
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF
SPENCER, OKLAHOMA
_____________________________
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
_____________________________
 

 
[_MUNICIPALITY_] OFFICIALS
_____________________________
Earnest Ware 
Mayor
_____________________________
Paula Mason 
Vice Mayor
_____________________________
Frank Calvin 
Jim Scanlan 
James Talley 
City Council
 
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Spencer, Oklahoma. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1983 Code, as supplemented through October 18, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 

Index
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself that stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Amy Norton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to the members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Spencer, Oklahoma. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Spencer, Oklahoma. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Spencer, Oklahoma. 2017. 
 
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Spencer, Oklahoma," and may be so cited. This Code may also be referred to by the short title, "Spencer City Code." 
(Prior Code, §§ 1, 1-1.1; Code 1983, § 1-101)
 
Sec. 1-2. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules are observed unless the construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
City. The term "city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Spencer, Oklahoma" followed them. 
City council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of Spencer. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which the notice is given or the act is done shall be counted in computing the time but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
County. The term "county" or "this county" means Oklahoma County, Oklahoma. 
Fee schedule. The term "fee schedule" means the list of city fees, rates and charges adopted from time to time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Fine schedule. The term "fine schedule" means the list of penalties for violation of certain provisions of this Code as adopted from time to time by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Gender. A word importing one gender only shall extend and be applied to other genders and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well. 
Joint authority. All words giving "joint authority" to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Law. The term "law" includes applicable federal law, provisions of the Constitution and statutes of the State of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
Manager, city manager. The term "manager" or "city manager" means the manager of the city. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the city. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases which are not specifically defined shall be construed according to the common and accepted usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. Words used in the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary intention plainly appears. 
Oath. The term "oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law. An affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officers, agencies or departments by title only (i.e. "clerk," "city clerk," "city attorney," "fire chief," "chief of police," etc.), they mean the officers, agencies or departments of the city. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to an actual person, any persons and to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
Shall/may. The term "shall" is mandatory. The term "may" is permissive. 
State. The term "state" or "this state" means the State of Oklahoma. 
Statutory references. The term "statutory references" means references to statutes of the State of Oklahoma as they are now or as they may be amended to be. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts. places, squares, curbs and all other public ways in the city which are dedicated and open to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Prior Code, § 1-1.2; Code 1983, § 1-102)
 
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections; citations.
The catchlines of sections in this Code and citations included at the end of sections are intended to indicate the contents of the section and original historical source respectively, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles and official sources of such sections; nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, or citations, are amended or reenacted. 
(Prior Code, § 1-1.3; Code 1983, § 1-103)
 
Sec. 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the repealed ordinance took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the repealed ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 1-1.4; Code 1983, § 1-104)
 
Sec. 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code or of any ordinance in the Code shall be declared unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 1-1.5; Code 1983, § 1-105)
 
Sec. 1-6. Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: 
"Be it ordained by the city council of the City of Spencer, Oklahoma: 
Section _____. That Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Spencer, Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as follows:" 
(Set out new provisions in full.) 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"Be it ordained by the city council of the City of Spencer, Oklahoma: 
Section _____. That the Code of Ordinances, City of Spencer, Oklahoma, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:" 
(Set out new section in full.) 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Prior Code, § 1-1.6; Code 1983, § 1-106; Ord. No. 250-A, 5-14-1987)
 
Sec. 1-7. Altering Code.
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Prior Code, § 1-1.7; Code 1983, § 1-107)
 
Sec. 1-8. General penalty.
(a)	Except as otherwise specifically provided, violations of this Code are punishable by a fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine and costs that is no greater than that established by statute for the same offense pursuant to 11 O.S. § 14-111: 
(1)	The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for traffic-related offenses relating to speeding or parking shall not exceed $200.00. 
(2)	The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for alcohol-related or drug-related offenses shall not exceed $800.00. 
(3)	For all other offenses, including offenses for which no specific penalty is stated, the maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine shall not exceed $750.00 except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(4)	The court shall remit $50.00 of each alcohol fine or deferral fee to a separate city fund to be used to defray costs for enforcement of laws relating to juvenile access to alcohol, other laws relating to alcohol and other intoxicating substances, and traffic-related offenses involving alcohol or other intoxicating substances. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, the city may prescribe costs pursuant to the provisions of 11 O.S. § 27-126 or imprisonment not exceeding 60 days or both the fine and imprisonment; provided that the city shall not enact any ordinance making unlawful any act or omission declared by state statute to be punishable as a felony. 
(c)	The city may enact ordinances prescribing maximum fines of $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment for violations of municipal ordinances regulating the pretreatment of wastewater and regulating stormwater discharges. If imprisonment is available for the offense, then that person charged shall have a right to a jury trial. 
(d)	The city may prescribe specific fines, within the limits established in this section, for certain Code violations. Such fines are delineated in the city fine schedule, adopted and amended from time to time by the city council and incorporated in this section, a copy of which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(e)	Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in this section. 
(f)	If a defendant on an original case fails to comply with a lawful order of the court to appear or pay a fine or penalty, such non-compliance shall become a new and separate offense. This offense of failure to appear or pay shall be punished in a manner equal to but not to exceed the fine or punishment of the original offense. 
(Prior Code, § 1-1.8; Code 1983, § 1-108)
 
Sec. 1-9. Fines recoverable by civil action.
All fines shall be recoverable by civil action before any court of competent jurisdiction in addition to any other method provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 1-109)
 
Sec. 1-10. Ordinances in effect in outlying territory of city.
All ordinances of the city now in effect within the city are hereby extended to all real property belonging to or under the control of the city outside the corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as they are applicable. All ordinances of the city which shall go into effect in the future, shall also apply to, and be in full effect within the boundaries of all outlying real property, insofar as they may be applicable. Any words in any ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also the outlying real property belonging to or under the control of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Code 1983, § 1-110)
 
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 2-1. Council manager form of government.
The city is governed by the statutory council-manager form of government. 
(Code 1983, § 2-101)
 
Sec. 2-2. Service charges.
Fees for duplication, certification, notarization and faxing of public records at a customer's request shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 2-404.9; Ord. No. 495-02-07, 2-21-2008)
 
Secs. 2-3—2-22. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
 
Sec. 2-23. Power and duties.
(a)	All powers of the city, including the determination of matters of policy, shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council may: 
(1)	Appoint and remove the city manager as provided by law; 
(2)	Enact municipal legislation subject to limitations as may now or hereafter be imposed by the state constitution and law; 
(3)	Raise revenue, make appropriations, regulate salaries and wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the city, subject to such limitations as may now or hereafter be imposed by the state constitution and law; 
(4)	Appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, members of commissions and boards and other quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial officers as provided by law, or prescribe the method of appointing or electing and removing them; 
(5)	Create, change and abolish offices, departments and agencies other than those established by law, and assign additional functions and duties to offices, departments and agencies established by this chapter; and 
(6)	Grant pardons for violations of municipal ordinances, including the remission of fines and costs, upon the recommendation of the municipal judge. 
(b)	The duties of the council shall be those prescribed by law and the ordinances of the city. The council may regulate the number and classes of positions of employment in the various offices, departments and agencies of the city, and determine the salaries, wages and compensation to be paid all such officers, assistants, and employees of the city; and, except as otherwise provided by ordinance, all such regulations may be by resolution or motion; where such regulation is by resolution, the same shall be entered at length in the resolution book; where such regulation is by motion, the same shall be entered at length in the minutes of the meeting. 
(Prior Code, § 2-1.3; Code 1983, §§ 2-204, 2-207)
 
Sec. 2-24. Elections to be held biannually; four-year overlapping terms.
The term of city councilmembers shall be staggered so that at any one general municipal election. In the first general election, councilmembers from wards one and two shall be elected for four-year terms. At the next general elections councilmembers from wards three and four and the councilmember at large shall be elected for four-year terms. 
(Code 1983, § 2-201)
 
Sec. 2-25. Qualifications of councilmembers.
Councilmembers shall be residents and registered voters of the city. Councilmembers from wards shall be actual residents of their respective wards at the time of their candidacy and election, but removal of a councilmember from one ward to another within the city after his election, or a change in ward boundaries, shall not disqualify him from completing the term for which he was elected. 
(Code 1983, § 2-205)
 
Sec. 2-26. Election of mayor and vice mayor; duties.
(a)	The council shall elect from among its members a mayor and a vice mayor. The mayor and vice mayor shall be elected in each odd numbered year at the first council meeting held after council terms begin, or as soon thereafter as practicable, and they shall serve until their respective successors have been elected and qualified. 
(b)	The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council, and shall certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by it. He shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law. He shall have no regular administrative duties except that he shall sign all conveyances and other written obligations of the city as the council may require. The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence, disability or suspension of the mayor. 
(Prior Code, § 2-1.1; Code 1983, § 2-206)
 
Sec. 2-27. Compensation for city councilmembers.
Members of the city council shall receive compensation in the amount of $50.00 per councilmember and $75.00 per councilmember appointed mayor per month; provided that this section shall not be applicable during the present term of appointment of any councilmember in office at the time of approval of the ordinance codified herein. 
(Code 1983, § 2-208; Ord. No. 395-01-01, 1-11-2001)
 
Sec. 2-28. Filling vacancies and unexpired terms.
In the event of a vacancy of a city council seat, the unexpired term shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of the city council. The office of an official who is holding over shall be filled at the next general election in compliance with the provisions of 11 O.S. §§ 16-101 through 16-213. 
(Code 1983, § 2-209; Ord. No. 469-04-05, 4-21-2005)
 
Sec. 2-29. Council meetings.
(a)	The council of the city shall hold a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on the third Thursday of every month. If such Thursday falls on a holiday as prescribed by city ordinance, the regular meeting shall be held at that time on the following Thursday which is not a holiday. 
(b)	Every meeting of the council shall be held in the council chamber in the city hall unless, in case of an emergency, the mayor or the councilmembers calling a special meeting designate another place in the city for the holding of the special meeting. The mayor or any three councilmembers may call a special meeting. Any adjourned meeting may be held at any other place designated by the council. It is the duty of each councilmember to attend each meeting of the council, regular, adjourned or special. 
(Code 1983, §§ 2-202, 2-203; Ord. No. 394-01-01, 1-11-2001)
 
Secs. 2-30—2-46. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
 
Sec. 2-47. Number and classes; compensation.
The council, by motion, resolution, or ordinance, may regulate the number of classes of officers and positions of employment in the various departments, offices, and agencies of the city government, and may determine or regulate the compensation to be paid to officers and employees. 
(Code 1983, § 2-503)
 
Sec. 2-48. Certain personnel to be bonded.
(a)	Before entering upon their official duties, the city manager, city clerk-treasurer, assistant city clerk-treasurer and the city court clerk shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their official duties, payable to the city, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state, in such amounts as set or approved by the council. 
(b)	The council, by motion or resolution, may require other officers and employees in such positions as it may designate to be bonded. The city shall pay the premiums on the bonds. 
(Code 1983, § 2-504)
 
Sec. 2-49. City manager.
(a)	The council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its members. It shall choose him solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office. 
(b)	The city manager shall be the head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible therefor to the council. He shall: 
(1)	Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove, demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other administrative officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by law. The manager or the council by ordinance may authorize the head of a department, office or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such department, office or agency; 
(2)	Supervise and control all administrative departments, offices and agencies; 
(3)	Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect; and recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable; 
(4)	Submit to the council a report after the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
(5)	Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make recommendations as he deems desirable; and 
(6)	Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 2-1.4; Code 1983, §§ 2-301, 2-302)
 
Sec. 2-50. City clerk and treasurer.
(a)	Generally. There is a department of finance, the head of which is the city clerk appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the manager. The city clerk is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the department of finance. The city treasurer is also an officer of the city appointed by the city council for an indefinite term and shall have such duties as the council may prescribe. The same person may hold the office of city clerk and the office of city treasurer as provided by law. 
(b)	Duties of clerk. The city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and other money for the city, and shall deposit the same daily in an account maintained in a depository. The city clerk shall maintain a general accounting system for the city government. The clerk shall attend all council meetings and shall keep the journal of the proceedings of the council. The clerk shall enroll in a book kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions passed by the council. He shall keep the seal of the city and attest the signature of the mayor or vice mayor and shall perform such other duties as may be required by law or ordinance for the city clerk or city treasurer. 
(c)	Duties of treasurer. The city treasurer shall deposit daily all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as the council may designate; and shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable law or ordinance. He shall have such other powers, duties, and functions as may be prescribed by applicable law or by ordinance. 
(Code 1983, §§ 2-401, 2-402, 2-403; Ord. No. 322-8-93, 9-9-1993)
 
Sec. 2-51. City attorney.
The city attorney is appointed by the city council for an indefinite term, and is removable by the city council. The city attorney is an officer of the city. The city attorney is the chief legal adviser of the council and all other officers, departments, and agencies of the city government in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He represents the city in proceedings in the courts, and performs all services incident to his position which may be required by law or ordinance. He shall attend regular meetings of the council and prepare ordinances for the council. He shall receive a regular salary as set by the council and, in addition thereto, receive reasonable fees for representing the city in lawsuits or controversies to which the city is a party, whether tried, settled or otherwise. He shall provide other special services as requested by the council or manager. When duly authorized by the council or manager, he shall receive a reasonable fee for such special services. 
(Prior Code, § 2-1.6; Code 1983, § 2-501; Ord. No. 220-A, 10-11-1984)
 
Secs. 2-52—2-75. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND SIMILAR BODIES (RESERVED)
 
Secs. 2-76—2-93. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. FINANCE AND TAXATION
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 2-94. Fee schedule.
The city fee schedule, as adopted and amended from time to time by the city council, is incorporated in this section as though fully set forth herein. 
 
Sec. 2-95. Deposits, investments and security.
The city shall adhere to the provisions of 62 O.S. §§ 511 and 513, and the provisions of the Security for Local Public Deposits Act, 62 O.S. § 517.1 et seq. regarding the deposits and security of city funds. The city shall adhere to the provisions of 62 O.S. §§ 348.1 through 348.4 for the investment of city funds. 
(Code 1983, § 7-101; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Sec. 2-96. Funds secured by unit collateral system.
The deposits of the city shall be secured by the unit collateral system provided by state law. 
(Code 1983, § 7-102)
 
Sec. 2-97. Disbursement of public funds, authorized signatures.
All municipal warrants or municipal checks shall be signed by the city clerk-treasurer or, in the absence of the clerk-treasurer, by the assistant clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 2-404; Ord. No. 318-A-93, 3-11-1993)
 
Sec. 2-98. Financial reporting.
The city clerk-treasurer shall prepare a monthly budget status report in accordance with the detail of budgetary accounts in the annual fiscal year budgets. The report shall be placed on the agenda for city council acknowledgment at the first meeting following the close of the previous month. 
(Code 1983, § 7-113; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Sec. 2-99. Applicability to public trusts.
(a)	For all public trusts created pursuant to 60 O.S. §§ 176 through 180, for which the city is beneficiary and for which the trust's governing body (trustees) are comprised entirely of members of the city council, the requirements of sections 2-130 through 2-137 and this section shall apply. 
(b)	For the purposes of the public trusts as used in subsection (a) of this section, the following terms shall mean: 
Chief executive officer means the trust manager as appointed by the trustees. 
City treasurer means the trust treasurer as appointed by the trustees or required by the trust indenture. 
Governing body means the board of trustees of the trust. 
(Code 1983, § 7-114; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Sec. 2-100. Payroll disbursements.
(a)	For all employees and officers of the city, a documented record shall be maintained in a personnel file of the authorized rate of pay or salary for each employee or officer. 
(b)	For each pay period, a documented record of time worked and leave taken shall be prepared in the form of time sheets or cards or logs for each employee and officer to be paid. For employees exempt from the overtime provisions of the fair labor standards act, the record may exclude time worked. Such record of time worked and leave taken shall be verified as to its accuracy in writing by the employee or officer, supervisor or department head if applicable, and the city clerk-treasurer or designee. 
(c)	Upon verification of the work record, a payroll statement or register including the amount of gross pay, authorized deductions, and net pay shall be prepared and submitted to the city manager for review and written approval. 
(d)	Upon approval of the payroll statement or record the net payroll checks shall be prepared along with checks for payment of related payroll taxes and other payroll benefits required by law or contract. 
(e)	The checks shall be presented to the city clerk-treasurer along with the approved payroll statement or register. The city clerk-treasurer shall compare the checks to the payroll statement or register and verify their accuracy. Upon verification, the city clerk-treasurer and the mayor, or their designees, shall sign the checks and prepare them for distribution. In addition, the city clerk-treasurer shall prepare or cause to be prepared a check register. 
(f)	No payroll related encumbrances are required to be recorded in the budgetary accounting records as long as the payroll costs are recorded as expenditures at the time they become due and payable. However, no payroll costs may be incurred or paid if they exceed the available appropriation for the accounts to be charged at the legal level of control. 
(g)	The city clerk-treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers the payroll costs incurred and/or paid for the pay period. 
(h)	A copy of the payroll statement, register or payroll check register may be provided to the city council for informational purposes; however, city council approval is not required prior to the payment of payroll related costs if incurred and paid in accordance with the provisions above. 
(Code 1983, § 7-105; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Secs. 2-101—2-128. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PURCHASES AND COMPETITIVE BIDDING
 
Sec. 2-129. Contractual services defined for purchasing.
The term "contractual services," for the purpose of this division, shall mean services performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection with said services under express or implied contract. Contract services shall include travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone; telegraph; utilities; rents; printing and binding; repairs, alterations and maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets and bridges, and other physical facilities of the city; and other services performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 7-103)
 
Sec. 2-130. Purchases of goods, services and capital.
(a)	The city designates the city manager, the city clerk, and department directors as the only purchasing officers empowered to purchase or contract against budget appropriation accounts. 
(b)	For all purchases of goods, services or capital, excluding payroll and debt service related purchases, a requisition form, purchase order or contract shall be prepared and approved in writing by a designated purchasing officer prior to the time the purchase commitment is made. 
(c)	For all purchases or contracts for goods, services or capital over $5,000.00, excluding standard operational purchases, city council approval shall be obtained prior to the time the commitment is made, and such approval shall be recorded in the minutes of the city council. 
(d)	For all purchases of goods, services and capital, the approved requisition, purchase order or contract shall be forwarded to an officer or employee charged with the appropriation and expenditure records who shall determine that there exists available appropriation in accounts to be charged. Upon such determination, the officer or employee shall attest to that fact in writing. 
(1)	The city manager, shall have the authority to amend the appropriated line items between budgeted categories of a department. All amendments between departments of budgeted funds shall be submitted for city council approval. 
(2)	If appropriation is not available for the proposed purchases or commitment, the purchase or commitment shall not proceed until budget amendments are authorized to provide sufficient appropriation. 
(3)	Upon approval of the purchasing agent and officer or employee charged with keeping the appropriation and expenditure records, the original copy of the purchase order shall be filed in a pending file awaiting delivery of the goods or services. 
(e)	After satisfactory delivery of the merchandise or completion of contract provisions, an invoice or claim form shall be obtained adequately documenting request for payment. The officer or employee receiving satisfactory delivery of merchandise or contract service shall acknowledge such fact by signing the invoice, claim form, delivery ticket or receiving advice. The invoice or claims form, along with the written acknowledgment of receipt, shall be forwarded to the officer or employee responsible for processing accounts payable who shall review for completeness of items presented for payment. Upon completion of the accounts payable officer review, the invoices or claim forms, along with the related supporting documentation, shall be submitted to the city manager for consideration and approval of payment, along with accompanying invoice or claims listing, which shall be approved in writing by the city manager. 
(f)	Upon approval of the invoices or claims for payment, checks or other payment documents as authorized by state law, shall be prepared and submitted to the city clerk-treasurer, along with a copy of the approved invoice or claims listing. The treasurer shall compare the checks or other payment documents to the invoice or claim listing and verify their accuracy. Upon verification, the city clerk-treasurer and the mayor, or their designees (assistant clerk-treasurer and vice mayor), shall sign the checks or other documents and prepare them for distribution. In addition, the city clerk-treasurer shall prepare or cause to be prepared a check register. 
(g)	The city clerk-treasurer shall record, or cause to be recorded, in the appropriate journals and ledgers the purchases and cash disbursements incurred and paid. 
(h)	A copy of the approved invoice or claims list or check register may be provided to the city council for informational purposes; however, the city council approval is not required prior to the payment of the invoices or claims if incurred and paid in accordance with the provisions above. 
(Code 1983, § 7-104; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Sec. 2-131. Competitive bidding.
(a)	When bidding required. The city shall adhere to the provisions of the Public Competitive Bidding Act of 1974, 61 O.S. § 101 et seq., when determining when competitive bidding is required and the manner in which competitive bids will be obtained. 
(b)	Public trusts to follow bidding process. In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, public trusts created pursuant to 60 O.S. § 176, of which the city is beneficiary, shall also follow the competitive bidding provisions of 60 O.S. § 176(G). 
(c)	Authorization to utilize electronic sealed bidding and reverse auction bidding. The city may, in conjunction with all other requirements for competitive bidding in this Code and the statutes of the state, utilize electronic sealed bidding and reverse auction procedure as provided by the reverse auction bidding procedure action of 11 O.S. § 17-115. 
(d)	Eligible purchases for electronic sealed bidding and reverse auction bidding. As an alternative to the competitive bidding procedures of this article and state law, the city manager or his designee may engage in electronic sealed bidding or reverse auction bidding for city services, equipment, capital, projects, or supplies with an estimated cost of over $5,000.00 pursuant to 11 O.S. § 17-115. 
(e)	Procedures for conducting competitive electronic sealed bidding and reverse auction bidding.
(1)	The reverse auction shall be a real time bidding process taking place at a previously scheduled time and internet location and for a previously established duration in which multiple suppliers, anonymous to each other, submit bids to provide city services, equipment, capital, projects, or supplies. 
(2)	The city shall establish a bid opening date and time. At that time and date, the city shall begin accepting reverse auction electronic bids. Reverse auction bids shall be accepted until the established bid closing, except as provided in subsection (e)(7) of this section, unless the city determines it is in the best interest of the city to extend the closing time by public announcement at the internet location at least 15 minutes prior to the original closing. 
(3)	Bidding shall take place between standard operating hours for the city. The city shall state in the bid specifications for electronic and reverse auction bidding the time zone of the city so as to inform vendors in varying time zones and locations. 
(4)	The posting of all reverse auction bids electronically and updating of bids shall be on a real time basis by the city. 
(5)	Potential bidders shall be required to register before the opening date and time, as a part of registration, may be required to agree to any terms, conditions or other requirements of the solicitation or applicable acts determined by the city council, the trustees, and or the requesting department of the city. Solicitations will be restricted to registered bidders. 
(6)	The city shall retain the authority to determine the criteria that will be used for making awards. 
(7)	In the event the city determines that a significant error or event occurred that affected the electronic receipt of any reverse auction or electronic bid, the city will retain the authority to determine if it is in the best interest of the city to accept an electronic bid after the specified official closing date and time. This includes, but is not limited to, failures of software, hardware or communication links. 
(8)	The bids submitted electronically through reverse auction bidding process pursuant to this section are subject to the same public disclosure laws that govern bids received pursuant to any other law of this state governing purchasing procedures for the city. 
(9)	All remedies available to the city and suppliers through a bid process pursuant to any other law of this state are also available to the city or reserve auction bidder in the reverse auction bidding process as above set out. 
(10)	Electronic sealed bids may be awarded pursuant to other provisions in this Code or as designated in the specifications of the item to be bid. 
(Code 1983, § 7-106; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004; Ord. No. 462-12-04, 12-16-2004)
 
Sec. 2-132. When competitive bidding is not required.
The following may be purchased without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding: 
(1)	Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services whose cost does not exceed $5,000.00 in a single transaction; 
(2)	Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price wherever bought; 
(3)	Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased from another unit of government at a price deemed below that obtainable from private dealers, including war surplus; 
(4)	Contractual service, including, but not limited to, gas, electricity, telephone service, purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined by the state corporation commission or other government authority; 
(5)	Supplies, materials, equipment or contractual service when purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state purchasing agency or any other state agency hereafter authorized to regulate prices for things purchased by the state, whether such price is determined by a contract negotiated with a vendor or otherwise; 
(6)	Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering, architectural and medical services; and 
(7)	Emergency purchases. 
(Prior Code, § 2-1.5; Code 1983, § 7-107)
 
Sec. 2-133. Sales, council to declare surplus or obsolete competitive bidding.
No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment of a value of more than $5,000.00 may be sold until the council shall have declared them obsolete or surplus. Before the city manager sells any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, except as otherwise provided in section 2-134, he shall advertise them for sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or give notice in such other manner as he deems necessary to adequately reach prospective buyers to give them opportunity to make bids. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place, except when the sale is by auction. The city manager may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice again. He shall sell such supplies, materials or equipment to the highest responsible bidder for cash. In case of a tie, he may sell to either of the bidders tying, or may divide the sale among two or more tying, always selling to the highest responsible bidder for cash. 
(Code 1983, § 7-108)
 
Sec. 2-134. Sale of surplus property; when competitive bidding is not required.
The city manager may sell the following without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding: 
(1)	Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment whose total value does not exceed $5,000.00 in a single transaction; and 
(2)	Supplies, materials or equipment when sold at a price at least as great as that paid by the city for the same. 
(Code 1983, § 7-109; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Sec. 2-135. Debt service.
(a)	All long term indebtedness, in form of bonds, notes or lease purchase obligations, shall only be incurred in the manner provided by law. 
(b)	Once lawfully incurred, payments of principal and interest on the bonds or notes and payments on the lease purchase obligations shall be paid in accordance with the terms as specified in the bond indenture, note agreement or lease purchase contract by the city clerk-treasurer without further approval of the city council. 
(c)	The manner of payment shall be consistent with the manner used for the payment of purchases of goods, services or capital as described in subsection 2-130(f). 
(d)	The city clerk-treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers the debt service payments and maintain current records on the remaining amount of indebtedness. 
(Code 1983, § 7-110; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Sec. 2-136. Interfund transfer.
(a)	All transfers of resources between funds shall only be made in accordance with city council appropriations. Such appropriations shall be contained in the original or amended budget of the city. 
(b)	Once lawfully appropriated, interfund transfer payments may be made by the city clerk-treasurer without further city council approval. Such transfers, however, may not exceed the amount lawfully appropriated. 
(c)	The manner of payment shall be consistent with the manner used for the payment of purchases of goods; services and capital as described in subsection 2-130(f). 
(d)	The city clerk-treasurer shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers these interfund transfers. 
(Code 1983, § 7-111; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Sec. 2-137. Petty cash.
As provided for in 11 O.S. § 17-102(D), the city may have petty cash accounts for use in making certain small payments for cost incurred in operating the city. Each petty cash account established shall require city council approval, including the amount of the petty cash imprest balance. However, in no case, should the imprest balance exceed $250.00. The petty cash accounts shall be reimbursed by utilizing properly itemized invoices or petty cash voucher slips and by then processing the reimbursement in the manner used for payment of purchases of goods, services and capital as described in section 2-130. 
(Code 1983, § 7-112; Ord. No. 435-1-04, 1-15-2004)
 
Chapter 4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
ABLE commission means the Alcoholic Beverage Law Enforcement Commission. 
Alcoholic beverage means beverages controlled by the Alcoholic Beverage Law Enforcement Commission. 
Retail package store means a retail alcoholic beverage store as licensed by the state for the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages. 
State licensee means any person, partnership, firm, corporation or association who holds a license issued by the authority of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
(a)	The following specific terms are given the meanings provided in 37 O.S. § 506, a part of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37 O.S. § 501 et seq.: Brewer, Class B wholesaler, distiller, manufacturer, person, premises winemaker, rectifier, Oklahoma winemaker and wholesaler, agent, employee, bonded, warehouse, non-resident seller, if soliciting in the city, and manufacturer's agent. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.1; Code 1983, § 3-101; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Secs. 4-2—4-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. OCCUPATION TAX
 
Sec. 4-21. Levied annually.
There is hereby levied an annual occupation tax upon each person, firm or corporation engaged within this city in any of the following occupations hereinafter named, in the following sums respectively set opposite the designation of each such occupation: 
Brewer 	$1,250.00 
Distiller 	3,125.00 
Winemaker 	625.00 
Oklahoma winemaker 	75.00 
Rectifier 	3,125.00 
Wholesaler 	3,500.00 
Class B wholesaler 	625.00 
Package store 	605.00 
Mixed beverage 	905.00 
Caterer 	905.00 
Hotel 	905.00 
Special event, per day 	55.00 

The occupation tax levied herein shall be reduced to the extent necessary to conform to applicable state law. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.2; Code 1983, § 3-102; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-22. Payment of tax; proration.
(a)	All occupation taxes levied under the provisions of this article expire on June 30 of each year. 
(b)	The amount of any occupation tax levied shall be computed pro rata upon the months remaining in the year ending June 30 following. Such taxes paid on or before the 15th day of any month shall be on the basis of the first day of the month, and such taxes paid after the 15th day of any month shall be on the basis of the first day of the next succeeding month. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.3; Code 1983, § 3-103)
 
Sec. 4-23. City clerk to make report.
The city clerk shall make and transmit to the alcoholic beverage law enforcement commission an annual report showing the number and class of licensees upon which occupation taxes were levied, and the amount of money collected from such taxes. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.6; Code 1983, § 3-104; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-24. To post tax receipt.
Any state licensee shall post his tax receipt in a conspicuous place in the premises wherein he carries on his occupation. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.5; Code 1983, § 3-105)
 
Sec. 4-25. Payment of tax required; state license required; penalty.
Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this article without paying the occupation tax imposed therefor is guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction, shall be fined in the amount provided in the city fine schedule. No person shall engage in any of the occupations taxed herein, or in the sale, distribution, manufacture or bottling of any alcoholic beverages within the city without first obtaining a license as required by state law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-1.4, 5-1.9; Code 1983, § 3-106)
 
Sec. 4-26. Violation of state law.
Any violation of any law of the state in connection with any of the matters covered by this article shall be construed to be a specific violation of this article, whether specifically covered by the provisions of this article or not. 
(Code 1983, § 3-107)
 
Secs. 4-27—4-55. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
 
Sec. 4-56. Purpose of article.
This article is enacted as an exercise of the police power of the city to preserve the public peace, safety, health, and good order thereof and to aid the enforcement of the policy of the state as established by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.7; Code 1983, § 3-120)
 
Sec. 4-57. Definitions.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Retail alcoholic beverage store means a package store. 
(b)	The following specific terms are given the meanings defined for them in the appropriate sections of the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act: Advertise the sale of alcoholic beverages, alcohol, brewery, distillery, original package or original container, retail containers, sale, spirits, wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages, and wine. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.8; Code 1983, § 3-121)
 
Sec. 4-58. Signs.
No person owning, operating or maintaining a retail alcoholic beverage store shall cause or permit it to be designated by more than one sign, which shall contain only the term "retail alcoholic liquor store," or any combination of such words or any of them, and which shall contain no letter or figure more than four inches in height or more than three inches in width and in which the lines of words, if more than one, shall not be more than one inch apart. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.10; Code 1983, § 3-122)
 
Sec. 4-59. Advertising.
No person shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, in any manner, other than as authorized by section 4-58, the sale of alcoholic beverages within the limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.11; Code 1983, § 3-123)
 
Sec. 4-60. Separate premises.
No person shall maintain, operate, or assist, in any manner, the maintenance or operation of a retail alcoholic beverage store or package store in premises which are not separated from adjoining premises in which any other goods, wares or merchandise are sold or services are rendered by nontransparent walls, broken only, if at all, by a passageway to which the public is not admitted. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.12; Code 1983, § 3-124)
 
Sec. 4-61. Passageway.
No person shall take any alcoholic beverage through any passageway described in section 4-60, for the purpose of delivery thereof in connection with a sale of such beverage. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.13; Code 1983, § 3-125)
 
Sec. 4-62. Sale in containers.
No person shall sell or deliver alcoholic beverages at a retail alcoholic beverage store other than: 
(1)	In retail containers; 
(2)	At ordinary room temperatures; 
(3)	In the original package; and 
(4)	For consumption off the premises. 
No person owning, employed in, or in any manner assisting in the maintenance and operation of such a store shall suffer, or permit any alcoholic beverage to be consumed, or any retail container of such beverage to be opened on the premises of such a store. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.14; Code 1983, § 3-126)
 
Sec. 4-63. Not to drink on premises.
No person shall drink or consume, in any manner, alcoholic beverages on the premises of a retail alcoholic beverage store, nor shall any person open or break the seal of any original package or retail container containing alcoholic beverages on the premises of any such retail alcoholic beverage store. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.15; Code 1983, § 3-127)
 
Sec. 4-64. Sale only at licensed establishments.
No person shall sell at retail and no person shall deliver, in consequence or in completion of such a sale, any alcoholic beverages at any place in the city except at establishments licensed by the ABLE commission in strict conformity with this article and the laws of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1.16; Code 1983, § 3-128; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-65. Location.
No person shall own, operate, maintain or be interested in any retail alcoholic beverage store, any wholesale alcoholic beverage store or any mixed beverage establishment which is located at a place within this city, except at a location for such stores which is permitted by state law and at locations authorized by the zoning ordinances of the city. In no event shall any retail package store or mixed beverage establishment be located within 300 feet of any church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities, or any public school. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-1.17, 5-1.18; Code 1983, § 3-129; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-66. Not to sell to persons under 21 years of age.
No person shall knowingly sell, deliver, or furnish alcoholic beverages at any place within the city to any person who is under 21 years of age. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.1; Code 1983, § 3-130)
 
Sec. 4-67. False documentation.
No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his age in writing or present false documentation of age or otherwise for the purpose of inducing any person to sell him alcoholic beverages. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.2; Code 1983, § 3-131)
 
Sec. 4-68. Not to sell to intoxicated person.
No person, at any place within this city, shall sell, deliver or knowingly furnish alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or mentally deficient. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.3; Code 1983, § 3-132)
 
Sec. 4-69. Drinking in public prohibited; exception.
(a)	No person within this city shall: 
(1)	Drink an alcoholic beverage in public except on the premises of a licensee of the ABLE commission who is authorized to sell or serve alcoholic beverages by the individual drink; or 
(2)	Be intoxicated in a public place. 
This provision shall be cumulative and in addition to existing law. 
(b)	With the purchase of the appropriate licenses and inspections by the city code office and city clerk, alcoholic beverages and beer may be sold at Kringlen Park for special events under the following conditions: 
(1)	The alcoholic beverages and beer may only be sold at special events at Kringlen Park on Friday from 4:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m., Saturday from 12:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. and/or Sunday from 2:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(2)	Sellers must show appropriate licenses from the county, the ABLE commission, and the city or county health departments as applicable. 
(3)	The permit fee to sell alcoholic beverages and beer at Kringlen Park shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(4)	Vendors and sellers of alcoholic beverages and/or beer will be required to assist with the clean-up of related litter. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-2.5, 2.16, 2.17; Code 1983, § 3-133; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993; Ord. No. 531-05-10, § 1, 5-20-2010)
 
Sec. 4-70. Person under 21 years of age not to be employed.
No person under 21 years of age shall be employed in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other handling of alcoholic beverages at any place within this city. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.6; Code 1983, § 3-134)
 
Sec. 4-71. Not to employ person under 21 years of age.
No person shall employ or assist or aid in causing the employment of any person under 21 years of age at any place within this city, in the selling, manufacture, distribution or other handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.7; Code 1983, § 3-135)
 
Sec. 4-72. Time of sale.
(a)	No person shall open for business or keep open for business, or sell or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person at a retail alcoholic beverage store in this city, on any Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day, or, while the polls are open, on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary or special election, whether national, state, county, or city, or on any other day, except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(b)	No mixed beverage licensee shall allow alcoholic beverages to be sold, dispensed, served or consumed on its premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.8; Code 1983, § 3-136; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-73. Not to sell on credit.
No person at any retail alcoholic beverage store in this city shall sell any alcoholic beverage on credit. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.9; Code 1983, § 3-137)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537. 
 
Sec. 4-74. Not to furnish prizes.
No owner or proprietor of a retail alcoholic beverage store, and no person employed therein, shall offer or furnish any prize, premium, gift or similar inducement to a consumer in connection with a sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.10; Code 1983, § 3-138)
 
Sec. 4-75. Persons under 21 years of age not to be permitted to enter.
(a)	No owner or proprietor of a retail alcoholic beverage store in this city and no person employed therein, shall permit any person under 21 years of age to enter into, to remain within or to loiter about the premises of such retail alcoholic beverage store. 
(b)	If the premises of a licensee of the ABLE commission contains a separate or enclosed lounge or bar area, which has as its main purpose the sale or distribution, of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, notwithstanding that as an incidental service, meals or short order foods are made available therein, no owner or proprietor of such establishment shall permit any person under 21 years of age to enter such area. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.11; Code 1983, § 3-139; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-76. Persons under 21 years of age not to enter.
(a)	No person under 21 years of age shall enter into, remain within or loiter about the premises of any retail alcoholic beverage store within this city. 
(b)	If the premises of a licensee of the ABLE commission contains a separate or enclosed lounge or bar area, which has as its main purpose the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, notwithstanding that as an incidental service, meals or short-order foods are made available therein, no person under 21 years of age shall enter such area. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.12; Code 1983, § 3-140; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-77. Time of delivery.
No wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages, and no officer, agent or employee of such a dealer, shall sell or deliver to any retail alcoholic beverage store in this city any amount of spirits or wines on Saturday of any week, on Sunday of any week, on New Year's Day, on Memorial Day, on the Fourth of July, on Labor Day, on Veteran's Day, on Thanksgiving Day, on Christmas Day, or, while the polls are open, on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary, or special election, whether national, state, county or city. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.13; Code 1983, § 3-141)
 
Sec. 4-78. Intoxication prohibited.
No person operating a cafe, restaurant, club, or any place of recreation within this city, and no employee engaged in connection with the operation of such a cafe, restaurant, club or place of recreation, shall permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in the place of business. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.14; Code 1983, § 3-142; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-79. Transportation restricted.
No person within this city shall transport in any vehicle upon any public highway, street or alley any alcoholic beverage, unless such alcoholic beverage is: 
(1)	In an unopened original container with seal unbroken and the original cap or cork not removed from the container; or 
(2)	In the trunk or other closed compartment or other container, out of public view and out of reach of the driver or any occupant of the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.4; Code 1983, § 3-143)
 
Sec. 4-80. Purchase restricted.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to purchase in the city from anyone, other than a duly licensed beverage dealer, any alcoholic beverage. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.15; Code 1983, § 3-144)
 
Sec. 4-81. Possession without payment of tax prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to have in his possession more than one quart of alcoholic beverage unless the state tax has been paid thereon or unless the person has a valid bill of lading confirming the alcoholic beverage to a licensed beverage dealer. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.18; Code 1983, § 3-145)
 
Sec. 4-82. Possession by minor, insane or mentally deficient person, chronic alcoholic, or intoxicated person prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person under the age of 21 years, or of unsound mind, or who is a chronic alcoholic, or any intoxicated person to have in his possession or under his control in a public place in the city any liquid that may be used as a beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2.19; Code 1983, § 3-146)
 
Sec. 4-83. Separate offenses.
Each day's violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense, but nothing herein contained shall be construed as determining that not more than any one such offense can be committed in any one day by the same person. 
(Code 1983, § 3-147)
 
Secs. 4-84—4-109. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. LOW POINT BEER
 
Sec. 4-110. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Minor means a person who has not yet attained the age at which consumption of low point beer is permitted pursuant to state law. 
Low point beer means all beverages containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
Retail dealer means and includes any and all persons, firms, corporations, associations or concessionaires who sell, distribute or dispense any low point beer, as herein defined, within the corporate limits of the city without regard as to any place where such beverages may be consumed or used. 
(Prior Code, § 21-2-3; Code 1983, § 3-201)
 
Sec. 4-111. Not to sell to minors.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or barter to any minor any low point beer. 
(Prior Code, § 21-2-4; Code 1983, § 3-202)
 
Sec. 4-112. Time of sale.
It is unlawful for any retail dealer to sell, or offer for sale, any low point beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any weekday or Saturday and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sunday. 
(Prior Code, § 21-2-6; Code 1983, § 3-203; Ord. No. 234-A, 8-8-1985; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-113. License fee.
(a)	There is hereby levied upon each retail dealer in low point beer for consumption on and off the premises, an annual municipal license fee as provided in the city fee schedule. There is hereby levied upon each retail dealer in low point beer in original packages and not for consumption on the premises, an annual municipal license fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)	All such municipal license fees shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of issuance and in the manner herein prescribed. 
(c)	For any organized temporary assemblage of people, a special license may be issued to any retail dealer of low point beer for the sale, possession, and consumption of such beverages on the premises. Special licenses may be issued for the sum as provided in the city fee schedule, for each license; provided that in the event any state or county fair association shall meet for more than five days in any year, a special license for the sale of low point beer shall be issued for the sum as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 3-204; Ord. No. 251-A, 6-18-1987; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
State law reference(s)—State license requirements, cities not to levy greater fee, 37 O.S. § 163.7. 
 
Sec. 4-114. License required.
It is unlawful for any retail dealer, whether permanent or temporary, at any place within the corporate limits of the city to sell, distribute or dispense any low point beer without having first applied for and received a municipal license as herein required and an applicable state license. 
(Prior Code, §§ 21-2-5, 21-2-9; Code 1983, § 3-205)
 
Sec. 4-115. Compliance with state law; not transferable.
No municipal license shall be issued to any retail dealer by the city clerk without a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained all state and county permits required by law, and has in all other respects complied with the laws of the state relating to the sale and distribution of low point beer. All licenses levied herein shall expire on June 30 of the year following issuance. No license shall be transferable. 
(Code 1983, § 3-206; Ord. No. 259-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 4-116. Possession by minors in public.
It is unlawful for any minor to be in possession of any alcoholic beverage while such person is upon any public street, road or highway, or in any public building or place. 
(Code 1983, § 3-207)
 
Sec. 4-117. Drinking in public.
It is unlawful for any person, whether a minor or of age, to drink any low point beer while such person is upon any public street, alley, or other public highway, or in any public building or other public place, within the city. This section shall not prohibit a person who is of age from drinking such beverage in a place licensed to sell it for consumption on the premises, including such places licensed to sell low point beer under a special license. 
(Code 1983, § 3-208; Ord. No. 251-A, 6-18-1987)
 
Sec. 4-118. Persons under 21 years of age prohibited from entering or remaining in bar area.
If the premises of a holder of a license to sell low point beer contains a separate or enclosed bar area which has as its main purpose the sale or serving of low point beer for consumption on the premises, no person under 21 years of age shall enter, attempt to enter, or remain in the area. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 21 years of age from entering or remaining in an area which has as its main purpose some objective other than the sale or serving of low point beer, in which sales or serving of the beverages are incidental to the main purpose, if the persons under 21 years of age are not sold or served or do not consume low point beer anywhere on the premises; however, the incidental service of food in the bar area shall not exempt persons under 21 years of age from the provision of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 21-2-2; Code 1983, § 3-209; Ord. No. 251-A, 6-18-1987; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Sec. 4-119. Minors not to be employed.
It is unlawful for any minor to be employed or permitted to work in any capacity whatsoever where low point beer is sold or dispensed for consumption on the premises. This section shall not apply to any business or establishment where such sales do not exceed 25 percent of the gross sales of such business or establishment. 
(Prior Code, § 21-2-8; Code 1983, § 3-210)
 
Sec. 4-120. Nudity or drink solicitation prohibited.
It is unlawful for any form of nudity or drink solicitation to be allowed in establishments licensed to sell low point beer for consumption on the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 21-2-7; Code 1983, § 3-211; Ord. No. 319-A-93, 4-8-1993)
 
Chapter 6 ANIMALS
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 6-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by a humane society, or municipal agency, or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
Animals or poultry, as specifically named herein, by whatever other name they might be called, means and includes every age and sex of each of the species of animals or poultry referred to herein. 
Area of enclosure means that area, large or small, in which animals are confined. Residences shall be excluded in computing the area of the enclosure. 
At large means not securely confined by a fence or other means on premises under the control of, or occupied by, the owner, and not under the control of the owner, a member of his immediate family over 12 years of age or an agent of the owner, by leash or otherwise, whether on the owner's premises or not. 
Auction means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. The term "auction" does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners. 
Cat means any cat, male or female, and every other animal of feline species. 
Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, groom shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, or kennel. 
Confined on the premises means that condition in which a dog is securely and physically confined and restrained on and within the premises of the owner by means of walls or fences, of such strength and size as physically to prevent the dog from leaving the premises. 
Dog means a dog, male or female, and every other animal of canine species. 
Grooming shop means a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked, or otherwise groomed. 
Health officer means the director of the city-county health department, or his authorized representative. 
Keeper or person means any person, family, firm or corporation owning or actually keeping, having, using, or maintaining any of the animals referred to herein. 
Kennel means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats. 
Large animals means horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, llamas, rhea, ostrich, emu, or any other animal of similar size. 
Nuisance means doing any act or omitting to perform a duty, which act or omission either annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others as defined by the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
Owner means the owner of an animal and also every other person having the care or custody of, harboring, keeping or maintaining any animal. 
Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act, or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used. 
Pet means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
Pet shop means any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise except for a licensed kennel, that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal. 
Rabies suspected animal means any dog which shall have bitten a human being, or which shall have been bitten by any animal suspected of having rabies or any infection associated therewith. 
Ratproof means a state of being constructed so as to effectively prevent entry of rodents and vectors. 
Restraint means any animal physically secured by a leash or lead, not to exceed six feet in length, and under the control of a responsible person or within the real property limits of its owner. 
Riding school or stable means any place which has available for hire, boarding or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro. 
Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness which precludes the probability of disease transmission. 
Small animals means rabbits, hares, guinea pigs, chickens, turkeys, guineas, geese, ducks, hamster, pigeons, goats, sheep or any other animal or fowl of similar size or stature. 
Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
Vicious animal means one not only of disposition to attack every person or animal it may meet, but it includes as well a natural fierceness or disposition to mischief, as may occasionally lead it to attack human beings or animals without provocation. 
Wild animal means any live animal, including, but not limited to, monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous or constricting snake, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, bear, or other animal which can normally be found in the wild state or recognized by state and federal game and fish departments. 
Editor's note(s)—At this point, one or more pages are missing from the 1983 Code provided as source material for this recodification. The missing text runs from the end of the definitions in section 4-101 through section 4-111 of the 1983 Code. Sections 6-178 and 6-179 in this chapter derive from Ordinance No. 539-05-11, adopted May 19, 2011, which amended two of the missing sections (Code 1983, sections 4-102 and 4-103). 
…way only, and in an orderly manner or upon private property of individuals who have given their permission to the rider. No horses are permitted to be ridden in city parks, except where the park board has authorized same. Riding at and/or beyond dusk, both rider and horse will be required to adhere front and rear reflectors, tape or other reflective material for the general safety of the public. 
(Code 1983, § 4-101; Ord. No. 479-10-05, 11-17-2005; Ord. No. 541-11-11 , §§ 1, 2, 11-18-2011)
 
Secs. 6-2—6-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. CARE AND CONTROL
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 6-21. Cruelty to animals and abandonment.
(a)	No person shall: 
(1)	Cruelly beat or otherwise cruelly maltreat any dumb animal in this city, or willfully and wantonly kill, maim, wound, poison or disfigure any animal, bird, or beast of any kind; 
(2)	Mutilate, or cruelly kill, or drive over, override, or overload, or unnecessarily confine, or in any manner oppress any animal; 
(3)	Unnecessarily fail to provide an animal with proper food, drink or shelter; 
(4)	Drive or work, or use the same if such animal is maimed, wounded, sick, lame or otherwise unfit for labor; 
(5)	Carry, haul, or force along any animal in a cruel or inhuman manner; or 
(6)	Leave any animal tied up, or confined anywhere, day or night, for more than six hours at a time exposed to inclement weather or without proper feed, watering and caring for the same. 
(b)	This section shall not be construed as preventing a police officer or other persons from killing animals when lawfully entitled to do so. 
(Code 1983, § 4-119; Ord. No. 92A, 11-10-1977)
 
Sec. 6-22. Loud animal noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any animal in this article, which, by frequent or prolonged barking, whining, howling, crowing, noisemaking, cause or tend to cause excessive noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. 
(Code 1983, § 4-120; Ord. No. 342-7-95, 7-17-1995)
 
Sec. 6-23. Keeping of dogs and cats restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any property within the city to keep and maintain more than four dogs and cats per single-family dwelling unit. Pups and kittens shall not be considered within the meaning of this section until they have reached eight weeks of age. 
(Code 1983, § 4-121; Ord. No. 443-07-04, 7-15-2004)
 
Sec. 6-24. Dogs not to run at large; impounding.
(a)	It is unlawful and an offense for any person to permit a dog, possessed, kept or harbored by him to run at large on the streets, alleys, or public places, or on private premises not under the control of the owner, within the city whether licensed or not. All dogs will be kept in an enclosed area or on a leash. 
(b)	It is the duty of the dog catcher to take up any dog found running at large and confine it to the city pound for 48 hours. The owner may redeem the dog within 48 hours upon the payment of the sum of the pound fee, and all other costs provided by the city. The chief of police or other officer will be allowed to enter upon private property to restrain dogs violating this division. In the event the chief of police or other officer is unable to capture the dog, he shall issue a complaint against the owner of this animal. 
(c)	All fees shall be delivered to the city treasurer and credited to the general fund of the city, provided that a dog may not be redeemed or released unless there is adequate evidence that the dog has been vaccinated and licensed as required by this Code. 
(d)	In the event that the owner of any dog impounded by the city fails to pay the amount set out above and redeem the dog within 48 hours, it is the duty of the police chief or other officer to destroy any dog not reclaimed. However, if, in the judgment and discretion of the other officer the unreclaimed animal should not be destroyed, then the chief of police, after the time for reclaiming such dog has expired, shall sell and dispose of the dog for sums equal to the total poundage plus any liens or registration fees then due. Before selling of any dog in this manner, all dogs must be vaccinated for rabies. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.25; Code 1983, § 4-129)
 
Secs. 6-25—6-49. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PROHIBITED ANIMALS
 
Sec. 6-50. Animals, keeping prohibited.
(a)	It is unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)	Certain wild and exotic animals. Any warm-blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or exotic animal excluding fowl, ferrets and small rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes and excluding exhibitions of animals maintained by a zoological park. Any person having a current state commercial wildlife license dated prior to October 10, 1996, will be allowed to keep and replace animals approved by his current license, provided that: 
a.	The state commercial wildlife license remains continuously current; 
b.	No violation of the license occurs that requires the license to be revoked; 
c.	The city sanitation requirements are met at all times; 
d.	Animals remain in the location approved by the license; 
e.	Animals are not sold to a person who resides within the city limits unless that person has a current state commercial wildlife license issued prior to October 10, 1996, or that person will be keeping the animals outside the city limits; 
f.	The number of wild animals kept on property within the city limits is in accordance with this chapter and any other relevant provisions of this Code ; and 
g.	The animal control officer is permitted to make periodic inspections of the wild animal facilities within the city. 
(2)	Any animal having a poisonous bite. 
(3)	Any pit bull dog, defined, for purposes of this subsection, as the bull terrier breed, the Staffordshire bull terrier breed, the American pit bull terrier breed, and the American Staffordshire terrier breed and any mixed breed of dog which contains as an element of its breeding any of the breeds described. 
(b)	Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section shall upon conviction in municipal court be fined as provided in the city fine schedule. In addition to the fine imposed, the court may sentence the defendant to imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days. In the event the violation shall involve an animal prohibited by this section, the court shall order the animal removed from the city. Should the animal owner refuse to remove the animal from the city, the municipal court judge shall find the defendant owner in contempt and order the immediate confiscation and impoundment of the animal. If the owner shall continue to refuse to remove the animal from the city, the municipal court judge shall issue any other orders necessary to carry out the intent of this section. Each day that a violation of this division continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement. 
(Code 1983, § 4-200; Ord. No. 357-9-96, 11-14-1996)
 
Secs. 6-51—6-73. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. VICIOUS ANIMALS
 
Sec. 6-74. Vicious animals prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, owner or possessor to keep a vicious animal as defined by section 6-1. 
(Code 1983, § 4-211; Ord. No. 358-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-75. Attacks prohibited.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or possessor to permit such animal to attack or bite any person or animal upon the premises of the person, owner or possessor. It shall be an affirmative defense to this subsection when such premises are previously posted at each entrance to the same with prominent and conspicuous signs warning all persons in lettering not less than two inches in height of such animal. It is also an affirmative defense to this subsection that the use of such animal to attack or bite any person was necessary to prevent or apprehend a person engaged in committing an act of violence, robbery or theft upon the property. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or possessor to permit such animal to attack or bite any person or animal not upon the premises of such person, owner or possessor. 
(c)	For the purposes of this section, the term "attack" shall mean violent or aggressive physical contact. 
(d)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer who uses or employs an animal while engaged in law enforcement activities, nor to any owner, possessor or keeper whose animal attacks or bites a person engaged in physically attacking or striking the owner, possessor or keeper. 
(Code 1983, § 4-212; Ord. No. 358-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-76. Complaint of violation.
(a)	Any person who witnesses or has personal knowledge that an act made unlawful by this division has been committed may file a complaint in the municipal court against the alleged violator. 
(b)	Any police officer, animal control officer or code enforcement officer who is employed by the city is authorized to issue a summons and complaint when the officer personally observes a violation of this division. 
(c)	The complainant shall provide a sworn complaint to the officer receiving the complaint containing the following information: 
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of the complainant and other witnesses to the incident; 
(2)	Date, time and location of the incident; 
(3)	Description of the animal; 
(4)	Name, address and telephone number (if known) of the animal owner; 
(5)	A statement that the animal attacked the complainant or some other person or animal as witnessed by the complainant; and 
(6)	Other facts and circumstances of the incident. 
(Code 1983, § 4-213; Ord. No. 358-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-77. Impoundment.
It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designated representative, upon receipt of a verified complaint under this division to cause the animal involved to be impounded pending a determination as required by this division. Any and all expenses associated with the impounding including shelter, food, handling and veterinary care shall be borne by the owner of such animal during the period of impoundment. 
(Code 1983, § 4-214; Ord. No. 358-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-78. Hearing.
The municipal judge, in addition to any hearings which may be required on criminal charges, shall hold a hearing within ten days of the date of impoundment to determine if the animal is vicious as defined by this division. The hearing may be held in conjunction with any criminal proceedings if so ordered by the judge but in no event shall this delay the hearing on determination of viciousness. 
(Code 1983, § 4-215; Ord. No. 358-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-79. Determination.
The municipal judge shall be empowered to make one of the following determinations as a result of the hearing: 
(1)	The animal is in fact not vicious, in which event, the city manager shall cause it to be surrendered to the owner of the animal, upon payment by the owner of expenses as required by this division; 
(2)	The animal is in fact vicious and should be destroyed; 
(3)	The animal is vicious but, that for good cause shown, the animal should not be destroyed in which event the judge shall order one of the following: 
a.	That the animal be immediately removed from the corporate limits of the city and not to ever be again allowed within the corporate limits of the city and that the owner give a good and sufficient bond in the amount of $250.00 and pay all fees required by this division; 
b.	That the owner be allowed to maintain the vicious animal within the corporate limits of the city under the following conditions: 
1.	Fees. Payment of all fees required by this division. 
2.	Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit an animal covered by this section to go outside its kennel or pen unless such animal is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length. No person shall permit the animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such animal may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all animals on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such animal from biting persons or other animals; 
3.	General confinement. All animals covered by this section shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine the animals must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures erected to house the animals must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition; 
4.	Confinement indoors. No animal covered by this section may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure; 
5.	Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of animals covered by this section within the city shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Vicious Animal." in addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal; and 
6.	Insurance. All owners, keepers or harborers of animals covered by this section must provide proof to the animal control officer of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $50,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless ten days' written notice is first given to the animal control officer. 
(4)	All owners, whose animal is adjudged to be vicious at the hearing, and sentence imposed by the municipal judge pursuant to this section, upon written demand, may appeal the judge's decision with ten days to the district court of the county where a trial in the district court shall be accorded them de novo. All such appeals shall comply with the procedures of section 12-131. 
(Code 1983, § 4-216; Ord. No. 358-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-80. Violation and penalties.
Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this article shall upon conviction be fined as provided in the city fine schedule. In addition to the fine imposed, the court may sentence the defendant to imprisonment in the municipal jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this division continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 4-217; Ord. No. 358-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Secs. 6-81—6-103. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. CATS
 
Sec. 6-104. Authority to seize, impound cats.
It is the duty of the city manager or his authorized representatives to seize and impound for the times and under the conditions hereinafter stated every abandoned cat, every vicious cat, every rabies suspected cat, every cat which is a nuisance as hereinafter provided, and every cat, either licensed or unlicensed, which is found running at large upon the streets, alleys or public places or upon private premises not under the control of the owner of such cat, and every cat the keeping or harboring of which is declared to be an offense. 
(Code 1983, § 4-185; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-105. Failure to surrender violating cats.
It shall be unlawful to fail or refuse to deliver to the city manager or his designated representative, upon demand, any licensed cat, any vicious cat, any cat which is a nuisance, any rabies suspected cat, or any cat the keeping or harboring of which is declared to be an offense. 
(Code 1983, § 4-186; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-106. When cat constitutes a nuisance.
A cat within the city limits is deemed a nuisance if it: 
(1)	Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)	Attacks other animals; 
(3)	Trespasses on school grounds; 
(4)	Is repeatedly at large; 
(5)	Damages private or public property; 
(6)	Meows, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion, or otherwise endangering or offending the well-being of the public without cause; or 
(7)	Overturns any garbage can or other vessel for waste products or scatters the contents of same, is a public nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 4-187; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-107. Nuisance cats prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep or have possession of any cat which is a nuisance as herein defined. 
(Code 1983, § 4-188; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-108. Procedure for nuisance cats.
(a)	It is the duty of the city manager or persons designated by him, upon being notified that any person claiming that a cat is a nuisance within the meaning of this division has filed a verified complaint alleging that such cat is a nuisance as herein defined, to seize and impound the cat therein described. If the court finds that no nuisance exists, it shall order the cat to be surrendered to the owner thereof. 
(b)	If the court finds that the nuisance exists without cause, it shall order the cat destroyed as in the case of a vicious cat; however, if the owner of such cat gives a good and sufficient bond in the sum of $200.00 with a surety to be approved by the judge of the municipal court conditioned that such owner shall abate and prevent such nuisance, the court shall order the return of such cat to the owner thereof upon payment of the impounding fees herein specified. 
(c)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit any cat to run or be at large except as permitted under the city ordinances. No such cat shall be returned to the owner if the same is a vicious cat or in any event unless the same is vaccinated, registered and licensed as required by this division. 
(Code 1983, § 4-189; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-109. Reclaiming cats.
(a)	No person shall be entitled to reclaim any cat found to be a nuisance except as herein provided, nor shall any person be entitled to reclaim any cat found to be rabid or vicious; but the owner may reclaim any other cat seized under the terms of this division within the times and under the conditions stated herein. 
(b)	After the expiration of the ten-day term as to every cat held under observation and not showing symptoms of rabies, and as to every other cat within 48 hours from the time of seizure, the owner may reclaim the cat seized hereunder by submitting proof, satisfactory to the city manager or his designated representative, of his ownership of such cat and by paying any license fees then due for the current year in addition to any applicable impounding fee for any cat plus the costs of providing care and maintenance of the cat for each day since the seizure thereof. 
(c)	In the event the reclaimed cat has not been vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the terms of this division, the person reclaiming it must have the cat properly vaccinated and submit proof of such vaccination to the city manager or his designated representative. Failure to submit such proof within three days will constitute a violation of this division. 
(d)	No cat shall be released without satisfactory proof of ownership and without payment of the charges herein prescribed, nor shall the payment thereof constitute any defense in any prosecution that may be instituted for violation of the terms of this division. 
(e)	No poundage shall be charged for any licensed cat surrendered to the owner on acquittal or dismissal of the charges of harboring such cat as a nuisance or as a vicious cat. 
(Code 1983, § 4-190; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-110. Unreclaimed cats.
At the expiration of the time within which the owner may reclaim any cat seized under the provisions of this division, it is the duty of the humane society, city manager or person designated by him, to destroy any cat not then reclaimed, and cause the body thereof to be disposed of, however, if in the judgment and discretion of the humane society, city manager or person designated by him, the unreclaimed animal should not be destroyed, then the humane society or city manager may, after the time for reclaiming such cat as expired, sell and dispose of the cat for a sum equal to the total poundage plus any license or registration fees then due. Before selling or disposing of any cat in this manner, all cats must be vaccinated for rabies. 
(Code 1983, § 4-191; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-111. Cat waste.
The owner of every cat shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his cat on public walks, recreation areas, or private property. 
(Code 1983, § 4-192; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-112. Vaccination and licensing.
All persons possessing a cat within the city limits shall comply with the provisions of section 6-206. 
(Code 1983, § 4-193; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-113. Isolation.
The city manager or his designated representative may require or cause any cat which he has reason to believe may be infected with rabies to be confined in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1983, § 4-194; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Sec. 6-114. Release from pound.
Whenever a cat is impounded because the same is not licensed or because it is suspected of rabies, the cat shall not be released to the owner or person making claim thereto until the city manager or his designated representative holding the cat shall be furnished with a certificate of vaccination from a veterinarian or other person legally authorized to immunize cats showing that the cat has been immunized against rabies during the calendar year, and that any applicable impounding fee for any cat plus the cost for providing care and maintenance of the cat for each day since the seizure thereof has been paid. 
(Code 1983, § 4-195; Ord. No. 359-9-96, 10-10-1996)
 
Secs. 6-115—6-141. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. POULTRY AND FOWL
 
Sec. 6-142. Restrictions.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to keep poultry in any residential zoning except as provided in this division. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.40; Code 1983, § 4-150)
 
Sec. 6-143. Enclosure area.
No more than 12 poultry may be kept in an area of enclosure having a minimum of 100 square feet. For each four additional poultry, 50 square feet of area must be provided. In no event will more than 16 poultry be allowed on one acre. An additional acre must be provided for each 12 poultry in excess of 16. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.41; Code 1983, § 4-151)
 
Sec. 6-144. Housing facilities; building permits.
The owner, keeper or possessor of any poultry is required to provide an enclosure which shall contain the poultry therein. The erection of any shelter within the enclosure to provide shelter for the poultry shall be neatly built so as to conform to the buildings on the surrounding premises in neatness and appearance and in such a manner as to prevent unsanitary conditions. A building permit shall be secured before the commencement of construction. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.42; Code 1983, § 4-152)
 
Sec. 6-145. Fence.
Any keeper of poultry as provided in this division shall fence the area enclosure in such a manner as to prevent the poultry from escaping or running at large. No poultry shall be allowed to run at large or be tethered outside an area of enclosure within the limits of the city. The fence shall be neat in appearance and conform to the surrounding area. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.43; Code 1983, § 4-153)
 
Sec. 6-146. Determination of area.
In determining the number of square feet in the area of enclosure, only that ground which will be actually encompassed in the area of enclosure shall be used in arriving at the number of square feet in the area of enclosure. No area of enclosure will be closer than 40 feet to any dwelling designed to be used as living quarters for one or more families, and not less than 100 feet from the nearest water well used for human consumption. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.44; Code 1983, § 4-154)
 
Sec. 6-147. Sanitation.
It is the duty of the keeper where the poultry are kept, to maintain and operate the shelter and premises in such a manner as to not create a health nuisance. No keeper of poultry shall allow manure to accumulate in the enclosure and/or shelter. The enclosure and shelter shall be kept in a neat and clean manner. Each shelter or enclosure shall be sprayed with a suitable residual spray as often as is necessary to control flies and other insects. It is unlawful to dump or place any manure or other waste, feathers, or dead poultry in the garbage cans serviced by the sanitation department of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.45; Code 1983, § 4-155)
 
Secs. 6-148—6-177. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 6. LARGE FARM AND LIVESTOCK ANIMALS
 
Sec. 6-178. Requirements for keeping/raising large animals.
Large animals (horse, pony, mule, ass, calf, sheep, goat, cow, steer, bull) may not be kept in areas zoned for residential, commercial or industrial use. In no case may swine (pig or hog) be raised within the city limits of Spencer, Oklahoma. Commercial feed pens for livestock are prohibited within the city limits of Spencer, Oklahoma. 
(a)	Exceptions.
(1)	Large animals may be kept in unplatted areas zoned A-1, suburban agricultural district, provided said property contains a minimum of two and one-half acres and an occupied single family dwelling is part of this two and one-half acre tract. 
(2)	Large animals may be kept in unplatted areas zoned R-1, single-family dwelling district, provided said property contains a minimum of two and one-half acres and an occupied single-family dwelling is part of this two and one-half acre tract. 
(3)	Large animals may be kept in unplatted areas zoned R-5, single family manufactured home district, provided said property contains a minimum of five acres and an occupied conventional single-family dwelling or a single-family manufactured home (mobile home) is part of this five acre tract. 
(b)	Additional requirements concerning the keeping of large animals.
(1)	No large animal may be kept within 40 feet of the dwelling on the same property or within 100 feet of a dwelling adjacent to this property. 
(2)	No large animal will be kept within 100 feet of a private water well on this property or within 100 feet of a private water well adjacent to this property. 
(3)	Adequate fencing to prevent large animals from running at large shall be provided. 
(4)	Adequate water, food supply (pasture, grain or hay), and appropriate shelter shall be provided for large animals. 
(5)	Poor drainage combined with the accumulation of animal manure causing unsanitary conditions, flies, mosquitoes and foul odors may be declared a public nuisance by the City of Spencer with corrective action required by the property owner. 
(6)	Equine registration required. Effective June 30, 2021, any horse, pony, mule or ass kept within the city limits of Spencer must be registered with the City of Spencer on an equine registration form provided by the city. An annual registration fee of $25.00 shall be required for each registered equine animal. All equine registration forms expire on June 30th of each year and must be renewed with the registration fee paid for each animal. 
(7)	The rule for the number of large animals being kept within the City of Spencer, Oklahoma: 
a.	Two cows per acre, excluding one-half acre reserved for the dwelling (excluding other large animals). 
b.	Two horses per acre, excluding one-half acre reserved for the dwelling (excluding other large animals). 
c.	Four sheep or goats per acre, excluding one-half acre reserved for the dwelling (excluding other large animals). 
(c)	Current keeping of large animals not in compliance with this section.
(1)	Properties within the city limits of Spencer, Oklahoma where large animals are being kept that do not comply with this section on the effective date of the ordinance from which it is derived shall be considered a nonconforming use. 
(2)	Large animals being kept on nonconforming properties shall be subject to subsection (b)(1)—(6) above. 
(3)	The removal of large animals from nonconforming properties for a period of three months or more shall terminate the large animal nonconforming use of said property meaning no other large animals will be permitted to be kept or raised on this property. 
(4)	Repeated violations of any of the additional requirements for the keeping of large animals (subsection (b)(1)—(6)) within any three-month period shall result in the termination of the large animal nonconforming use status and the future use of said property for keeping or raising large animals. 
(Ord. No. 539-05-11, § 1(4-102), 5-19-2011; Ord. No. 2020-12-17 , § 1, 12-17-2020)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2020-12-17 , § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 2020, changed the title of § 6-178 from requirements for housing to requirements for keeping/raising large animals. 
 
Sec. 6-179. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2020-12-17 , § 2, adopted Dec. 17, 2020, repealed § 6-179, which pertained to special permits allowed for keeping [large animals] on properties with less than five acres, and derived from Ord. No. 539-05-11, § 1(4-103), adopted May 19, 2011. 
 
Sec. 6-180. Breeding in public prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person who is owner or possessor of any male or female large animal or the owner or possessor or occupier of the premises to permit or authorize the breeding of such animals at any place in the city limits that is in view of any private residence, public road or way, playground, school, or other place where private citizens may congregate or be. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.12; Code 1983, § 4-112)
 
Sec. 6-181. Certain farm animals and livestock not to run at large or be present on public property.
Unless specifically authorized by the city, no person shall permit any horse, pony, mule, ass, calf, sheep, goat, swine, cow, steer, bull, or other animal owned by or under his control to run at large or be picketed, staked or herded, or to be driven in or on the streets, alleys, and public grounds within the city limits. All stock must be led by halter or rope in being taken to and from pasture. However, nothing in this division shall prevent dealers or other persons from driving their stock to market. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.13; Code 1983, § 4-113)
 
Sec. 6-182. Chief of police to impound animals at large.
All police officers of the city and such other persons as the chief of police may in writing designate and appoint are authorized and directed to take up all animals found running at large within the city, contrary to this division. Animals picked up shall be confined in a pound, pen, building, or other place as may be designated by the chief by and with the approval of the city manager. The chief shall provide at the cost of the city suitable and necessary sustenance for all animals so taken up and impounded. The cost of providing such sustenance, together with all other costs and charges growing out of the taking up, care and keeping of such animals, shall be paid by the owner or person redeeming the animal before the animal shall be released. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.14; Code 1983, § 4-114)
 
Sec. 6-183. Owners of animals responsible for damages.
Any person driving horses, cattle or other stock along the streets or alleys of the city shall be held liable for all damages done by such stock to lawn, trees, or shrubbery. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.18; Code 1983, § 4-118)
 
Secs. 6-184—6-205. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 7. LICENSING AND RABIES VACCINATION
 
Sec. 6-206. License required; reduced rates offered.
It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, possess, harbor or to allow to remain upon the premises under his control, within the city any dog or cat without having obtained a license. The license fee is as provided in the city fee schedule for each dog and cat. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year. License fees shall be reduced by 50 percent with proof that the animal is spayed or neutered. A certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall serve as proof and must be submitted at the time of purchase. 
(Code 1983, § 4-122; Ord. No. 443-07-04, 7-15-2004)
 
Sec. 6-207. Cats and dogs to be vaccinated.
The owner or keeper of any dog or cat of three months of age or older within the city limits shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian every calendar year. Owners shall affix, or have affixed, to the collar or harness of each vaccinated dog or cat a metal disc with sufficient information thereon that the vaccination certificate covering the animal may be readily traced. 
(Code 1983, § 4-123)
 
Sec. 6-208. Vaccination required for license.
No license shall be issued for any dog or cat unless the dog or cat shall have first been vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian within 60 days prior to the issuance of such license for the dog or cat. There shall be delivered to the city clerk-treasurer prior to the issuance of such license, a certificate signed by a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice within the state, that the dog or cat has been duly vaccinated, giving the date of the vaccination thereof. Thereafter and upon payment of the fee as provided by law, the city clerk-treasurer shall issue a license for the dog or cat. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.21; Code 1983, § 4-124; Ord. No. 443-07-04, 7-15-2004)
 
Sec. 6-209. Payments of license fee, issuance of license and metal tag.
The license fee required in this division shall be paid annually and in advance and upon the payment of the fee. In addition to issuing the license, the city clerk-treasurer shall issue a properly numbered metal tag to be affixed to the collar of the dog. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.22; Code 1983, § 4-125)
 
Sec. 6-210. City clerk-treasurer to keep a record.
The city clerk-treasurer shall keep a register of all licenses issued in which shall be entered the name and address of the applicant, the description of the dog or cat, the number of the license and check issued, the amount paid, and the date of issuance and expiration. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.23; Code 1983, § 4-126; Ord. No. 443-07-04, 7-15-2004)
 
Sec. 6-211. Tag to be attached to collar; lost tag.
The metal tag shall be securely fastened to the collar to be worn by the dog. If any such tag is lost, the city clerk-treasurer may, on satisfactory proof thereof, and on payment of the sum as provided in the city fee schedule, issue another, and shall note such fact and number of such tag on the register, together with a memorandum of the amount paid therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.24; Code 1983, § 4-127)
 
Sec. 6-212. Unlawful to remove tag.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to remove any tag from the collar of any dog without the owner's consent. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.24; Code 1983, § 4-128)
 
Sec. 6-213. Report of persons bitten by animal.
Any person owning or having under his control any animal who bites any person or any person who has been bitten by any animal shall forthwith notify the police department of the city giving the location and license number of the animal and the name and address of the owner thereof and the name and address of the person bitten, and failure to make such report is an offense. 
(Prior Code, §§ 6-1.26, 6-1.36; Code 1983, § 4-130
 
Sec. 6-214. Owner to confine dog which bites.
The owner of any animal who has bitten a person shall immediately fasten up the animal and the animal shall be impounded at the city pound or in a veterinary hospital which has been approved by the city for a period of 14 days. The expense of such impoundment shall be paid by the owner of the animal. If the owner cannot be located or found, or refuses to pay for the upkeep of the animal, the animal shall be destroyed at the end of the 14 days as otherwise provided in this division. 
(Prior Code, §§ 6-1.27, 6-1.28; Code 1983, § 4-131)
 
Sec. 6-215. Enforcement.
It is the duty and responsibility of the police department of the city to enforce the provisions of this division. However, the city manager may appoint a qualified person to act as dog catcher, who shall have police authority. He shall perform such other duties as may be directed by the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 6-131; Code 1983, § 4-133)
 
Secs. 6-216—6-238. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 8. CITY POUND AND IMPOUNDMENT
 
Sec. 6-239. City pound.
A city pound shall be provided and maintained at the expense of the city in which all animals found at large in the city contrary to this Code shall be impounded. Such pound shall be constructed in such manner as to provide shelter for all animals impounded therein, with sufficient stalls to separate one breed of animal from that of another, and to separate a ferocious animal from that of another of the same breed in separate stalls; and shall be constructed out of strong material to ensure the safe keeping of all animals. Animals held for observation shall be maintained in separate stalls. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.32; Code 1983, § 4-140)
 
Sec. 6-240. Pound keeper.
A qualified person shall be approved to serve during the pleasure of the city manager as pound keeper whose duty it is to take up and impound all animals and livestock running at large contrary to the ordinances of the city, and to safely keep and dispose of all animals coming into his possession as provided by this Code. He shall provide adequate food, water, shelter and care to such animals while the same are in the city pound, and shall take precaution for the safe care of animals while impounded; the pound keeper shall have full police power to pick up, impound, sell, release on redemption all live stock and animals as provided by the ordinances of the city and to destroy and bury all unredeemed dogs impounded therein, as provided by such ordinances, and shall perform such duties as directed. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.33; Code 1983, § 4-141)
 
Sec. 6-241. Disposal of animals.
It is the responsibility of the pound keeper to notify the owner of any impounded animals, if such owner can be determined, of the fact of the impoundment of the animal and any dog not redeemed by the owner shall be killed and buried, as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.34; Code 1983, § 4-142)
 
Sec. 6-242. Monthly report.
The pound keeper shall make a written report within the first five days of the month to the city manager, a duplicate of which shall be filed with the city clerk, which report shall include the following: 
(1)	By class the total number of animals received at the city pound the previous month; 
(2)	A description of each animal; 
(3)	The name of the owner if known; 
(4)	The date received or taken up; 
(5)	The date of redemption; 
(6)	Animals sold and the time of sale and the price received; and 
(7)	Animals destroyed. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.35; Code 1983, § 4-143)
 
Sec. 6-243. Sale of impounded animals.
Any animal taken up and impounded may be sold at public auction by the chief of police or otherwise disposed of at any time after the expiration of three days from the time of impounding the same. The chief of police or other officer shall give at least five days' notice of the time and place of such sale, by causing notices thereof to be posted in the police office of the city hall and the city pound. The notice shall be substantially in the form approved by the city from time to time. 
(Code 1983, § 4-115)
 
Sec. 6-244. Redemption of animals impounded; excess over expenses to be paid owner.
(a)	If the owner of any animal shall pay the costs, which shall include a pick-up fee plus feeding costs per animal, all as set by the city council by motion or resolution, and other charges and expenses incurred under this chapter at any time before the sale or disposition of such animal, the chief of police or other officer shall release such animal. 
(b)	If the owner of any animal shall apply to the city after such animal has been sold and prove the ownership thereof to the satisfaction of the chief of police, before payment to the city treasurer, the chief shall pay the balance from the sale of such animal to the applicant, taking his receipt in duplicate, one of which he will file with the city clerk. 
(c)	But if the owner of such animal sold shall apply to the city after the payment to the city treasurer, and prove the ownership thereof to his satisfaction, then the chief of police shall certify the facts to the mayor and council, stating the amount deposited in the city treasury and account of such animal, and therefrom a warrant shall be drawn upon the treasurer in favor of claimant for the amount so certified by the chief of police. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.16; Code 1983, § 4-116)
 
Sec. 6-245. Breaking open pound.
It is unlawful for any person to break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid, assist in or counsel or advise the breaking open of any city pound, or to hinder, delay or obstruct any person duly authorized in taking up or taking to the city pound any animal liable to be impounded. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.17; Code 1983, § 4-112)
 
Sec. 6-246. Payment of food and care for impounding dog.
The fee for the food and care of any animal confined in the city pound under this chapter shall be set by the city council by motion or resolution. Before any dog shall be redeemed the full cost of the food and care shall have been fully paid by the owner. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1.29; Code 1983, § 4-132)
 
Secs. 6-247—6-270. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 6-271. Restrictions.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to offer any animal for sale, barter, or give away at any public market, flea market, swap meet, fair, commercial store, or similar establishment or for any person to provide facilities for the sale, barter, or give away of any animal except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 4-160; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-272. Compliance with Code.
(a)	Animal licensing and vaccination. An animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any dog or cat over three months of age unless the dog or cat has been licensed or vaccinated as required by this Code. 
(b)	Diseased animals. An animal establishment shall cease the sale of animals when it has been determined that an animal in their care has a contagious disease. The sale of animals can continue after certification by a veterinarian that the disease has been arrested or is of no threat to the other animals. Licenses will be revoked if an establishment sells sick or diseased animals. 
(c)	Inspection. The animal control authority shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment and all animals and the premises where such animals are kept at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article and the animal control code. 
(Code 1983, § 4-137; Ord. No. 290-A, 4-17-1990)
 
Sec. 6-273. Space requirements and restraints.
(a)	Cages or enclosures shall be large enough to ensure that each animal contained therein has space enough equal to a minimum of two times the length of its body and sufficient space to turn about freely in a standing position using normal body movements, to stand and sit erect, and to lie in a natural position. This requirement shall apply to each animal regardless of the number of animals within the cage or enclosure. 
(b)	Chains, ropes, or other devices used to contain animals must be of such length to allow the animal to sit erect, stand, or lie in a natural position, and to be so attached to a stake or other device so as to prevent the animal from becoming entangled in or from becoming wound around the stake or other device to which the chain, rope, or other device is attached. Animals tethered to fences along a public thoroughfare is prohibited. 
(Code 1983, § 4-161; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-274. Shelter.
Sufficient shade shall be provided to allow all animals to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun and sufficient shelter shall be provided to allow all animals to remain dry during rain or inclement weather. 
(Code 1983, § 4-162; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-275. Food and water.
Fresh, non-contaminated water shall be accessible to the animals at all times. Watering receptacles shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. Animals shall not be deprived of their daily food requirements as a result of their being confined for sale, barter or give away. 
(Code 1983, §§ 4-163, 4-164; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-276. Classification and separation.
Animals housed in the same cage or enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups with species of their own kind. 
(Code 1983, § 4-165; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-277. Sick or injured animals.
Animals suspected of being sick, diseased, or injured shall be removed from the premises and must receive prompt veterinary care. 
(Code 1983, § 4-166; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-278. Disposal of waste.
Animal waste and uneaten food must be properly disposed of. Cages and enclosures shall be cleaned of waste as often as necessary to prevent contamination of the animals contained therein and to reduce disease hazards and odors. 
(Code 1983, § 4-167; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-279. Rabies vaccination.
Dogs, cats, and other animals requiring rabies vaccination by state law, for sale, barter, or give away shall have a current rabies vaccination certificate available for inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 4-168; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-280. Regulations to apply to all animals.
Any owner of such establishment will provide shelters and enclosures as prescribed by this section for all animals, including large animals, for example, horses, mules, ponies, cows, goats, sheep and swine. Such shelters and enclosures will comply with city ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 4-169; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-281. Responsibility for compliance.
An owner or keeper of animals, or an occupant or owner of such establishment who charges fees for, or allows to occur free, such sales, barter, or give away of animals, will be responsible for the care requirements as set forth in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 4-170; Ord. No. 239-A, 3-20-1986)
 
Sec. 6-282. Pet shops.
All pet shops, including pet shops operated in conjunction with another holding facility, shall, in addition to the other requirements of this Code, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a license or revocation of a license. Standards for pet shops are as follows: 
(1)	There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit for washing cages and disinfecting, and cold water easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water shall be available to all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day; 
(2)	The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the shop; and 
(3)	All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and stretch out to his full length. 
(Code 1983, § 4-135; Ord. No. 290-A, 4-17-1990)
 
Secs. 6-283—6-312. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. KENNELS
 
Sec. 6-313. Minimum operating standards.
All kennels shall, in addition to the other requirements of this Code, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a license or revocation of a license. Standards for kennels are as follows: 
(1)	Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting; 
(2)	Building temperature shall be maintained at a comfortable level. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained; 
(3)	Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or top of cages; 
(4)	Cages are to be of material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing; 
(5)	Cage floors of concrete, unless radiantly heated, shall have a resting board or some type of bedding. Bedding is to be of material that permits cleaning and sanitizing, or should be changed and disposed of daily; 
(6)	Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface; 
(7)	All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry, and in a sanitary condition; 
(8)	The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal; 
(9)	All animals shall have fresh water available at all times; and 
(10)	All sick animals shall be separated from the rest of the animals at a distance to minimize infection of healthy animals. 
(Code 1983, § 4-134; Ord. No. 290-A, 4-17-1990)
 
Chapter 8 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 8-1. Engineering department.
(a)	Department established; personnel. There is hereby established and created an engineering department which consists of a city engineer, a city inspector and such other personnel who may from time to time be authorized by the city council. The city engineer, the city inspector, and all other personnel of the engineering department shall be appointed by the city manager to serve during his pleasure and the city engineer shall be a registered licensed engineer. 
(b)	Duties of the engineer. It is the duty of the city engineer to prepare, at the request of the city manager or the city council, all plans and specifications for the erection, construction or addition to all utility systems, buildings and other structures owned or to be erected by or for the benefit of the city. He shall supervise all construction and shall advise the city council regarding all contractors bidding on contracts for the city, the needs of the city, and shall, from time to time, examine all building codes, fire codes, electrical codes, plumbing codes and other ordinances and regulations pertaining to buildings and development in the city and make recommendations to the council concerning same. He shall issue work orders to all private parties making additions to the streets, water and sewer systems of the city after approval of same by the city council. He shall perform such other duties as the city manager may, from time to time, designate. 
(c)	Duties of the inspector. The inspector shall inspect and examine all construction and additions of buildings, streets and utilities operated by the city for the purpose of checking the compliance with the various building codes of the city and to ascertain if all paving, sewer and water lines are being built to conform with plans and specifications approved by the city council. The inspector shall be charged with the duty of enforcing all ordinances relating to electrical wiring, plumbing, forced-air heating, building code and the buildings in the fire zone. 
(Prior Code, § 12-1.4; Code 1983, §§ 5-101—5-104)
 
Sec. 8-2. Building and dwelling addresses.
(a)	It is the duty of the record owner of every now-existing dwelling, building or structure in the city to place and maintain thereon, in a place visible from the street, figures at least three inches high, showing the number of the dwelling, building or structure. Any person failing to so number any now-existing dwelling, building or structure owned by him within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, or, after receiving notice to do so from the city inspector, or shall fail to so number such dwelling, building or structure within 48 hours after such notice, shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)	The record owner of any dwelling, building or structure constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall place such figures thereon before or at the time the occupancy permit is issued. 
(Code 1983, § 5-305; Ord. No. 227-A, 4-11-1985)
 
Sec. 8-3. Penalty.
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, or repairs, or has erected, constructed, altered or repaired, a building or structure or portion thereof, in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, is guilty of an offense subject to penalties as provided in the city fine schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 9-1.9; Code 1983, § 5-303)
 
Secs. 8-4—8-24. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
 
Sec. 8-25. Enforcement authority of building inspector.
This article shall be enforced by a building inspector, acting at the direction of the city manager. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-1.6, 45-8.1; Code 1983, § 5-201)
 
Sec. 8-26. Building permit required.
It is a violation of this Code for any person to change or permit the change in the use of land or buildings or structures or to erect, alter, move, or improve any building or structure until a building permit or certificate of occupancy has been obtained under the following conditions; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the erection of farm buildings not used for human habitation. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-1.6, 45-8.1; Code 1983, § 5-201)
 
Sec. 8-27. Permit issuance conditioned upon compliance with zoning and other city regulations.
Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy under this chapter is subject to such additional restrictions and prerequisites as may be provided elsewhere in this Code, specifically including, but not limited to, city zoning regulations which are cumulative to the provisions of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 8-28. Approval of building inspector or engineer required.
No building permits or permits relating to buildings, wiring, plumbing, paving, or the water system as provided by ordinance shall be issued until approved by the inspector or engineer or his designee. 
(Prior Code, § 12-1.5; Code 1983, § 5-105)
 
Sec. 8-29. Application for permit.
Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by: 
(1)	A plat drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of existing buildings and structures and the lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered; 
(2)	A declaration of the existing and intended use of each building or part of a building, and the number of families and housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; and 
(3)	Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots and their use as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of these regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 5-202)
 
Sec. 8-30. Certificate of occupancy.
(a)	No change shall be made in the use of any land or building or structure until a certificate of occupancy is approved by the city code enforcement officer and issued by the city clerk certifying that all of the provisions of this chapter are complied with. Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection of a new building or structure, an occupancy permit shall not be required, except when the use of the building or structure is changed from that for which the permit is issued or where the intended use is not clearly stated on the building permit. 
(b)	In certain circumstances, where it is revealed that undue hardship may otherwise result, the city manager or code enforcement officer, at his discretion, may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy not to exceed 60 days' duration, and only if compliance is probable within the time period. If compliance is not met within 60 days, for any reason whatsoever, whether or not within the control of the occupant, then the occupancy shall automatically and summarily cease. 
(Prior Code, § 45-8.4; Code 1983, § 5-203; Ord. No. 263-A, 6-30-1988)
 
Sec. 8-31. Permit and inspection fees.
Fees shall be paid for all new construction and altered construction within the city. All fees except the base inspection fee will be based upon square footage. Fees will be paid to the office of the city clerk before construction is started. The base fee shall be in such sum as set by the council by motion or resolution for each inspection or reinspection plus fees in accordance with the schedule adopted by the council. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-1.7, 9-1.7A, 9-1.8; Code 1983, § 5-204)
 
Sec. 8-32. State required fees for the issuance of building permits.
Pursuant to 59 O.S. §§ 1000.23 and 1000.25, the city shall apply a fee as provided in the city fee schedule per building or construction permit issued by the city to a fund to be remitted to the Uniform Building Code Commission before the 20th of each month. An additional fee as provided in the city fee schedule shall be imposed and received by the city to support the processing and handling of this fee. 
(Ord. No. 529-04-10, 4-15-2010)
 
Secs. 8-33—8-53. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION CODES
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 8-54. Adoption of building code.
(a)	Adoption of International Building Code.
(1)	The city adopts the 2012 edition of the International Building Code regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, building and structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures in the city. 
(2)	The following sections of the 2012 edition of the International Building Code book are hereby revised: These regulations shall be known as the building code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(b)	Fire limits established. The fire limits of the city are hereby established as follows: All areas within hereafter may be zoned under class C by the ordinances or other authority of the city. 
(c)	Copies of code on file. Not less than two copies of construction codes adopted by the city shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, §§ 5-301—5-304; Ord. No. 460-10-04, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. 538-05-11, § 2, 5-19-2011)
 
Sec. 8-55. Adoption of existing building code.
(a)	That certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters A and B (see International Existing Building Code section 101.7, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the city for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said existing building code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)	Section 101. These regulations shall be known as the existing building code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)	Section 1201. Applicability: Structures existing prior to December 16, 2004. 
(Code 1983, § 5-306; Ord. No. 456-02-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Secs. 8-56—8-83. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PLUMBING
 
Sec. 8-84. Adoption of plumbing code.
(a)	That certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Code Council Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters A through G (see International Plumbing Code section 102.5, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the city for regulating and governing the construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said plumbing code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)	Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the plumbing code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)	Section 106.6.2. The fees for work shall be as indicated in Ordinance 450-10-14. 
(3)	Section 106.6.3 Fee refunds: Not more than 50 percent of the permit fees paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. Not more than 50 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
(4)	Section 108.4. Persons, who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided in the city fine schedule or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)	Section 108.5. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as provided in the city fine schedule. 
(6)	Section 305.6.1. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of six inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of four inches below grade. 
(7)	Section 904.1. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the roof. 
(Code 1983, § 5-501; Ord. No. 452-02-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 8-85. Fees, permits and inspections.
No permit shall be issued for any plumbing fitting to any person other than a licensed and bonded journeyman plumber or plumbing contractor. Every plumber, before work of any kind covered by the applicable ordinances of the city, except in cases of repairing leaks inside of property lines, shall obtain a permit from the city for such work. The applicant for a permit shall pay to the city clerk an inspection fee in such amount as set by the city council by motion or resolution, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. If the plumbing inspector is required to make another or an additional inspection of the installation, necessitating another trip therefor, the permittee shall be required to pay the city clerk an additional sum as set by the council for additional inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 9-6.1; Code 1983, § 5-502)
 
Sec. 8-86. Application for permit; issuance.
(a)	Before a plumber installs any gas fitting work, or makes additions to or alterations in existing plumbing appliances, fittings or fixtures, he shall file with the city clerk an application in writing for a permit. The application shall be made out on a form which shall be furnished by the city clerk. The following information shall appear: 
(1)	Street and house number of the premises where the plumbing work is to be done; 
(2)	Name of the owner or builder; 
(3)	Kind of building; 
(4)	A list of plumbing fixtures to be done; and 
(5)	Such other information as the plumbing inspector may reasonably require. 
(b)	The application shall be referred to the plumbing inspector who, after consideration thereof, shall issue a permit in accordance therewith if the application complies with the terms and provisions of the codes of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 9-6.2; Code 1983, § 5-503)
 
Sec. 8-87. Permits not transferable; second permits.
Permits are not transferable. The issuance of a second permit cancels a permit issued prior thereto. In the event a plumber obtains a permit for work to be performed and fails to finish it, another plumber who desires to finish the work may apply for a new permit. If after an investigation, the plumbing inspector finds that the master plumber who held or holds the original or first permit has not been diligent in performing his contract and finishing the work described in the permit, he must issue a new or another permit according to the plans and application therefor, upon the payment of the required fees for the issuance of the permit, as provided by the terms and provisions of the plumbing code. 
(Prior Code, § 9-6.3; Code 1983, § 5-504)
 
Sec. 8-88. Expiration of permit.
If plumbing work under a permit is not commenced within six months after the issuance of a permit, or the work is discontinued for a period of one year from the date of the issuance thereof, the permit shall thereupon become void, and no work shall be done on the premises until a new permit is issued and all fees are paid. 
(Prior Code, § 9-6.4; Code 1983, § 5-505)
 
Sec. 8-89. Plumbers' registration, fees.
No person shall practice or engage in the business, trade or occupation of a journeyman plumber, a plumbing contractor, or a plumber's apprentice unless he is registered as such with the plumbing inspector. The registration fees to be paid to the city shall be in such sums as the city council shall set by motion or resolution. 
(Code 1983, § 5-506)
 
Secs. 8-90—8-106. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. ELECTRICAL
 
Subdivision I. In General
 
Sec. 8-107. Adoption of electrical code.
(a)	That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters A through L (see International Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions section 102.5, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the International Electrical Code—Administrative Provisions of the city for regulating and governing the design, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said electrical code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)	Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the electrical code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)	Section 404.2. The fees for work shall be as indicated in Ordinance 450-10-14. 
(Code 1983, § 5-635; Ord. No. 450-02-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 8-108. Permit required.
(a)	No electric wiring shall be installed or altered, or changes made in existing wiring, in or on any building, without a permit being issued by the chief electrical inspector. No permit shall be issued except to a licensed electrical contractor or to a certified maintenance electrician in the employ of the owner of the building on which such electric wiring work is to be performed. Permits shall not be necessary for maintenance work or for repair work if wiring is not altered or rearranged. 
(b)	The electrical inspector may, if he deems it necessary, require or demand from the electrical contractor a set of plans and specifications of any job, in order that the electrical inspector may check them to determine if the plans and specifications comply with this division. The electrical inspector must render a decision on such plans and specifications within 24 hours after receiving them. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.16; Code 1983, § 5-612)
 
Sec. 8-109. Permits refused.
The electrical inspector has authority to refuse a permit for the installation of electric wiring as herein provided, or any additions or extensions to any electric wiring in or on any building where, in his judgment, the wiring done or proposed to be done is unsafe or not in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.17; Code 1983, § 5-613)
 
Sec. 8-110. Fees for permits.
In order to procure a permit for the installation of electric wiring, any licensed electrical contractor, before beginning any electrical work, shall make application to the city clerk and shall pay an inspection fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.18; Code 1983, § 5-614)
 
Sec. 8-111. Inspection.
(a)	The electrical inspector shall inspect all work for which permits have been issued. 
(b)	After inspecting any electric wiring, the electrical inspector shall leave notice in the form of a tag or label attached to the service entrance switch or branch cabinet. The notice shall clearly state whether the wiring is approved or is to be kept open for correction, and no person shall seal or in any manner conceal any electrical wiring until such wiring has been approved. However, it is the duty of the electrical inspector to make such partial inspection as is required to permit the continuous construction of the building. 
(c)	If, in any case, the wiring is in such a position as to interfere with the completion of the building as called for by the plans, the electrical contractor must be notified to change the same. Proper conveniences such as ladders must be provided to inspectors on work to be inspected by the firm, corporation, or individual desiring inspection. In all cases, on completion of the rough-in job, a final rough-in inspection must be called for. 
(d)	The roughing-in of each job shall include the installation of main and branch cabinets and the installation of all boxes and transformers. All rough-in wiring shall be tested, circuits made up, splices soldered or approved wire connectors used and taped, and wiring completed. From each active outlet box, one pair of wires not less than eight inches long shall be left for the fixture connection. 
(e)	A "finish" permit indicates that, upon inspection, the work will be found in condition for a service connection on final approval. The wireman who does the last work on the job shall assure himself that such a condition exists by testing each circuit, socket, and receptacle. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.19; Code 1983, § 5-615)
 
Sec. 8-112. Certificate of inspection.
(a)	On the completion of the work covered by a permit in accordance with all ordinances and laws, and after inspection and approval by the electrical inspector, the electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection. In this certificate, the electrical inspector shall certify that the work is in accordance with the rules covering the respective class to which it belongs, as specified by this division. 
(b)	This certificate shall be issued to the electric service company, and shall be its authority to supply electric service to the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.20; Code 1983, § 5-616)
 
Sec. 8-113. Temporary certificate.
When, for good and sufficient cause, it is necessary to have the electricity turned on at any installation before final certificate can be issued, the electrical inspector may, if the parts to which the current is applied are in a safe and satisfactory condition, issue a temporary certificate. Whenever a temporary service is installed satisfactory to the electrical inspector, the electric service company will not be permitted to make a connection to permanent service until after a final permanent certificate has been issued. Before the temporary certificate is issued, the party requesting it shall pay a fee as set by the city council by motion or resolution. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.21; Code 1983, § 5-617)
 
Sec. 8-114. Refusal of certificate.
The electrical inspector is hereby given the authority to refuse to issue a certificate of inspection for any addition or extension to any electric wiring in or on any building wherein the existing wiring is in an unsafe condition. 
(Code 1983, § 5-618)
 
Sec. 8-115. Connections by electric service companies restricted.
(a)	It is unlawful for any electric light or power company or any supplier of electricity for light, heat or power, to make any electrical connection to any building or electric wiring or apparatus until a certificate stating that the electric wiring has been approved, or written permit authorizing connection has been issued by the electrical inspector. 
(b)	All firms, corporations, or individuals, whether operating under a regular franchise granted by the city or not, shall, upon written notice by the electrical inspector, disconnect from any such circuit, including main service wires, branch feeder wires, or distribution as designated by the notice and shall not reconnect to the installation except upon written notice from the electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.23; Code 1983, § 5-619)
 
Sec. 8-116. Defective workmanship or materials.
Any person engaged in the business of electrical construction and the installation of wiring and apparatus for electric light, heat, or power in the city who fails to correct promptly any defect in any work done by him contrary to this division, after having been notified thereof by the electrical inspector, shall not be issued any further permits until such defect has been corrected. In any case in which any person continues to violate or persistently violates the ordinances of the city in regard to electrical work or the orders of the electrical inspector in relation to the same, the license of such person shall be suspended or revoked. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.24; Code 1983, § 5-620)
 
Sec. 8-117. Fire, storm, or emergency.
Every person owning or controlling electrical wires and apparatus for the transmission of light, heat, or power shall, in time of fire or in case of a severe storm or any other emergency wherein lives or property of the citizens of the city may be endangered by the operation of such wires and apparatus, upon notice by the electrical inspector, the mayor, city manager, the chief of the fire department, or chief of police, disconnect such dangerous wires from current or service as are designated by the official. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.25; Code 1983, § 5-621)
 
Sec. 8-118. Poles, wires, and cables.
(a)	The placing, stringing, or attaching of telegraph, telephone, electric light, or other wires and cables, and the placing of all poles and appliances shall be done in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code, and the Oklahoma Corporation Commission's orders, so as to prevent fires, accidents, or injury to persons or property. 
(b)	The electrical inspector shall notify the telephone, telegraph, or electric service companies of any such poles, wires, cables, or apparatus so placed as not to meet the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code, and the Oklahoma Corporation Commission's orders. All such wires, lights, cables, poles, and electrical apparatus now existing, as well as those hereafter constructed and placed, shall be maintained to meet the same requirements. 
(c)	The telephone, telegraph, or electric service company shall have a reasonable time in which to correct such conditions after being so notified by the electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.26; Code 1983, § 5-622)
 
Sec. 8-119. Relocated buildings.
When a building or portion of a building containing electric wiring is moved from its foundation, the owner shall have the electric wiring and equipment in the building inspected and repaired and, where necessary, provide proper grounding wires, etc. The electrical contractor shall obtain a wiring permit and request inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.27; Code 1983, § 5-623)
 
Sec. 8-120. Inspection no relief from responsibility.
This division shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibilities of any person, partnership, or corporation owning, operating, or installing electric wires, appliances, apparatus, construction, or equipment, for the damage to property or person injured by any defect therein. Nor shall the city or any agent thereof be deemed to assume any such liability by reason of the inspection issued by the electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.28; Code 1983, § 5-624)
 
Sec. 8-121. Exceptions; communication companies; electric utilities.
The provisions of this division shall not be construed as affecting or applying to any work done by or for any telephone, telegraph, or other communication company in the installation, repair, or maintenance of wiring or other electrical apparatus, equipment, or device to be used exclusively in connection with its business, or as applying to any work done by or for any public utility electric service company operating under a franchise from the city or any central station powerhouse, substation, shop, or device belonging to such service company and used exclusively in the operation of its business. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.29; Code 1983, § 5-625)
 
Sec. 8-122. Service connection from overhead supply system.
A standard overhead service connection consisting of one span extending from the electric service company's supply system to the conductor support at the point of delivery on the building wall or other structure belonging to the property shall be supplied by the electric service company. All other service conductors, raceways, and facilities, except measuring devices belonging to and installed by the service company, shall be supplied and installed by the owner of the premises as a part of the electric wiring of the premises being served. The installation of electrical equipment covered in this division shall conform to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)	The point of delivery will be designated by the electric service company, and shall be at least ten feet, but not more than 25 feet, above the ground, and so located that adequate clearance from buildings and trees will be provided for the overhead service connection; 
(2)	The contractor shall provide adequate structural support for the attachment of the service-terminating device. The minimum size conduit for mast-type service shall be 1½-inch rigid galvanized steel conduit, and shall be installed in accordance with the electric service company's recommendations; 
(3)	If the service connection is attached to a structure constructed of materials other than wood, the contractor shall install a service rack, which shall be furnished by the electric company; 
(4)	Where an existing building or new building interferes with adequate clearance for the standard overhead service connection to another building, the service outlet shall be extended in conduit from such other building to the wall of the building or structure located most conveniently for connection to the electric service company's supply system, and all meters for the premises shall be grouped at such point of delivery; 
(5)	At locations where originally platted lots have been subdivided in such a manner that a serviced connection cannot be completed from the established utility reserve without crossing other property, the service connection must be extended in conduit so as to provide a point of delivery available to the electric supply system; 
(6)	Service entrance conductors shall be carried in an approved metal raceway. The raceway shall terminate on the exterior of the building at a point at least six inches above the point of delivery. The service entrance conductors shall extend not less than 30 inches beyond termination of the raceway. No service entrance conductor shall be smaller than number three AWG; 
(7)	All lighting and power installations shall be designed for a three-wire or a four-wire connection, corresponding to the type of distribution system established for the area; 
(8)	When a service entrance or any part of it is installed underground, it must be terminated on a support adequate for attachment of the standard overhead service connection. There shall be a weatherproof fused disconnect and meter mounting located six feet above the ground on such support. The electric service company's pole shall not be used for the support of the service entrance or meter; 
(9)	No overhead service to or between school buildings shall be permitted; and 
(10)	For voltages above 600 volts, the plans for service entrance and point of delivery must be approved by the electrical inspector and the electric service company before the permit is issued. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.30; Code 1983, § 5-626)
 
Sec. 8-123. Service connections from underground network distribution systems.
Standard electric service connections from an underground supply system shall be installed by the electric service company operating under franchise from the city. All other service conductors and facilities, except meters, transformers, and related equipment installed by the electric service company, shall be installed and maintained by the owner of the premises as a part of the electric wiring of the premises or buildings being served. The installation of electrical equipment covered in this section shall conform to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)	When service boxes are used as the terminating device for service connections, such boxes, not exceeding one box to each 50 feet of the property line, will be furnished and installed by the electric service company on the property line of the premises being served; 
(2)	If transformers are required on the premises, they shall be installed in a vault provided by the owner. The contractor shall extend and terminate the service entrance bus inside the vault wall. The length and type of termination shall be approved by the electric service company; 
(3)	The point of delivery shall be the service box when this type of service connection termination is used; and where a transformer vault is installed, the point of delivery shall be the point at which the service entrance bus terminates; 
(4)	Service entrance conductors between the point of delivery and the main disconnect device shall be furnished as a part of the electric wiring of the premises by the owner. If the main line disconnect is rated at 400 amperes or above, its interrupting capacity must be approved by the electrical inspector before being installed; 
(5)	When new buildings are being wired or the wiring changed in old buildings in the underground network area, the service entrances and building distribution system shall be designed and installed to conform to the type of service available in the area; and 
(6)	Commercial buildings shall be provided with service and distribution equipment arranged for three or four wires, 100 amperes capacity as a minimum. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.31; Code 1983, § 5-627)
 
Sec. 8-124. Meters and associated equipment.
All meters and related electrical equipment furnished and installed by the electric service company shall be installed subject to and in compliance with the following conditions, rules, and requirements: 
(1)	Outdoor meters shall be installed so that the top of the meter will not be more than six feet six inches nor less than five feet six inches above the ground; 
(2)	A meter board of soft lumber and of suitable dimensions for mounting the meter and cabinet shall be provided as a part of the rough-in job. It shall be located near the service entrance on a wall or structure free of excessive vibration and readily accessible at all reasonable hours; 
(3)	Outdoor metering installations shall be installed in all new or remodeled buildings whose service is to be supplied from an overhead electricity supply system through a single meter, and when the load does not exceed 100 amperes, single phase. Such meters shall be installed in the service entrance raceway on the outside of the building, and on the supply side of the service disconnect device. The electric service company shall provide an approved meter cabinet or socket for such installations, which shall be installed as a part of the service entrance by the electrical contractor. Outdoor metering installation shall be in a protected area and not on walls adjacent to passageways along which traffic may move; 
(4)	Each set of service entrance conductors shall be provided with a safety-type fused switch or circuit breaker, which shall be accessible to the occupants of the premises being serviced and be of ample capacity to carry and to interrupt the connected load; 
(5)	Where meters are installed outside of main buildings, branch panel cabinets shall be placed inside the buildings where they will be readily accessible to the occupants; 
(6)	Circuit breakers approved for branch circuit protection shall be installed on all new or remodeled old wiring installations for lighting circuits. No circuit breaker panels shall be installed in bathrooms. Breakers must be in place when the electrical inspector makes the final inspection. All circuit breaker panels and breakers shall be of the noninterchangeable type; 
(7)	All metering installations on electricity supply systems rated above 240 volts and those designed for a capacity over 200 amperes require instrument transformers; and for installations of this type, approved metal cabinets of sufficient size to enclose the instrument transformer cabinet and meters shall be furnished and installed by the contractor as a part of the wiring. The plans and specifications of such installations must be approved by the electrical inspector and the electric service company before the cabinets are installed; and 
(8)	Under no circumstances shall any meter be moved or relocated except by authorized employees of the electric service company. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.32; Code 1983, § 5-628)
 
Sec. 8-125. Wiring methods.
All electric wiring hereafter installed in or on any building, structure, or premises located within the city shall be installed by the use of one or more of the following approved wiring methods: 
(1)	All wiring shall be installed in rigid galvanized conduit, both on the interior and exterior of all buildings, below ground and in concrete slabs. The exceptions to this are listed below. (See subsection (6) of this section, concerning aluminum rigid conduit.) 
(2)	All connectors and couplings must be of an approved type. E.M.T. shall be bent with an approved type of wheel bender. One-half, three-fourths, and one inch E.M.T. only are permitted in the following locations: 
a.	Residences. On the exterior and above the slab; 
b.	Apartment houses, motels, duplexes, and similar type dwelling units. On the interior and above the slab; and 
c.	Commercial buildings. E.M.T. may be used in commercial or industrial buildings provided all of the following conditions are met: 
1.	No portion of the building or equipment is classed as hazardous (service stations, etc.); 
2.	Complies with National Electrical Code; and 
3.	On the interior and above the slab. 
(3)	Surface metal raceways shall not be concealed by any portion of the building, structure, or finish except to extend horizontally through a wall. 
(4)	Flexible metal conduit shall be used as follows: 
a.	Flexible terminations of rigid raceways; 
b.	Where the installation of a rigid raceway would damage the building; 
c.	Three-eighths inch is permitted only in lengths up to 48 inches, and shall contain no more than two number 12 AWG or its equivalent; 
d.	In moist locations or in the interior of buildings, it shall be of the neo prime type with approved weather-tight connectors; 
e.	Where permitted by the National Electrical Code as related to hazardous locations; or 
f.	When required in service runs, a minimum number six AWG bare or green insulated bonding jumpers shall be installed. This shall be suitably terminated at each end. 
(5)	The following apply to non-metallic sheathed cable: 
a.	Non-metallic sheathed cable may be used in single-family residential structures only. In no case will it be permitted in commercial buildings, schools, churches, or any other public buildings. 
b.	Non-metallic sheathed cable may be used in normally dry locations. It may be run or fished in air voids in masonry block walls, where such walls are not exposed to or subject to excessive moisture or dampness. Non-metallic sheathed cable shall not be installed where imbedded in masonry, concrete fill, or plaster; nor run in shallow chase in masonry or concrete and covered with plaster or similar finish. 
c.	Non-metallic sheathed cable in attics or roof spaces shall be secured by approved staples, straps, or similar fittings so designed and installed as not to injure the cable. Cable shall be secured in place at intervals not exceeding 4½ feet and within eight inches from every outlet box or fitting except in concealed work in finished buildings where such supporting is impractical, the cable may be fished from outlet to outlet. 
d.	Non-metallic cable in attics or roof spaces used for storage shall be run as follows: If run across the top of ceiling joists, the cable shall be protected by guard strips at least as high as the cable, unless the cable is run within 24 inches of the outside wall or where there is less than 18 inches of space between the ceiling joists and the rafters, or if the cable is run along the sides of rafters or joists or through holes bored through the rafters or joists. 
e.	If the cable is run at angle joists in unfinished basements, it shall be run through bored holes in the joists or run on running boards; where run parallel to the joists, cable shall be secured to the sides of the joists. 
f.	Grounding rules. 
1.	The cable shall contain a grounding conductor. The grounding conductor shall be secured to every metallic box by means of a grounding screw or approved grounding clip, which shall be used for no other purpose, or shall be connected to the wiring device where a screw for that purpose has been provided by the manufacturer; 
2.	The grounding conductor shall enter into every non-metallic outlet box in such a manner that it can be connected to any fitting or device that may require grounding; 
3.	Where more than one grounding conductor enters a box, all such conductors shall be in good electrical contact with each other by means of securing all conductors under grounding screws, or by connecting them together with an acceptable solderless connector and connecting one conductor only to the box by a grounding screw or an approved grounding device; and the arrangement shall be such that the disconnection or removal of a receptacle, fixture, or other device fed from the box will not interfere with or interrupt the ground continuity; 
4.	Grounding conductors, when run separately from the cable, shall be installed in the same manner as the cable, and shall not be smaller than number 14 AWG; 
5.	Electric ranges, ovens, and electric dryers may be grounded to the neutral conductor if it is the same size as the largest circuit conductor, but in no circumstances shall it be smaller than number ten AWG; 
6.	All receptacle outlet devices installed shall be of the grounding type designed to accept parallel blades and U-shaped grounding blade. 
(6)	Aluminum rigid conduit may be used as rigid conduit provided it meets the following requirements: 
a.	It shall not be installed in concrete slabs, or in contact with soil known to have an adverse effect on its life; 
b.	It shall not be used as a service mast; 
c.	No bare copper conductors or copper alloyed fittings are to be used with or come in contact with aluminum conduit; 
d.	It shall not be installed in locations subject to abuse; 
e.	All threaded joints are to be treated with a compound to prevent joint seizure; and 
f.	It shall not to be used in hazardous locations. 
(7)	All non-metallic underground conduits shall be installed in a minimum concrete envelope of three inches. A grounding or bonding conductor shall be installed in all ducts carrying conductors in excess of 100 volts above ground. 
(8)	Other conduits shall meet the following requirements: 
a.	All other conduits (bus-duct, floor ducts, wireways, etc.) shall be of a type approved for the installation and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations; and 
b.	Before starting or installation of any of these types of wiring, plans and specifications must be submitted to the electrical inspector for approval, and special permission, in writing, must be obtained before starting the job. 
(9)	Overhead feeders between buildings shall be dead ended at both ends on insulators, and when intermediate supports are required, the conductors must be supported on approved insulators, and such conductors shall be weatherproof and not smaller than number ten AWG. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.33; Code 1983, § 5-629)
 
Sec. 8-126. Conduits, raceways, and fittings.
(a)	In buildings, runs of conduit looped over wooden joists shall be so installed that they will not be more than four inches above a two-inch by four-inch joist or two inches above a two-inch by six-inch joist. They shall be blocked and strapped not more than 12 inches from the outlet, and blocked and strapped every additional six feet or less thereafter. 
(b)	In buildings where it is necessary to place conduits on the lower edges of wooded ceiling joists, the joists shall not be notched to a depth greater than one-fifth of the depth of the joists, nor at a distance of more than 18 inches from a supporting wall; except that, where joists are supported at points not more than four feet apart, notches not deeper than three-fourths inch may be cut. 
(c)	To reduce corrosion, the joining of dissimilar metals shall be avoided whenever possible. 
(d)	All conduit connections of cabinets, outlet boxes, and all other equipment shall, in addition to the end bushing, be provided with two lock nuts, one inside and one outside the fitting opening. All bushings shall be of the fiber or insulating type. 
(e)	Unused openings in cabinets, outlet boxes, and other equipment shall be effectively closed by the use of metal plugs or plates, affording protector equivalent to that of the material of the fittings. 
(f)	Metal conduit and tubing shall be installed so as to provide adequate drainage. 
(g)	Outlet boxes in concrete slabs and columns shall not be less than 2 ⅛inches deep. Conduit placed in concrete slabs shall be laid above the bottom layer of reinforcing steel in order to provide ample clearance from forms and to ensure fireproofing of wires and strength of structure. 
(h)	Conduit runs on the exteriors of buildings or structures shall be equipped with watertight fittings. 
(i)	In wood building construction, where two or more switch boxes are ganged between studs, they shall be adequately supported. 
(j)	Boxes enclosing flush devices shall be of sufficient size to allow 2½ inches of space for the device after the required space has been allowed for the wires pulled in or through the box. 
(k)	Lights in bathrooms, kitchens, and open porches shall be controlled by wall switches. 
(l)	Lights in clothes closets shall be installed in the ceiling or over the door of the clothes closet and controlled by a switch located in the wall or door jam. 
(m)	Pull-chain lamp holders or switches over concrete floors or near any grounded object shall have an insulating link installed in the pull chain. The uninsulated portion of the pull chain must be at least seven feet from the floor. 
(n)	All drops shall be reinforced cord or equal. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.34; Code 1983, § 5-630)
 
Sec. 8-127. Wiring capacity.
(a)	All residences shall be provided with a minimum service entrance capacity of three, number three RH or equivalent in 1¼-inch conduit. 
(b)	Minimum conductor size for branch circuit wiring shall be number 12. 
(c)	All installations shall be provided with a minimum availability of 12 circuits and a main disconnect. 
(d)	From each branch circuit panel, at least one three-fourths-inch empty conduit shall be stubbed into an accessible location for future use, or circuits shall be made accessible by other means. 
(e)	Not more than eight outlets shall be installed on one circuit excepting utility circuits. No convenience outlet shall be installed other than that of the grounding type. 
(f)	Utility circuits shall consist of receptacles in kitchens, dining rooms, breakfast rooms, and utility rooms. No lights may be connected to utility circuits. A maximum of four outlets are permitted on utility circuits, and each residence must contain at least two utility circuits. 
(g)	The number and requirements for outlets are as follows: 
(1)	In every kitchen, dining room, breakfast room, living room, parlor, library, den, sun room, recreation room, and bedroom receptacle outlets shall be installed so that no point along the floor line in any usable wall space is more than six feet, measured horizontally, from an outlet in that space including any unusable wall space two feet wide or greater and the wall space occupied by sliding panels in exterior walls. The receptacle outlets shall be spaced an equal distance apart or as nearly so as practicable; 
(2)	Hallways and passageways shall have a minimum of one receptacle when the gross distance around the hall or passageway measured horizontally along at the floor line meets or exceeds two linear feet; and 
(3)	Kitchens, dining rooms, breakfast rooms, and utility rooms shall have a minimum of two circuits with a maximum of four outlets per circuit. Separate dining rooms and separate utility rooms shall have a minimum of two receptacles in each room, and shall be installed on the utility circuit. Dishwasher and laundry outlets shall be classified as special circuits, and shall not be installed on required utility circuits. 
(h)	All receptacles installed on utility circuits shall be parallel blade with a U-shaped grounding slot. 
(i)	All room spaces planned or arranged for use as retail stores, offices, theaters, schools, hospitals, display rooms, beauty parlors, cafes, barber shops, churches, hotels, and all buildings where the public is to be served or where there will be public assembly shall have installed sufficient outlets and wiring capacities to provide not less than five watts per square foot for general illumination. 
(j)	A form of emergency lighting shall be provided in all public buildings, of a type that, on the failure of the normal power source, will provide sufficient lighting to gain exit from the place of gathering to the exterior of the building. This source shall come on automatically and remain on for a sufficient length of time. This does not apply to buildings normally occupied during the daylight hours that are not totally absent from natural light. 
(k)	In show windows, where wiring is brought to the terminals of sockets and receptacles through conduit raceway, special types of tubing, or metal strip, such wire, extending from the fitting terminals back to the first outlet or junction box, shall be of the slow-burning or asbestos-covered type. 
(l)	In beauty parlors, where appliances are connected to receptacles through cords and attachment plugs, one receptacle shall be allowed on 15 ampere circuits, or two receptacles on a 25 ampere circuit. 
(m)	In all gasoline service station pump stands, explosion-proof fittings shall be used in the pump stands, and where such motors will not be larger than one-third horsepower, one pair of number 12 wires may be used to feed such motors in groups as follows: 
(1)	If operating at 115 volts, three motors; 
(2)	If operating at 230 volts, five motors; and 
(3)	Not more than one raceway shall enter a gasoline dispensing pump stand. 
(n)	In all rooms designed or arranged for use as retail stores or display rooms, and fronting on a street, avenue, or public highway, one receptacle circuit shall be provided for each window. 
(o)	All stationary electric heating units of 1,000 watts or more shall be on a special circuit. All electric heating installed shall have thermal protection installed that will cut the power if the air flow is obstructed. All wiring installed within baseboard-type electric heating units shall be asbestos covered. All baseboard heating incorporated convenience outlet devices shall be wired with three wire circuits, and shall be grounded in accordance with the city's building regulations where wired with nonmetallic sheathed cable. Heating panels shall not be installed directly on concrete block walls or floors and must have a minimum of clearance one-eighth inch from walls three-fourths-inch from floor from this type of construction. Electric heating devices shall be protected at not more than 125 percent their rated capacity. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.35; Code 1983, § 5-631)
 
Sec. 8-128. Low-voltage, signal, and control circuits.
(a)	All concealed wires for door bells and other signal circuits shall be rubber or type TW, covered and braided, and not smaller than number 18 AWG. 
(b)	Door-bell wiring, furnace and heater control, and other low-voltage signal wiring shall be set up complete with the roughing-in of all lighting wiring. 
(c)	Signal wiring shall be installed so that the step down transformers are mounted in approved metal boxes and in accessible locations, preferably near the equipment that is to be controlled. If such transformers are located under a floor where there is no basement, a switch must be provided. 
(d)	The transformer wiring for door bells, chimes, and push or control buttons is considered to be a part of the roughing-in work. 
(e)	All low-voltage signal and control circuits may be installed without conduit protection except in concrete slabs, underground, or where exposed to weather or mechanical damage, or in hazardous locations. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.36; Code 1983, § 5-632)
 
Sec. 8-129. Remodeling installations.
(a)	The service entrance wiring shall be construed as being that part of the wiring system extending from the service company's wires up to and including the main switch, circuit breaker, or branch circuit distribution cabinet. When any part of the service entrance wiring is changed, moved, or rearranged, the service in its entirety shall be changed so as to comply with the National Electrical Code now in effect and the requirements of this division. 
(b)	If finished walls would be damaged by making the change over, metal distribution cabinets in good condition may be left in operation. 
(c)	All neutral wires must be placed on a common bus bar, eliminating fuse in neutral wire. 
(d)	Cabinets for less than four circuits may be arranged to not more than four circuits provided same can be done safely and in a neat mechanical manner. Neutral wires in such cabinets may be jointed together in a common joint if limited space prohibits mounting a bus bar. 
(e)	All cabinets made of wood must be replaced with metal cabinets. Service conductors and main feeders, if they are not moved, may remain as they are, provided they are large enough to meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code. 
(f)	Approved circuit breakers, approved for branch circuit protection, shall be installed where the old wiring is not of the metal-raceway method and the old wiring is not disturbed. 
(g)	The electrical inspector shall require the installation of nontamperable type over-current device on existing circuits which are protected with plug fuses whenever the actual connected load on the circuit exceeds the maximum ampere rating of the circuit or wherever there exists evidence of willful overfusing or fuse tampering. 
(h)	If as much as 30 percent of a job is being remodeled, the building must be rewired completely according to the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1983, § 5-633)
 
Sec. 8-130. Motors.
(a)	Before a motor installation is made, approval must be secured from the electrical inspector and the electric service company as to the voltage and phase available at the location. 
(b)	Motor protection and control equipment shall conform to the provisions of the National Electrical Code, but with this further requirement; a low voltage motor of the plug in type of not more than one-third horsepower may be connected by cord and attachment plug into a circuit having an overcurrent protection of not more than 15 amperes. Low voltage motors of more than one-third horsepower and less than one horsepower shall be connected through safety type switches which open all ungrounded conductors. Low voltage motors from one to five horsepower, inclusive, and which require starting and running overload current protection, shall be provided with either externally operated motor starting switches of the type which does not open the circuit when passing from the starting to the running position, or starters of the thermal relay type. Motors of more than 50 horsepower shall be provided with autotransformer or compensator type starters or other approved current limiting devices. 
(c)	The sizes of branch circuit conductors for individual squirrel cage motors shall be as indicated in table numbers 1 to 4 inclusive. All other types shall follow the rate covered in the National Electrical Code. (See code book for tables 1 to 4 inclusive.) 
(d)	Feeder conductors supplying a group of two or more motors and service entrance conductors and metering equipment shall have a current carrying capacity of not less than the sum of the starting current of the largest motor plus the full load running current of the other motors in the group or system. Where a number of motors of equal horsepower rating are the largest in the group, one of these motors shall be considered as the largest for the above calculations. Where two or more motors of a group must be started simultaneously, it will be necessary to use the starting current of all such motors if they are the largest in the group, or all but one of such motors if they are of smaller ratings, for the above calculations. Table numbers 1 to 4 show the approved sizes of overcurrent protection to be used. The setting of branch circuit breakers and group feeder circuit breakers shall comply with the rules contained in the National Electrical Code. 
(e)	Large motors shall be provided with starting devices to meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Where the user's demand, including the proposed installation is 100 kVA, the maximum permissible starting current of a single motor or group of motors starting simultaneously shall not exceed 200 amperes; 
(2)	Where the user's demand, including the proposed installation, is greater than 100 kVA, the maximum permissible starting current of a single motor or group of motors starting simultaneously shall not exceed 200 amperes, plus one ampere for each kVA of demand in excess of 100 kVA and in no case shall the total exceed 1,000 amperes; 
(3)	Motors with starting currents in excess of the values given above shall be started by increment starting devices. The current increments must not exceed the values stated above, and the time interval shall not be less than one-half second between current increments. The circuit shall not be opened during the starting interval. 
(f)	Stationary motors exceeding one-half horsepower shall have a disconnecting means placed within sight of the motor, and shall not be located more than 15 feet from the motor location. 
(g)	All control wiring shall be protected and shall not be fused in excess of 20 amperes unless the current carrying capacity of the conductor is as large as the maximum overcurrent devices. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.36; Code 1983, § 5-634)
 
Sec. 8-131. Sealing of service cabinets.
It is unlawful for any person other than an authorized employee of the electric service company, the electrical inspector, or authorized member of the fire department to break any seal of any electric meter, transformer, or cabinet. In case of emergency, an authorized employee of a licensed electrical contractor may break a seal when necessary to replace fuses. In all such cases, the electric service company must be notified by the party breaking the seal within 24 hours, in order that the equipment may be resealed. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.41; Code 1983, § 5-636)
 
Sec. 8-132. Covering or concealing switches or outlets.
It is unlawful for any plasterer, carpenter, or other workman to cover or conceal with plaster, building board, or any other material, any switch or other electrical outlet. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.42; Code 1983, § 5-637)
 
Secs. 8-133—8-162. Reserved.
 
Subdivision II. Contractors
 
Sec. 8-163. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apprentice electrician means any person who is learning the electric wiring trade and who is competent to assist under the supervision of a journeyman wireman in the work of installing or repairing electric wiring or installing nonportable electric fixtures or apparatus. 
Electrical contractor means any person engaged in the business of installing, repairing, or altering electric wiring or nonportable electric fixtures or apparatus in the city and who has complied with the terms of this subdivision. 
Electrical inspector means the chief electrical inspector of the city or any of his duly authorized assistants. 
Electrical wiring means the installation of electric raceways, conductors, or apparatus of any kind used, or to be used, in or on any building for the transmission and distribution of electric current for electric light, heat, or power, or nonportable electrical fixtures and apparatus of any nature to be connected to light, heat, or power services. The terms "electrical wiring," "electrical equipment," and "apparatus" do not include service lines, apparatus, and equipment for the sale, distribution, and regulation of electricity and remaining the property of the electric service company, or for telephone, telegraph, or other communication purposes, or in connection therewith. 
General maintenance electrician means any person accomplishing limited electrical maintenance in any building or factory. Limited electrical maintenance includes replacement of switches, breakers, fuses, and light bulbs; it does not include additions to or alterations of existing wiring. 
Journeyman electrician means any person qualified under the provisions of this subdivision to engage in the installing or repairing of electric wiring or installing nonportable electrical fixtures or apparatus in the city and who has complied with the terms of this subdivision. 
Maintenance electrician means any person engaged only in the work of operating, caring for, and maintaining the electrical installation of any building or factory. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.1; Code 1983, § 5-601)
 
Sec. 8-164. Electrical inspector; assistants.
There is hereby created the office of chief electrical inspector in the inspection division of the public works department. The chief electrical inspector shall be appointed by the city manager. He shall have had at least five years' practical experience as a journeyman wireman. He shall not be interested directly or indirectly in any way with any electrical contractor engaged in the electrical business or electrical supply business in the city or in any electrical work performed therein. The city manager may appoint such assistant electrical inspectors as may be necessary, who shall have the same qualifications as the chief electrical inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.2; Code 1983, § 5-602)
 
Sec. 8-165. Duties of electrical inspector.
(a)	The electrical inspector shall be charged with the duty of enforcing all the ordinances of the city relating to electrical wiring and the construction, installation, repair, alteration, and maintenance of electric wiring, apparatus, and fixtures, and the inspection of the same. The electrical inspector shall have the power to inspect or reinspect all overhead, underground, and interior wires and apparatus conducting electrical current for any of the purposes set forth in the electrical ordinances of the city. 
(b)	When such conductors or apparatus are found to be unsafe to life or property, he shall notify the person owning, using, or operating the same to place them in a safe condition within 48 hours. If the owner, user, or operator of such defective wiring or equipment refuses or fails to comply with the requirements of the electrical inspector and to correct all the defects as directed within the specified time, the electrical inspector shall notify, in writing, the service company, firm, or individual furnishing the electric current to such defective wiring or equipment to cease to supply electric current to same. Upon receipt of such notice, the service company, firm, or individual furnishing electric current to the defective wiring or equipment shall, within 24 hours, disconnect the service or feed wires and cease to supply current to the defective installation until the defects have been corrected. 
(c)	When any portion or all of the wiring in or on any building or premises is ordered changed for any reason, the electrical inspector shall leave attached to the main switch or service equipment a tag or label showing the date of the order and a memorandum of the correction to be made, and the signature of the authority making the order. 
(d)	The electrical inspector, in the discharge of his duties, may enter any building or premises at any time during business hours or at any reasonable hour. Upon the refusal of any owner, agent, or occupant to allow such inspection as required by the electrical inspector, he shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(e)	The electrical inspector shall also institute or cause to be instituted, by and with the advice of the city attorney, such prosecutions as may be necessary against any violators of any ordinance with the enforcement of which he is charged. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.3; Code 1983, § 5-603)
 
Sec. 8-166. Appeals.
An appeal may be taken to the board of appeals specified in the BOCA Building Code from any ruling, interpretation, requirement, or decision made by the electrical inspector by filing with the city clerk within five days from the ruling, interpretation, requirement, or decision, a statement in writing showing wherein the electrical inspector is alleged to have been wrong. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.4; Code 1983, § 5-604; Ord. No. 291-A, 3-22-1984)
 
Sec. 8-167. Journeymen electrician; apprentices.
(a)	No person shall work as a journeyman electrician in the city unless he possesses a state license and is registered with the city, upon payment of fees provided in the city fee schedule, has secured a registration certificate and works under the direct supervision of a licensed electrical contractor. 
(b)	Apprentice electricians shall be allowed to work without registering with the city if they work under the direct and personal supervision of a journeyman electrician on the job. No journeyman electrician will have more than one apprentice wireman under his supervision at any time. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.6; Code 1983, § 5-605)
 
Sec. 8-168. Maintenance and general maintenance electricians; certificate and registration necessary.
(a)	No person may engage in the occupation of maintenance electrician without first being registered with the chief electrical inspector of the city by the owner of the building or by the authorized representative of such owner, and without first having a state license and paying the fees required for such occupation as provided in this subdivision. Such registration shall show the name of the employer and the place of employment, and shall certify that the maintenance electrician named is a regular employee giving his full time to this employer's service. 
(b)	No person shall engage in the occupation of general maintenance electrician without being registered with the owner of the building, or by the authorized representative of such owner, and without first having a state license and paying the fees required for such occupation as provided in the city fee schedule. Such registration must show the name of the employer, the place of employment, and certify that the general maintenance electrician named is a regular employee giving his full time to this employer's service. 
(c)	A registration certificate issued to a maintenance electrician shall lapse when he leaves the employment under which he is registered, and the license shall not authorize the maintenance electrician to do electric wiring in or upon any building other than that named in his registration. The owner of a building may in person, or by an authorized agent, add under the registration of a maintenance electrician the name or location of any other building which may come under the control of the owner. Such license shall not authorize or permit the maintenance electrician to do any electrical wiring or other electrical work in any house or building that is used or designed solely as a place of residence for less than three families. 
(d)	The registration certificate of a general maintenance electrician shall lapse on the termination of the employment for which it is registered. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-3.8, 5-3.9; Code 1983, § 5-606)
 
Sec. 8-169. Electrical contractors.
No person shall engage in the business of installing, repairing, or altering electric wiring or installing nonportable electrical fixtures or apparatus within the city and no partnership, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of installing, repairing, or altering electric wiring or installing nonportable electrical fixtures or apparatus within the city, unless and until such person, or in the case of a partnership, firm, or corporation, either an official, partner, or employee, possesses the state electrical contractor's license and is registered as provided in this subdivision. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.10; Code 1983, § 5-607)
 
Sec. 8-170. Contractors issuance of registration certificate.
(a)	An applicant who possesses a state license shall, upon: 
(1)	Providing a copy of the license to the city clerk; 
(2)	Paying the prescribed fees; and 
(3)	Filing the bond as provided herein; 
Receive a certificate of registration from the city clerk. 
(b)	If the electrical contractor associated with any partnership, firm, or corporation, under the provisions of section 8-169, resigns, withdraws from or is discharged from such partnership, firm, or corporation, then such partnership, firm, or corporation shall not engage in business for a longer period than ten days without compliance with section 8-169. 
(c)	An electrical contractor's certificate shall not permit the holder thereof personally to install or alter electric wiring unless he also holds a journeyman electrician's license. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.11; Code 1983, § 5-608)
 
Sec. 8-171. Fees; expiration date.
(a)	The fees for initial and renewal registration shall be as set by the council by motion or resolution for journeyman or maintenance and electrical contractors. 
(b)	All certificates provided herein shall expire on June 30 following the date of issue, and no reduction for partial year shall be made. 
(c)	Any certificates renewed within 90 days may be renewed at a renewal fee as set by the council. Licenses renewed after 90 days but less than 180 days will be at a higher rate as set by the council. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.13; Code 1983, § 5-609)
State law reference(s)—State licensing of electricians, city powers to require registration, 59 O.S. § 1680 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-172. Transfer of certificate.
It is unlawful for any person holding a certificate to transfer it or allow the use of it, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any of the electrical work herein specified. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.14; Code 1983, § 5-610)
 
Sec. 8-173. Bond for electrical contractor.
An applicant for electrical contractor's registration shall execute a bond, which he shall renew annually, in the sum of $2,000.00 in favor of the city. The bond shall be conditioned for the faithful and proper conduct of the registrant's business in compliance with all ordinances of the city relating to electric wiring and all rules and regulations made thereunder, and for the protection and indemnification of the city against all damages resulting from or in any way growing out of an injury received by anyone on account of the negligence or unskilled work on the part of such licensee. The surety on such bond shall be a surety company authorized by the state. 
(Prior Code, § 9-3.15; Code 1983, § 5-611)
 
Secs. 8-174—8-199. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. GAS APPLIANCES AND GAS PIPING
 
Sec. 8-200. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this division is to provide minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe installation of gas appliances and gas pipes designed and intended to be employed by gas consumers in conveying natural gas to and utilizing the same in buildings, and to regulate the sale, maintenance, and repair of such gas appliances. All such gas appliances or gas pipes to be utilized in connection therewith that are hereafter sold, installed, maintained, or repaired shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 9-5.1; Code 1983, § 5-701)
 
Sec. 8-201. Adoption of fuel gas code.
(a)	That certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters A through L (see International Fuel Gas Code section 102.5, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the international fuel gas code of the city for regulating and governing the fuel gas systems and gas fired appliances; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fuel gas code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)	Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the fuel gas code of the city hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)	Section 106.5.2. The fees for work shall be as indicated in Ordinance 450-10-14. 
(3)	Section 106.5.3. Fee refunds. Not more than 50 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. Not more than 50 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
(4)	Section 108.4. Persons, who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided in the city fine schedule or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)	Section 108.5. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as provided in the city fine schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 5-704; Ord. No. 454-02-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 8-202. Application; premises.
This division shall apply to all buildings and consumer premises that are served by or connected to the city water distribution or sewerage system. 
(Prior Code, § 9-5.2; Code 1983, § 5-702)
 
Sec. 8-203. Application; kinds of installations.
These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances, and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances. They are intended to cover the design, fabrication, installation, tests, and operation of systems distributing natural gas. They are not intended to cover systems or portions of systems supplying equipment engineered, designed, and installed for specific manufacturing, production, processing, and power generating applications, such as large and high pressure boilers, melting and treating furnaces, production ovens, etc., or for public utility piping in gas distribution and transmission systems, in gas compressing stations, and in gas processing plants. 
(Prior Code, § 9-5.3; Code 1983, § 5-703)
 
Sec. 8-204. Inspector; certificate, licenses, and permits; fee.
All inspections required by this division shall be made by the plumbing inspector of the city and the issuance of certificates pertaining to inspections shall be issued by the city clerk after approval by the inspector. The licenses and permits provided in this division shall be issued by the city clerk, and the inspection fee shall be paid to the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 9-5.5; Code 1983, § 5-705)
 
Sec. 8-205. Application for permit; issuance.
(a)	Before a master gas fitter installs any gas fitting work, or makes additions to or alterations in existing gas fittings, appliances, or fixtures, he shall file with the city clerk an application in writing for a permit. The application shall be made out on a form which shall be furnished by the city clerk. The following information shall appear: 
(1)	Street and house number of the premises where the gas fitting work is to be done; 
(2)	Name of the owner or builder; 
(3)	Kind of building; 
(4)	A list of the gas work to be done; and 
(5)	Such other information as the plumbing inspector may reasonably require. 
(b)	The application shall be referred to the plumbing inspector who, after consideration thereof, shall issue a permit in accordance therewith if the application complies with the terms and provisions of the applicable codes of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 9-6.2; Code 1983, § 5-706)
 
Sec. 8-206. Permit not transferable, second permits.
Permits are not transferable. The issuance of a second permit cancels a permit issued prior thereto. In the event a master gas fitter obtains a permit for work to be performed and fails to finish it, another master gas fitter who desires to finish the work may apply for a new permit. If after an investigation, the plumbing inspector finds that the master gas fitter who held or holds the original or first permit has not been diligent in performing his contract and finishing the work described in the permit, he must issue a new or another permit according to the plans and application therefor upon the payment of the required fees for the issuance of the permit as provided by the terms and provisions of the applicable code. 
(Prior Code, § 9-6.3; Code 1983, § 5-707)
 
Sec. 8-207. Expiration of permit.
If plumbing work under a permit is not commenced within six months after the issuance of the permit, or the work is discontinued for a period of one year from the date of the issuance thereof, the permit shall thereupon become void, and no work shall be done on the premises until a new permit is issued and all fees are paid. 
(Prior Code, § 9-6.4; Code 1983, § 5-708)
 
Sec. 8-208. Fees; permits and inspections.
(a)	No permit shall be issued for any gas fitting to any person other than a licensed and bonded meter fitter. Every master gas fitter shall, before work of any kind covered by applicable ordinances of the city, except in cases of repairing leaks inside of property lines, obtain a permit from the plumbing inspector of the city for such work. 
(b)	The applicant for such permit shall pay to the city clerk an inspection fee in such amount as set by the city council by motion or resolution, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. If the plumbing inspector is required to make another or an additional inspection of the installation, necessitating another trip therefor, the permittee shall be required to pay the city clerk a fee as set by the council for additional inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 9-6.1; Code 1983, § 5-709)
 
Secs. 8-209—8-239. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS AND GASOLINE
 
Subdivision I. In General
 
Sec. 8-240. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Liquefied petroleum gas means and includes any material which is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons, or mixtures of propane, propylene, butanes (normal butane or isobutane) and butylenes, regardless of by what means such substances may be hereafter known. 
Liquefied petroleum gas equipment means and includes all devices, piping and equipment pertinent to the use of liquefied petroleum gas, except gas-burning appliances. The term "appliances" as herein referred to, is construed to embrace all gas-burning appliances intended for use with liquefied petroleum gas. 
(Prior Code, §§ 17-3.1, 17-3.2; Code 1983, §§ 5-801, 5-802)
 
Sec. 8-241. Installation, notice, approval.
No system for the use or dispensation of liquefied petroleum gases shall be installed within the city, until written notice thereof is given to the inspection department of the city and the plans and specifications for such system have been submitted to the fire department and approved by the fire chief or his appointee. Every such system installed or used in the city shall be tested and listed either by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, and shall be approved by the state liquefied petroleum gas administrator. Any installation must be performed by a liquefied petroleum gas installer licensed by the state. 
(Prior Code, § 17-3.3; Code 1983, § 5-803)
 
Sec. 8-242. Records of installation.
Every person, firm or corporation installing liquefied petroleum gas equipment, other than gas-burning appliances, and replacing of portable cylinders, shall keep a record of each installation showing the name and address of the customer at whose place the liquefied petroleum gas equipment has been installed and the date of installation. Such reports shall be disclosed to the fire chief or his appointee of the city at any time upon request during regular business hours. However, the fire chief or his appointee may, at any time he deems it necessary as a precautionary measure, inspect such records. The fire chief or his appointee may, at any reasonable time, inspect the installation of liquefied petroleum gas equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 17-3.5; Code 1983, § 5-804)
 
Sec. 8-243. Standards for use and installation of liquefied petroleum gas equipment.
The use and installation of liquefied petroleum gas equipment shall be in conformity with the provisions of this division, with the statutes of the state and with any orders, rules or regulations issued by authority thereof, the liquefied petroleum gas administrator of the state, and with generally recognized standards, for safety to person and property. Where no specific standards are prescribed by this article or by state statutes, or by any orders, rules or regulations issued by authority thereof, the liquefied petroleum gas administrator of the state, conformity with the standards of pamphlet number 54, Liquefied Petroleum Gas, Storage and Handling, of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the design, installation and handling of liquefied petroleum gases, as amended, as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with generally recognized standards for safety to persons and property. 
(Prior Code, § 17-3.5; Code 1983, § 5-805)
 
Sec. 8-244. Permit and fee required.
Before any person, firm or corporation shall install any equipment in the city for the storage, dispensation or handling of liquefied petroleum gases, such person, firm or corporation shall first obtain a permit therefor from the city clerk. In granting or refusing such permit, the fire chief or his appointee shall take into consideration the proposed location of such equipment, and the probable hazards involved by reason of the proposed location thereof, and must have the approval of the state liquefied petroleum gas administrator in conformity with the state laws. A permit for the storage or dispensation of liquefied petroleum gas shall not be issued until a fee as set by the city has been paid to the city clerk. Before any installation of appliances are done, a permit must be secured from the inspection department and a fee paid to the city clerk as provided by the plumbing code of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 17-3.6; Code 1983, § 5-806)
 
Sec. 8-245. Duty of city inspector.
It is the duty of the fire chief and the city inspector to see that this division is enforced. 
(Prior Code, § 17-3.8; Code 1983, § 5-807)
 
Secs. 8-246—8-268. Reserved.
 
Subdivision II. Gasoline Storage
 
Sec. 8-269. Storage for distribution.
No tank for the storage and distribution of oil, gasoline and other inflammable and explosive liquids and commodities, excepting liquefied petroleum gas, shall ever be erected, built, rebuilt, constructed, maintained or enlarged in the city limits, unless such tank is constructed and maintained at least three feet below the natural surface of the earth. This section is not to be construed to prevent the use of such tanks as have already been established and are in operation on the initial effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, so long as the tanks are in a safe condition. 
(Prior Code, § 17-2.1; Code 1983, § 5-820)
 
Sec. 8-270. Location of tanks.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, maintain or operate any gasoline tank or receptacle at any point on or under any sidewalk or parking lot, or in any easement in the city or to construct, operate or maintain any pump or apparatus for the purposes of furnishing oil, gasoline, air or water or other supplies to automobiles within 19 feet of a street, right-of-way line or abutting property line. 
(Prior Code, § 17-2.2; Code 1983, § 5-821)
 
Sec. 8-271. Keeping for personal use.
All oil, gasoline and other inflammable and explosive liquids, excluding liquefied petroleum gas, where kept for personal use is to be kept in an iron or steel container, securely closed, in quantities not to exceed the sum of 100 gallons. 
(Prior Code, § 17-2.3; Code 1983, § 5-822)
 
Sec. 8-272. Keeping for commercial use.
All oil, gasoline and other inflammable and explosive liquids, excluding liquefied petroleum gas, where kept for use in heavy or commercial equipment, shall be kept in an iron or steel container, securely closed, in quantities not to exceed 300 gallons, and may not be located in a highly populated area, and not closer than 100 feet from any commercial or residential building. 
(Prior Code, § 17-2.4; Code 1983, § 5-823)
 
Secs. 8-273—8-292. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 6. RESIDENTIAL
 
Sec. 8-293. Adoption of residential code.
That certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the international residential code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters A through L (see international residential code section 102.5, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the residential code of the city for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said residential code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-294. 
(Code 1983, § 5-901; Ord. No. 455-11-04, 12-16-2004)
 
Sec. 8-294. Amendments to code.
The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)	Section R101.1. These regulations shall be known as the residential code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)	Section R301.2. Buildings and portions thereof shall be limited by wind speeds of moderate to heavy as defined in table R301.2. 
(3)	Section P2603.6.1. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches deep below finished grade or a minimum of six inches below frost line at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 18 inches below frost line. 
(4)	Section P3103.1. All open vent pipes which extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the roof or two inches above the anticipated snow accumulation. 
(Code 1983, § 5-901; Ord. No. 455-11-04, 12-16-2004)
 
Secs. 8-295—8-321. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 7. MECHANICAL
 
Sec. 8-322. Adoption of mechanical code.
(a)	That certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters A and B (see International Mechanical Code section 101.2.1, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city, and providing conditions and terms of such international mechanical code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the city clerk's office are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. 
(b)	The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)	Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)	Section 106.5.2. The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated as specified in the city fee schedule. 
(3)	Section 106.5.3. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
a.	The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
b.	Not more than 50 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. 
c.	Not more than 50 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
(4)	Section 108.4. Persons, who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided by the city fine schedule or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(5)	Section 108.5. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as provided in the city fine schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1501; Ord. No. 449-02-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 8-323. Fees; permits and inspections.
No permit shall be issued for any mechanical installation to any person other than a licensed and bonded mechanical contractor. Every mechanical contractor, before work of any kind covered by the applicable ordinances of the city, except in cases of emergency repairs, shall obtain a permit from the city for such work. The applicant for a permit shall pay to the city clerk-treasurer an inspection fee in such amount as set by the city council by motion or resolution, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the city clerk-treasurer's office. If the mechanical inspector is required to make another or an additional inspection of the installation, necessitating another trip therefor, the permittee shall be required to pay the city clerk-treasurer an additional sum as set by the council for additional inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1502; Ord. No. 309-A-91, 4-11-1991)
 
Sec. 8-324. Application for permit; issuance.
(a)	Before a mechanical contractor installs, makes additions to or alterations in existing mechanical systems, he shall file with the city clerk-treasurer an application in writing for a permit. The application shall be made out on a form which shall be furnished by the city clerk-treasurer. The following information shall appear: 
(1)	Street and house number of the premises where the mechanical work is to be done; 
(2)	Name of the owner or builder; 
(3)	Kind of building; 
(4)	A list of work to be done; and 
(5)	Such other information as the mechanical inspector may reasonably require. 
(b)	The application shall be referred to the mechanical inspector who, after consideration thereof, shall issue a permit in accordance therewith if the application complies with the terms and provisions of the codes of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1503; Ord. No. 309-A-91, 4-11-1991)
 
Sec. 8-325. Permits not transferable; second permits.
Permits are not transferable. The issuance of a second permit cancels a permit issued prior thereto. In the event a mechanical contractor obtains a permit for work to be performed and fails to finish it, another contractor who desires to finish the work may apply for a new permit. If, after an investigation, the mechanical inspector finds that the mechanical contractor who held or holds the original or first permit has not been diligent in performing his contract and finishing the work described in the permit, he must issue a new or another permit according to the plans and application therefor upon the payment of the required fees for the issuance of the permit as provided by the terms and provisions of the mechanical code. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1504; Ord. No. 309-A-91, 4-11-1991)
 
Sec. 8-326. Expiration of permit.
If mechanical work under a permit is not commenced within six months after the issuance of a permit, or the work is discontinued for a period of six months from the date of the issuance thereof, the permit shall thereupon become void and no work shall be done on the premises until a new permit is issued and all fees are paid. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1505; Ord. No. 309-A-91, 4-11-1991)
 
Sec. 8-327. Mechanical contractor registration fees.
No person shall engage in the business, trade or occupation of a mechanical contractor, journeyman, or apprentice unless he is registered as such with the mechanical inspector. The registration fees to be paid to the city clerk-treasurer shall be in such sums as the council shall set by motion or resolution. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1506; Ord. No. 309-A-91, 4-11-1991)
 
Secs. 8-328—8-357. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 8. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
 
Sec. 8-358. Adoption of property maintenance code.
A certain document, on file in the building department of the City of Spencer, Oklahoma, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition ("IPMC"), including appendix chapters A through L (see IPMC section 102.5, 2012 edition as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Spencer in the State of Oklahoma pursuant to Chapter 8, Article 111, Division 8, Section 8-359.6; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof by reference, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions, amendments and augmentations prescribed in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1701; Ord. No. 451-11-04, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. 451 , § 8, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 8-359. Amendments to code.
The following sections are hereby revised: 
(1)	Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)	Section 103.5. The fees for work shall be as indicated in Ordinance 450-10-14. 
(3)	Section 304.14. During the period from April through October, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screen of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
(4)	Section 602.3. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October through May to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
(5)	Section 602.4. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October through May to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
(6)	Administrative Policy #2020001 of the City of Spencer/Spencer. [The] utility authority housing inspection program is hereby created in order to protect the safety and well-being of the city residents; program description, application instructions, inspection, property owner certification, occupant certification, property manager certification, housing inspection brochure, abbreviated inspection checklist, certificate of occupancy, fees, and penalties. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1702; Ord. No. 451-11-04, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. 451 , § 8, 1-16-2020)
 
Secs. 8-360—8-376. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 9. ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
 
Sec. 8-377. Adoption of energy conservation code.
That certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, including the appendix chapter as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the international energy conservation code of the city for regulating and governing the energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said energy conservation code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-378. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1801; Ord. No. 457-02-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 8-378. Amendments to code.
The following section is hereby revised: Section 101.1 These regulations shall be known as the energy conservation code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Code 1983, § 5-1802; Ord. No. 457-02-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Secs. 8-379—8-399. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 10. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
 
Sec. 8-400. Adoption of performance code for buildings and facilities.
That certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as International Performance Code for buildings and facilities, 2012 edition, including appendices A through E as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the international performance code for buildings and facilities of the city for regulating and governing the performance based design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of building and/or fire protection systems; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said performance code for buildings and facilities on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1901; Ord. No. 458-02-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Secs. 8-401—8-428. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. FENCES
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 8-429. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, or affix any and all such fences. 
Fence means and includes every fence that is permanently attached to the ground including chain-link fences, redwood fences, masonry fences, but not limited thereto. 
Fence contractor means any person engaged in the business of constructing, installing, erecting, repairing, altering, or servicing fences as herein defined. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.1; Code 1983, § 5-1001)
 
Sec. 8-430. Variance.
Each fence is a structure and comes under the provisions of any structure in the city's zoning regulations, except that no rear or side yard setback will be required. Any variation from the zoning regulations will be grounds for the building inspector to revoke the permit. Special variances may be granted in case of hardship upon application to the building inspector for a special variance. A fee as provided in the city fee schedule will be required to investigate such hardship. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.6; Code 1983, § 5-1005)
 
Secs. 8-431—8-458. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PERMITS
 
Sec. 8-459. Required.
It is unlawful for any person acting as a contractor or such contractor's employee to construct, erect, install, alter or locate within the city any fence as defined in the article without obtaining a permit from the inspection department of the city and making a payment of the fee required in this article, except that such employee shall not be required to obtain a permit provided the fence contractor has obtained a permit for the construction of such a fence. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.8; Code 1983, § 5-1007)
 
Sec. 8-460. Application.
Application for erection permits shall be made upon forms provided by the building inspector and contain or have attached the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of applicant; 
(2)	Location of the lot upon which the fence is to be constructed or installed; 
(3)	The name of the person erecting such fence; 
(4)	Plot plan showing all easements, buildings, and fence locations on the property; and 
(5)	Such other information as the building inspector requires as to show full compliance with this and all other laws and codes of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.9; Code 1983, § 5-1008)
 
Sec. 8-461. Issuance.
It is the duty of the building inspector upon the filing of an application for an erection permit, if it is in order and in compliance with all regulations of this division and other laws and ordinances of the city to issue the permit. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, the permit becomes null and void. 
(Prior Code, § 9.9-10; Code 1983, § 5-1009)
 
Sec. 8-462. Fees.
Prior to beginning construction, each applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.11; Code 1983, § 5-1010)
 
Sec. 8-463. Inspection.
The building inspector shall inspect, at such times as he deems necessary, each fence regulated by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.12; Code 1983, § 5-1011)
 
Sec. 8-464. Revocation of permits.
The building inspector is hereby empowered and authorized to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provision of any city ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.13; Code 1983, § 5-1012)
 
Sec. 8-465. Suspension of license.
The building inspector has the right to suspend for a maximum period of 90 days any fence contractor for a violation of any city ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.14; Code 1983, § 5-1013)
 
Sec. 8-466. Property owner may erect fence.
An individual property owner may erect a fence on his own premises for his own private use provided all provisions of this article and provisions of the zoning regulations regulating structures are followed. A property owner is required to apply for an erection permit and be subject to inspection by the building inspector, but need not be bonded nor registered as a fence contractor. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.16; Code 1983, § 5-1015)
 
Secs. 8-467—8-485. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. FENCE CONTRACTORS
 
Sec. 8-486. Fence contractor's examination and licensing requirement.
No person shall engage in the business of installing, repairing or altering fences within the city unless and until such person, either by an official partner or employee, shall have passed the fence contractors examination and shall have procured a fence contractor's license as provided for in this chapter. No license shall be issued to any person who is not regularly engaged in the fence business as determined by the building inspector. Employees of a duly licensed fence contractor shall not be required to obtain such license or pay such fee in order to engage in the work of installing, constructing, erecting, repairing or servicing fences in the regular course of such employment. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.2; Code 1983, § 5-1002)
 
Sec. 8-487. Application for license.
Before a fence contractor installs any fence or makes alterations or additions to existing fences, he shall file with the building inspector an application in writing for a license to do such work. The application shall be on forms supplied by the building inspector and information furnished thereon includes: Name of applicant, address of applicant, number of years' experience in the fence business, and any other items deemed desirable by the building inspector. The building inspector arranges for the applicant to take the fence contractor's examination. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.3; Code 1983, § 5-1003)
 
Sec. 8-488. Fence contractor's examination license.
(a)	The building inspector shall, from time to time, hold examinations for approved applicants desiring to secure a license as a fence contractor. 
(b)	A fence contractor's examination will not be given to the applicant until the application has been approved by the building inspector. In addition, thereto, the applicant will then be examined to determine his qualifications as follows: 
(1)	The applicant will take a regular examination of not less than ten nor more than 20 questions or problems designed to determine his knowledge of this chapter and his practical knowledge of fence installations; 
(2)	A grade of 75 percent out of 100 percent (as perfect) will be necessary for the applicant to pass. In the event the applicant does not pass, he may again take the examination at a later date upon submitting application but no sooner than two weeks after failure of the examination. 
(c)	An applicant who has qualified by passing the prescribed examination will be certified to the city clerk by the building inspector and the city clerk will, upon the filing of a bond as provided in section 8-489 by such applicant, license the applicant as a fence contractor. 
(d)	If the fence contractor associated with any partnership, firm or corporation resigns, withdraws or is discharged from such partnership, firm or corporation he shall not be engaged in business for a longer period than ten days without compliance with section 8-486. 
(e)	A fence contractor's license may be obtained from the city clerk upon presentation to the city clerk of satisfactory evidence of qualifications from the building inspector and a fee as provided in the city fee schedule is paid to the city clerk in connection with such license. Such license expires on January 31 following the date of issuance. If the license is purchased during the year, a pro-rata rate will be observed. 
(f)	Any person who holds a license in his name may renew the license upon the payment of the fee to the city clerk within 30 days after the expiration thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.5; Code 1983, § 5-1004)
 
Sec. 8-489. Fence contractor's bond.
No fence contractor's license shall be issued until the applicant therefore has deposited with the city clerk a surety bond in the sum of $1,000.00 to be known as the fence contractor's bond. Such bond is executed by the fence contractor and the surety thereon is a corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond is payable to the city and as a condition states that the licensee will faithfully and properly conduct his business in compliance with all the codes of the city relating to fences and fence contractors and for the payment of all fines and penalties imposed for the violation of such laws; and for the protection and indemnification of the city against all damages resulting directly or indirectly from any injury to persons or property on account of negligence or unskilled work of the licensee. Such licensee will not engage in the business of fence contracting unless a bond, as herein provided, is on file with the city clerk and in full force. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.7; Code 1983, § 5-1006)
 
Sec. 8-490. Transfer of license.
It is unlawful for any person holding a license to transfer same or allow the use of same, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any of the fence work herein specified. 
(Prior Code, § 9-9.15; Code 1983, § 5-1014)
 
Secs. 8-491—8-518. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. FALLOUT AND TORNADO SHELTERS
 
Sec. 8-519. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fallout shelter means any underground structure designed to protect its occupants from residual radiation resulting from a nuclear detonation. 
Special permit means one issued by the city clerk after a hearing as provided in this chapter. All others are "regular permits." 
Tornado shelter means any underground structure designed to protect its occupants from the effects of wind and debris resulting from a tornado. 
(Prior Code, § 9-7.2; Code 1983, § 5-1101)
 
Sec. 8-520. Permits required.
(a)	No fallout or tornado shelter shall be constructed within the city unless a building permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. 
(b)	No building permit for the construction of a fallout or tornado shelter shall be issued until plans and specifications for each type shelter has been approved by a registered professional engineer or architect or the building official, as conforming to the standards and specifications as set forth in section 8-488, and where applicable, section 8-430. 
(c)	All applications for a permit, whether regular or special, shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in the city fee schedule. A regular permit shall then be issued to qualified persons, but a special permit only as herein provided. 
(Prior Code, § 9-7.3; Code 1983, § 5-1102)
 
Sec. 8-521. Protection factor; area and height of fallout shelters.
(a)	All fallout shelters shall have a protection factor which is obtained by not less than 12 inches of reinforced concrete or not less than 18 inches of compacted earth, or any equivalent combination thereof. 
(b)	All fallout shelters shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet of floor area, with an inside height of not less than six feet, three inches. 
(Prior Code, § 5-7.3; Code 1983, § 5-1103)
 
Sec. 8-522. Standards and specifications.
(a)	No pre-shaped shelter such as metal, plastic, wood, plexiglass, and similar material shall be approved unless the design is sufficient to prevent flotation when shelter is empty, and flotation force is considered to be 100 percent. Weight of earthen fill will not be considered in reducing this flotation factor. 
(b)	All underground fallout shelters shall be provided with a baffle wall affording at least one right-angle turn into the living area. 
(c)	All underground fallout shelters shall be constructed of sufficient mass for their designed category rating. 
(d)	All underground fallout shelters shall be equipped with a ventilation system producing not less than five cubic feet per minute, per person, of fresh air. 
(e)	All concrete used in shelter construction of underground fallout and tornado shelters shall have a compressive strength of not less than 3,500 pounds per square inch. 
(f)	All shelters shall be adequately waterproofed to prevent seepage. 
(Prior Code, § 9-7.4; Code 1983, § 5-1104)
 
Sec. 8-523. Location of shelters; special permits; front yard shelters.
(a)	No shelter shall be constructed in a front yard except when, for some reason beyond the owner's control, a shelter cannot be located in the back or side yard, and then under a special permit issued by the city clerk after hearing before the building official, and after evidence has been presented to him showing the necessity therefor. 
(b)	All shelters constructed in front yards shall be completely below established grade with the exception of one air-intake pipe and hood, which may extend three feet above grade, and one exhaust pipe and hood, which may extend four feet above established grade. Entranceways may extend not more than one foot above established grade, and be provided with metal or metal-clad door. 
(c)	All underground shelters constructed in front yards shall be provided with a locking device. 
(d)	Underground shelters constructed in front yards shall not be used for any type of occupancy other than as an underground fallout and tornado shelter. 
(e)	All installations in the front yard shall also comply with the standards set out in section 8-522 and all other provisions of this chapter that are applicable thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 9-7.5; Code 1983, § 5-1105)
 
Secs. 8-524—8-538. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. OIL AND GAS
 
Sec. 8-539. Intent and purpose.
As the imprudent operation of an oil and gas facility can constitute a menace to the public health, safety, and welfare of the city, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter that oil and gas operations be reasonably regulated for the public good. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1201; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-540. Definitions.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned well means: 
(1)	Each well in which no production casing has been run, and for which drilling or testing operations have ceased for 30 consecutive days; or 
(2)	Any other well for which there is no current city permit. 
Artificial production means the raising to the surface of the earth, by means other than natural flow, petroleum or natural gas. 
Corporation commission means the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. 
Deleterious substance means any chemical, salt water, oil field brine, waste oil, waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud or injurious substances produced or used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and processing of oil, gas or condensate. 
Enhanced recovery means an operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into a source of supply for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom. 
Natural production means the raising to the surface of the earth, by natural flow, petroleum or natural gas. 
Oil and gas inspector means that person qualified and employed by the city to enforce the provisions of this article, or by his authorized representatives. 
Permittee means the person to whom is issued a permit under the terms of this article. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of any natural waters of the city, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water of the city as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare; to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other beneficial uses; or to livestock, animals or aquatic life. 
Pressure maintenance means an operation by which gas, water or other fluids are injected into a supply of oil to maintain pressure or retard pressure decline therein for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom, and which has been approved by the corporation commission after notice and hearing. 
Salt water means any water containing more than 500 mg/l chlorides. 
Treatable water means surface and subsurface water in its natural state which may or may not require treatment to be useful for human consumption, and contains less than 10,000 ppm total dissolved solids or 5,000 ppm chlorides. 
Water, waters of the city or city water means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the city or any portion thereof. 
Well means, unless specifically qualified, any hole or bore to any depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquefied petroleum matter or deleterious substances, or for the injection or disposal of any of the foregoing. 
(b)	All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1202; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-541. Permits.
(a)	It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, acting for himself or acting as agent, servant, employee, subcontractor or independent contractor of any other person, to drill a well within this city, or to work upon or assist in any way in the production or operation of any such well, without a permit having first been issued by the authority of the oil and gas inspector in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, subcontractor or independent contractors of any person, to commence to drill an original well or reenter an abandoned well later than one year after the permit has been granted. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1203; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-542. Application and filing fee.
(a)	Every application for a permit to drill an original well or to reenter an abandoned well shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign same on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector and be accompanied by a filing fee of $3,500.00. No application shall request a permit to drill more than one well. The application shall contain full information required by the oil and gas inspector, including the following: 
(1)	Name and address of applicant and date of application; 
(2)	Where applying for a proposed original well: 
a.	A block map of the ten acres surrounding the drill site, including thereon the location of the proposed original well, and distance therefrom to all existing dwelling houses, buildings or other structures, designed for the occupancy of human beings or animals, within 300 feet of any such well, and the location of all existing oil, gas or fresh water wells within the ten-acre tract; 
b.	The names of the mineral, surface and lease owners; and 
c.	The ten-acre tract shown on the plat shall be the minimum area described as the limits of the special use permit; 
(3)	A drilling prognosis, to specify in detail the amount, weight and size of conductor pipe and surface pipe and the procedures to be used for cementing such. Plugging procedures to be used in the event production is not established shall also be specified; 
(4)	A statement of the provisions for water for the drilling rig; 
(5)	A written plan for disposal of deleterious substances produced during the drilling operations and any deleterious substances produced as a result of production from the well. This plan shall include the method of transportation and name of transporter or transport contractor for the deleterious substances and the name and location of the permitted disposal site, including a copy of the permit for the disposal site and a contract with the owner of the permitted site for the disposal of the deleterious substances, or in the alternative, provide proof of ownership of the permitted disposal site. The permittee shall provide monthly reports to the city of the amount of salt water and other deleterious substances produced, along with receipts for disposal of same; 
(6)	The name and address of the person within the state upon whom service of process upon applicant may be made within this state; and in the case of any nonresident person who has no such service agent within this state, there shall be attached to the application the designation of such a service agent resident in the county, and a consent that service of summons may be made upon such person in any action to enforce any of the obligations of the applicant hereunder; 
(7)	A verification of the above information by the applicant hereunder; and 
(8)	A map showing the location of the access road from the public highway or street to the drill site. 
(b)	A copy of the approved drilling permit from the corporation commission and a copy of the staking plat shall be filed with the city prior to issuance of the municipal permit. 
(c)	Where the application is one for the re-entry of an abandoned well, the application shall contain all the information required by subsection (a) of this section, with the exception that the oil and gas inspector may vary the requirements thereof to suit the application before him; provided that such an application for a permit to reenter an abandoned well shall provide a statement of the following information in every case: 
(1)	The then condition of the well; 
(2)	The depth to which it is proposed such well shall be deepened; and 
(3)	The proposed casing program to be used in connection with the proposed deepening; and 
(4)	Evidence of adequate current tests showing that the casing strings currently passed the same tests that are required in the case of the drilling of an original well. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1204; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-543. Issuance or refusal of permit.
(a)	The oil and gas inspector's office within 30 business days after the filing of an application for a permit under this article shall determine whether or not the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article and applicable federal and state law, and shall cause the permit to be issued. Each permit issued under the terms of this article shall: 
(1)	By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this chapter with the same force and effect as if this article were copied verbatim therein; 
(2)	By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of applicable state law and the rules, regulations and standards adopted in accordance therewith relating to the protection of human beings, animals and natural resources; 
(3)	Specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of one year from the date of issuance thereof, and for like periods thereafter upon the successful inspection of the permittee's well and operations, as is provided for elsewhere herein; 
(4)	Specify such conditions imposed by the oil and gas inspector as are authorized by this article; and 
(5)	Specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved the required bonds and certificate of insurance in the appropriate amounts as provided for elsewhere herein. 
(b)	If the permit is issued, it shall, in two originals, be signed by the oil and gas inspector and the permittee, and when so signed shall constitute the permittee's license to drill and operate in the city and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, such bonds as are required, and applicable state law, rules, regulations, standards and directives. One executed original copy of the permit shall be retained by the permittee and shall be kept available for inspection by the city or state law enforcement official who shall demand to see same. 
(c)	If the permit is refused, or if the applicant notifies the oil and gas inspector in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his application, or if the bonds of the applicant is not approved, then upon the happening of any events the cash fee filed with the application shall be refunded to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom by the city the sum of $200.00 as a processing fee. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1205; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-544. Permittee's insurance, bond or letter of credit.
(a)	In the event a permit shall be issued by the oil and gas inspector, no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city, bonds and a certificate of insurance as follows: 
(1)	A bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the principal sum of at least $25,000.00. The bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be executed by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and with the applicant as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this article in the operation of the well for either natural or artificial production, injection or disposal. 
(2)	Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall become effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city and remain in force and effect for at least 12 months subsequent to the expiration of the permit term, and in addition the bond or irrevocable letter of credit will be conditioned that the permittee will promptly pay fines, penalties and other assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of his breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this article, and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the permittee's operations to their former condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste and other substances, and will, after abandonment, grade, level and restore the property to the same surface condition, as practicable as is possible, as existed prior to commencing operations; and further, that the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability attributable to granting the permit. 
(3)	If, after the completion of a producing well, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this article, such as removing derricks and clearing the premises, he may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have the bond or irrevocable letter of credit reduced to a sum of not less than $10,000.00 for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. 
(b)	In addition to the bond or irrevocable letter of credit required in subsection (a) of this section, the permittee shall obtain a bond or irrevocable letter of credit, or pollution liability insurance policy, in the principal sum of at least $1,000,000.00. Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit or policy shall be executed by a reliable insurer licensed to do business in the state, as surety, and with the applicant as principal, all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with every applicable federal and state law, rule, regulation, standard or directive relating to the maintenance of the safe and beneficial physical, chemical and biological properties of any natural waters of the city; that the permittee shall obtain the necessary permits from the city and state with regard to any operations which have the potential of rendering such waters harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety and welfare; that the permittee shall bear all the costs necessary and incidental to the correction of any pollution to such waters caused by the permittee or the permittee's agents, servants, employees, subcontractors or independent contractors; that the permittee shall pay all fines, penalties, assessments or judgment resulting directly or incidentally from the permittee's activities and which result in pollution of city waters; and that the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all liability resulting from the pollution of city waters. 
(c)	In addition to the bonds or irrevocable letters of credit policy required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the permittee shall carry a policy of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the permittee and the city, issued by an insurer authorized to do business within the state. Such policy in the aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverage: 
(1)	Bodily injuries, $100,000.00 per person; $300,000.00 per accident; and 
(2)	Property damage, $200,000.00. 
(d)	The permittee shall file with the city certificates of insurance as above stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof of the oil and gas inspector who shall act thereon promptly after the date of such filing. 
(e)	Such insurance policy or policies shall not be canceled without written notice to the oil and gas inspector at least ten days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event such policy is canceled, the permit granted shall immediately thereupon terminate without any action on the part of the oil and gas inspector, and the permittee's rights to operation under the permit shall cease until the permittee files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(f)	If, after completion of a producing well, the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this article, such as removing derricks, clearing premises and the like, he may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have such insurance policy reduced as follows: 
(1)	Bodily injuries, $50,000.00 per person; 
(2)	$100,000.00 per accident; and 
(3)	Property damage, $50,000.00. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1206; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-545. Enhanced recovery and salt water or deleterious substances disposal wells.
(a)	No person shall reenter any well or drill an original well to be used for enhanced recovery or disposal of salt water or other deleterious substances without first obtaining the necessary permit therefor. Such permit shall consist of two separate parts (i.e., a permit to drill or reenter and construct and a permit to operate). 
(b)	An application for the permit to drill or reenter a well for enhanced recovery or substance disposal shall be in the same form as that required for a permit to drill an original well and shall contain complete information required by the oil and gas inspector, including the following: 
(1)	A block map of the well site, showing all equipment to be used thereat, location of pipelines, access road and distances from the well to any and all fences, public roadways, and buildings within a radius of 330 feet; 
(2)	A block map of the project, showing the location of: 
a.	All water supply wells within a quarter mile radius of each injection or disposal well; 
b.	All public water supply wells, disposal wells, injection wells, producing wells, and plugged and abandoned wells within the project area and those sections immediately adjacent; 
c.	All conduits; and 
d.	Tank battery, pumping station and appurtenant equipment; 
(3)	All wells within the project area and those sections immediately adjacent shall be indicated by status (e.g., plugged and abandoned, injection, salt water, oil, etc.) and show the following additional information: 
a.	Footage location (surface casing); 
b.	Derrick floor and ground level elevation; 
c.	Drilled total depth; 
d.	Packer body total depth; 
e.	Size, depth and quality of surface and production casing, including zones from which casing has been removed; 
f.	Location of all plugs, packers, cement plugs, tubing anchors, etc., with the well bore; 
g.	Depth and nature of all cement squeeze jobs; 
h.	Formation name and depth of all open perforations in a producing open hole; 
i.	Volume and type of cement used on surface and production strings; and 
j.	Top of cement; 
(4)	One copy of all electric, mechanical, sample and driller's logs, if available; 
(5)	Fee and operation name for each well; 
(6)	One copy of all cement bond logs and production logs; 
(7)	One copy of all work performed on the well; 
(8)	Copies of all information supplied to the corporation commission, and the commission's approval of the project; and 
(9)	A map showing the location of the access road from the public highway or street to the drill site. 
(c)	Upon the completion of the application required hereunder, the oil and gas inspector shall have 30 business days to review same and make a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the mayor and city council. 
(d)	Prior to placing any enhanced recovery or substance disposal well into service, a permit to operate such well shall be obtained from the oil and gas inspector. Every application for a permit to operate such well shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Depth to static water level (hydrostatic head). Such data shall be obtained by means of a method approved by the oil and gas inspector. Such data shall be obtained not less than 48 hours after openings have been made through the casing into the injection disposal zone; 
(2)	Based on the static water level identified in subsection (d)(1) of this section, maximum operating pressures and rates of injection shall be established and maintained so as to prevent the hydraulic pressure level at a radius of ten feet from the injection or disposal wells from rising above the base elevation of treatable water. Such maximum operating pressures and rates of injection shall be established and maintained so as to prevent the hydraulic pressure level at a radius of ten feet from the injection or disposal wells from rising above the base elevation of treatable water. Such maximum operating pressures and injection rates shall be noted on the permit. No injection or disposal well will be permitted to operate if the well's zone of influence will exceed the above referenced limits. 
(e)	A fee in the sum of $1,000.00 shall be submitted along with every application for a permit to operate an injection or substance disposal well. 
(f)	Copies of corporation commission form number 1015, indicating successful pressure testing of each injection well at a pressure greater than the maximum proposed for the project, or if no such form number 1015 has been filed and approved, then sufficient evidence of the successful pressure testing of each injection well shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(g)	Every such injection or disposal well shall be constructed so as to seal the injection zone from the upper portion of the casing. The annulus between the injection tubing and the casing shall be filled with a noncorrosive fluid, then sealed and a one-fourth inch female fitting with cutoff valve shall be attached so that the pressure in the annulus may be measured by the oil and gas inspector by attaching a gauge having a one-fourth inch male fitting. A pressure shall be maintained in the annulus sufficient to monitor the fluids in the annulus. Any significant deviation from the established pressure shall be cause to shut down the well, and may result in cancellation of the operating permit, until such time as the established pressure can once again be maintained. 
(h)	Injection lines shall be buried in a trench of a depth no less than four feet, and shall be pressure tested (static) annually at a minimum of 150 percent of the pressure normally encountered at the injection pump discharge for a period of hours to be fixed by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified five days in advance of such test and may supervise same. Test results shall be filed with city upon completion. Such testing is the responsibility of the permittee and at the permittee's expense, to be conducted by a person approved by the oil and gas inspector. 
(i)	Domestic and public water supply wells located within a radius of one-quarter mile of any enhanced recovery or disposal well shall be tested prior to beginning injection or disposal and thereafter semiannually for the presence of deleterious substances, such as chlorides, sulfates and dissolved solids. Such testing is the responsibility of the permittee and at the permittee's expense, to be conducted by a person approved by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified five days in advance of such testing and may be present therefor. Test results shall be filed with the city upon completion. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1207; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-546. Annual fee to operate.
An inspection fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule is hereby levied on each well operated or maintained under a permit issued by the city. No permit for any well shall be considered valid for any year for which the annual fee has not been paid. Failure to pay any required permit fee within 30 days of a delinquent notice sent to the latest address provided by the permittee will result in cancellation of the permit. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1208; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-547. Disposal of salt water.
(a)	Every permittee under this article shall be responsible for the safe disposal of salt water or other deleterious substances which he may bring to the surface of the earth and shall provide a plan for such disposal as required in section 8-543(a). Such disposal shall not result in pollution of the waters of the city and shall not result in any other environmental hazard, and shall incorporate the best available techniques and equipment. 
(b)	In the event of any leakage or spillage of any pollutant or deleterious substance, whatever the cause thereof, the permittee shall cause the oil and gas inspector to be notified thereof promptly. If in the judgment of the oil and gas inspector such leakage or spillage represents a potential environmental hazard he may issue whatever corrective orders he deems appropriate and additionally may require the appropriate testing of the surface and subsurface for pollutant incursion, the cost of such test to be borne by the permittee. 
(c)	No person shall dispose of salt water or other deleterious substance in any lined or unlined earthen pit within the city limits. 
(d)	No person shall inject any salt water or other deleterious substance into the annulus between the inside of the surface casing string and the next inside casing string, except when the bottom of the properly cemented surface casing extends 200 feet or more through or into a continuous impermeable clay barrier below the base of treatable water. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1209; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-548. Compliance with applicable laws.
No person shall drill an original well or reenter an abandoned well for any purpose, or permit to exist any well, structure, equipment, pipeline, machinery, tank or other appurtenance, in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other city ordinances as may be applicable, or the laws, rules, regulations, operative standards or directives of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1210; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-549. Surface casing.
(a)	Surface casing shall be set a minimum of 200 feet below the deepest encounter of treatable water found in eight sections adjacent to the section in which the well is located. Logs which identify the base of treatable water shall be run in the surface hole before the surface pipe is set. A copy of such logs shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector, or surface casing may be set without the above-required logging provided the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the oil and gas inspector that the bottom of the surface casing will extend through or into at least 200 feet of continuous impermeable clay barrier below the base of treatable water, is properly cemented, and cement bond logs run with the quality of the cement bond approved by the oil and gas inspector. Surface pipe shall have a centralizer on the shoe joint, and centralizers within 50 feet of the shoe joint, and a centralizer no more than 200 feet apart above the second centralizer. 
(b)	Surface pipe shall be cemented by attempting to circulate good cement to surface by normal displacement practices. If cement cannot be circulated to surface due to washed-out hole or lost circulation, the existing cement shall not be overdisplaced and a plug shall be left in the bottom of the casing string to be drilled out once the surface is set. The remaining open hole behind the surface pipe shall be cemented by running a tubing string between the conductor string and the surface pipe until the top of the cement is tagged. The remaining uncemented annular space will then be cemented until good cement is circulated to surface. No further drilling shall be accomplished until the cement has set for at least 24 hours or in the alternative, until sample of the cement have passed independent laboratory tests satisfactory to the oil and gas inspector. 
(c)	Where an existing well is to be used as an injection or disposal site, the existing casing and cement shall be of such integrity and depth as to adequately and safely isolate fresh water producing zones from the seepage or bleeding of injection fluids or disposants. Where additional protective operations are undertaken to comply with this subsection, the oil and gas inspector shall be notified thereof sufficiently in advance in order for him to be present for such operations. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1211; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-550. Abandonment and plugging.
Whenever any well is abandoned it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a 200-foot cement plug in the bottom of the surface casing with the bottom of the plug 100 feet below the surface casing section, and to set a 50-foot cement plug in the top of the surface casing. No surface or conductor string of casing may be pulled or removed from a well. During initial abandonment operations, it will be the obligation of the permittee and operator to flood the well with mud-laden fluid weighing not less than nine pounds per gallon, and to circulate this mud until stabilized; and the well shall be kept filled to the top with mud-laden fluid of the weight herein specified, at all times. Mud-laden fluid of the above specifications will be left in the well bore below and between cement plugs. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by the state or the corporation commission of the state in connection with the abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the permittee. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1212; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-551. Well location.
(a)	It is hereby declared that it shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is within 1,000 feet of any public park, any residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, or school for which a building permit has been applied for or issued. The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the structures lot line. 
(b)	Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits, or refuses to comply with or resists with the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in the fine schedule. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1213; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996; Ord. No. 512-04-14, § 1, 4-17-2014)
 
Sec. 8-552. Fences.
Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to enclose such well, together with its surface facilities, by a fence sufficiently high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and animals out of the enclosure, with all gates thereto to be kept locked when the permittee or his employees are not within the enclosure; provided that in non-platted areas, the oil and gas inspector, at his discretion, may waive the requirement of any fence or may designate the type of fence to be erected. Fences must be kept locked at all times workers of the permittee are not present; and a duplicate set of keys to the lock shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1214; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-553. Noise and other nuisances.
All oil operations, drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to exploration for, drilling for and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in exploration, drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they become, from time to time, available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance. No noise level greater than 55 dB level shall be received in any residential zoned area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as a result of any oil drilling or producing operations. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1215; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-554. Facilities.
All lease equipment shall be painted and maintained in good state of appearance, and shall have posted in a prominent place a metal sign no less than two feet square in area upon which the following information shall be conspicuous: 
(1)	The permittee's name; 
(2)	Lease name; 
(3)	Location of the drill site by reference to the United States survey; and 
(4)	Identifying number of the permit issued by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1216; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-555. Storage tanks and separators.
(a)	Crude oil storage tanks shall not be constructed, operated or used except to the extent of two steel tanks for oil storage, not exceeding 500 barrels' capacity each and so constructed and maintained as to be vapor-tight. Additional tankage may be approved by the oil and gas inspector. 
(b)	A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained as to be vapor-tight. Each oil, gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure-relief safety valve and a bursting head. 
(c)	The area in which any crude oil storage tanks and separators are located shall be surrounded by a six-foot high security fence and opaque screening such as, but not limited to, stockade fences, trees or bushes as determined on the special use permit. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1217; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-556. Fire prevention.
Adequate firefighting apparatus and supplies approved by the city fire department shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. All machinery, equipment and installations on all drilling sites within the city limits shall conform with such requirements as may from time to time be issued by the fire department. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1218; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-557. Pits.
Steel mud or circulating pits shall be used. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within 15 days after completion of the well. Earthen pits will be allowed only as temporary emergency pits or as catch basins. Catch basin pits shall be used only for the purpose of catching any deleterious substance runoff and shall be no greater than 320 cubic feet. Such catch basin will be equipped with a liquid level activated pump designed to keep fluids pumped out of such catch basin pit. All such earthen pits must be lined and approved in writing by the oil and gas inspector. Emergency pits shall be emptied as soon as the emergency is over, and all such pits shall be emptied and then leveled within 15 days after completion of the well. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1219; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-558. Retaining walls.
(a)	An earthen retaining wall of adequate size for the terrain involved will be constructed on the low side of the well site in the event the well site is located on sloping or unlevel ground. The top of the retaining wall shall be at least level with the top of the base of the Christmas tree or other wellhead connections on any completed well, or at least level with the ground at the point where surface casing is set in the well when drilling. 
(b)	An earthen diversion wall of adequate size for the terrain involved shall be constructed on the high side of the well site in the event the well site is located on sloping or unlevel ground. The diversion wall will be of sufficient height and strength so as to divert runoff waters around the well site. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1220; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-559. Motive power.
Motive power for all well-pumping equipment shall be electricity unless otherwise approved by the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1221; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-560. Derrick and rig.
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling, re-entry or reworking of any well within the city, any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig; and all engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector. Permitting any drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period of longer than 60 days after completion or abandonment of a well is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1222; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-561. Drilling operations, equipment.
All drilling, re-entry and operations at any well performed under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the best practices of the reasonably prudent operator. All casing, valves and blowout preventers, drilling fluid, tubing, bradenhead, Christmas tree and well head connections shall be of a type and quality consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent operator. Setting and cementing casing and running drill stem tests shall be performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent operator. Any permittee under this chapter shall observe and follow the recommendations or regulations of the American Petroleum Institute and the corporation commission, except in those instances that are specifically addressed by this chapter. A copy of all logs associated with the surface casing shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1223; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-562. Moving of drilling rig.
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to move or cause to be moved the drilling rig from a well until the hole has been cased or properly plugged unless written permission to do so is obtained from the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1224; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-563. Streets and alleys.
No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is within any of the streets or alleys of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any drilling or production operation except with the written approval of the oil and gas inspector, and then only temporarily. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1225; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-564. Flaring of gas.
All produced gas shall be either sold, recovered or flared with procedures being approved by the oil and gas inspector and fire marshal. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1226; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-565. Fracture and acidizing.
In the completion of oil and gas, injection, disposal or service well, where acidizing or fracturing processes are used, no oil, gas or other deleterious substances or pollutants shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1227; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-566. Swabbing and bailing.
In swabbing, bailing or purging a well, all deleterious substances removed from the bore hole shall be placed in appropriate tanks and no substances shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1228; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-567. Rupture in surface casing.
In the event a rupture, break or opening occurs in the surface or production casing, the permittee or the operator or drilling contractor shall take immediate action to repair it and shall report the incident to the oil and gas inspector promptly. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1229; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-568. Depositing oil products.
No person shall deposit, drain or divert into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon any oil or oily liquid with petroleum content or any mud, rotary mud, sand, water or salt water, or in any manner permit by seepage, overflow, deliberate release or otherwise, any of such substances to escape from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person and flow or be carried into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1230; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-569. Safety precautions.
Persons drilling, operating or maintaining any well shall use all necessary care and take all precautions which shall be reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect the public. The provisions of this article shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare; and compliance with the terms hereof shall not be deemed to relieve any persons of any additional duty imposed by law. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1231; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-570. Water for muds.
In the event a fresh water supply well is drilled to provide water for drilling muds, upon the completion of operations for which such well is required, such well shall be plugged by cementing the bottom to the top, after notice of intention to so plug is provided to the oil and gas inspector who may supervise the operation. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1232; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-571. Oil and gas inspector.
(a)	The city manager shall employ or designate a qualified person as an oil and gas inspector whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)	The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue such orders or directives as are required to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter and its particular provisions. Failure to abide by any such order or directive shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)	The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to go upon and inspect any premises covered by the terms of this chapter to ascertain whether this chapter and the applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state are being complied with. Failure to permit access to the oil and gas inspector shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(d)	The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records specified in this article relating to the status or condition of any well or project or the appurtenances thereof within the city. Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1233; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-572. Service companies.
Upon request of the oil and gas inspector, service companies or other persons shall furnish and file reports and records showing perforation, hydraulic fracturing, cementing, shooting, chemical treatment and all other service operations on any site covered by this article. Such furnished material shall remain confidential where such confidentiality is usually granted by the state. Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1234; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-573. Accumulation of vapor.
The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to require the immediate shutting in or closing of any well if he finds that there exists, within a 100-foot radius of any well, any gas or gasoline vapor in a quantity sufficient to constitute, in his judgment, or in the judgment of the city fire marshal, a fire hazard. The well shall remain shut or closed in until the hazard and its cause are removed. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1235; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-574. Inspection of pressure lines.
The oil and gas inspector shall inspect all pressure lines in use at any well or at any project to ensure that tubing, fittings, equipment or connections are reasonably tight, safe and free from leaks. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1236; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-575. Ingress and egress.
Lease access roads shall be maintained in such a manner as to safely and comfortably allow for ingress and egress of city or state personnel traveling in a common passenger motor vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1237; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-576. Order to cease operations.
(a)	If the oil and gas inspector finds that, in his judgment, a hazard to life or natural resources exists, he shall order immediate rectification of the cause. If the permittee takes no immediate measure to reduce the hazard, or if the situation be so perilous as to constitute an imminent threat to safety, then in either of these events he may order the prompt cessation of activity, and if necessary, the clearance of the premises. 
(b)	The oil and gas inspector shall apply to the city manager for a hearing upon such order, which hearing shall be held no longer than 24 hours after the issuance of the order by the oil and gas inspector. The city manager shall determine if proper cause existed and, if not, shall order the permittee's activity to resume without delay. If the city manager determines that proper cause did not exist for the order to cease activity to issue, he shall make whatever ruling is proper to ensure rectification of the cause of the peril. Such ruling and compliance with it by the permittee shall not be construed to absolve the permittee of any liability for any violation of this chapter or for any damage or injury caused hereby. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1238; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-577. Appeals.
Any permittee aggrieved by any order, directive or ruling issued by the oil and gas inspector or by any ruling by the city manager may appeal the same to the city council, which shall hear the matter at its next scheduled meeting. The lodging of such appeal shall not stay the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. The council, upon hearing the matter, may issue whatever ruling or order is appropriate, provided that such ruling or order is in keeping with the spirit and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1239; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-578. Oil and gas inspector review of permit recommendations.
Upon the consideration of any application for a permit required by the terms of this article, the city engineer, and other appropriate city officials shall recommend approval or disapproval thereof to the oil and gas inspector, who shall review the matter and thereupon uphold or reverse the recommendation with or without the addition of any conditions thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1240; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-579. Conduits on streets and alleys.
(a)	No permittee shall make any excavations or construct any lines for the conveyance of fuel, water or minerals on, under or through the streets and alleys of the city without first having obtained a permit therefor upon application to the code enforcement department. 
(b)	The city engineer or the code enforcement officer shall prescribe the forms to be used for such application and the information to accompany it. 
(c)	Each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(d)	The city engineer or code enforcement officer shall, within 30 days of receipt of the properly executed application, either grant or deny the request. 
(e)	The granting of any such permit shall not be construed to be the granting of a franchise. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1241; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-580. Annual fee for conduits.
(a)	The permittee under section 8-578 shall pay to the city an annual renewal and inspection fee as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)	The city engineer, or code enforcement officer shall appoint a representative who shall inspect the conduits to ensure the public safety. No permit issued under section 8-578 shall be renewed if the conduit or any part thereof covered by such permit is in an unsafe condition. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1242; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-581. Applicability to existing conditions.
This article shall apply to any person drilling an original well, reentering an abandoned well, conducting natural or artificial production projects or operations, or maintaining a disposal well within the city; and every such person shall have no longer than 90 days to come into compliance with this article, provided that: 
(1)	No initial permit fees shall be charged to such person as would otherwise apply; or 
(2)	No penalties shall be sought against any activity in violation of this article where such activity pre-existed the adoption of this article and was otherwise in compliance with the applicable state law, rules, regulations, standards or directives. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1243; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-582. Informal complaints.
If, upon information or inspection, it is found that a permittee is violating any portion of this article or causing damage or pollution to any surface or underground treatable water, the oil and gas inspector shall file a written administrative complaint with the city manager, a copy of which shall be delivered or mailed to the permittee or his agent. If upon subsequent inspection, it is determined that the permittee has taken the corrective actions specified, the complaint may be dismissed; otherwise, formal application will be made to the city council for an order revoking the permit, and for any other appropriate remedy; pending the outcome of the final determination of the city council on the formal application, the oil and gas inspector shall, after an on-site inspection, have the authority to shut down those operations where conditions appear obvious that surface or underground pollution is occurring. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1244; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Sec. 8-583. Penalties.
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with the provisions hereof, irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each section hereof contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to this article, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms hereof, shall be punished as provided in the fine schedule of the city and the violation of each separate provision of this article, and of such permit, and of such bond, shall be considered a separate offense; and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further provided that the city council at any regular or special sessions or meeting thereof may, provided ten days' notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this article and under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted in the event the permittee thereof has violated any provision of such permit or bond of this article. In the event the permit is revoked, the permittee may make application to the oil and gas inspector for reissuance of such permit; and the action of the city thereon shall be final. Any continuing offense shall be considered a public nuisance, the remedies for which under law shall be in addition to those hereinbefore enumerated. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1245; Ord. No. 354-7-96, 7-11-1996)
 
Secs. 8-584—8-599. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. MOVING BUILDINGS
 
Sec. 8-600. Permit required; application for permit; approval.
It is unlawful for any person to move any building or structure along or across any street, road, public ground, or thoroughfare within the city without first filing an application requesting permission in writing to move the structure. After the city manager has approved the application, the city clerk may issue a permit for same. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any building under 200 square feet put on a slab. 
(Prior Code, § 9-2.1; Code 1983, § 5-401)
 
Sec. 8-601. Permit fee.
The permit fee required by this article shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule and shall be paid to the office of city clerk when the permit is issued. 
(Prior Code, § 9-2.2; Code 1983, § 5-402)
 
Sec. 8-602. Route to be traveled.
No permit for the moving of any building or structure as above required shall be issued until: 
(1)	The route to be taken in such moving and the time when such structure shall start moving on the street or public ground shall have been approved in writing by the city clerk; and 
(2)	Proper arrangements made with the chief of police to provide a police escort for the purpose of regulating traffic along the route to be followed, if same is determined necessary by the city clerk or the chief of police. 
(Prior Code, § 9-2.3; Code 1983, § 5-403)
 
Sec. 8-603. Chief of police may refuse to approve route.
The chief of police shall have authority to refuse to approve the proposed route if, in his judgment, the moving of the proposed structure would cause irreparable damage to trees or shrubbery, or until written permission of the utility company has been obtained if it is necessary to change the height of any overhead utility wire to allow the passage of the structure, or until written permission is obtained from the city clerk when it is necessary to change the height of the wires used in connection with overhead electric signal lights in order to move the structure. 
(Prior Code, § 9-2.4; Code 1983, § 5-404)
 
Sec. 8-604. Wheels upon which structure moves.
No permit shall be issued unless the moving wheels upon the structure to be moved are surrounded with pneumatic tires and unless the wheels travel upon that portion of the street between curb and curb. 
(Prior Code, § 9-2.5; Code 1983, § 5-405)
 
Sec. 8-605. Watchman; flags and flares; time.
In the event that it is necessary to leave the structure on the street or public land or any part thereof, due to mechanical failures or otherwise, same shall at all times be attended by a watchman, who shall signal with a red flag to oncoming traffic, and during the hours of twilight or darkness, the watchman shall also signal with an electric light. Also suitable flares shall be placed on either side of the structure for a distance of 75 feet. The permit shall state the time when it is contemplated the moving will terminate. All such moves shall continue with diligence in a good and workmanlike manner from the time when they are started until time of completion, except when due to matters beyond the control of the mover. 
(Prior Code, § 9-2.6; Code 1983, § 5-406)
 
Chapter 10 BUSINESSES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 10-1—10-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. LICENSES, TAXES AND CERTIFICATES
 
Sec. 10-19. License tax levied.
The city has levied a license tax on the callings, trades, businesses, avocations and occupations specified in this chapter in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-1; Code 1983, § 9-101)
 
Sec. 10-20. License required.
No person, firm or corporation, either as principal or agent, shall conduct, pursue, carry on or operate in the city any calling, trade, profession or occupation hereinafter named without first paying in advance to the city clerk the license tax hereinafter prescribed, and procuring a license therefor. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-2; Code 1983, § 9-102)
 
Sec. 10-21. License due, delinquent.
All licenses shall become due on July 1 or at the commencement of business, whichever event first occurs, and, if not paid within 15 days thereafter, a penalty of ten percent shall be added to the cost of the license, and an additional ten percent shall be added to the cost of the license and previous penalty on the first day of each month thereafter that the fee remains unpaid. If the license fee remains unpaid on September 1 of each year, the amount of the license shall be doubled, and the penalty shall be collected in the same manner as the license. The addition of a penalty, if any, to a license shall not exempt the person from whom the license tax may be collected for any penalty to which he may be liable for violating any provisions of this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-3; Code 1983, § 9-103; Ord. No. 259-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 10-22. Expiration, mode of payment.
All licenses shall expire on June 30 next after the same are issued. No license shall be issued until the amount prescribed therefor shall be paid to the city clerk. No license in any case, shall be returned or transferred. Licenses shall be signed by the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-4; Code 1983, § 9-104; Ord. No. 259-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 10-23. Free licenses, rebates.
No free licenses shall be granted, or rebates allowed for any cause, or any sum accepted less than the amount specified, or for a shorter period than required in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-5; Code 1983, § 9-105)
 
Sec. 10-24. Not to make loud noise.
No person licensed by this article shall call attention to his business or to the wares which he may have for sale, by crying them out, by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell, or by any other loud or unusual noise so as to disturb another. No person by means of any dancing, singing or other exhibition, shall call about him upon the highways of the city a number of people or in any way interfere with the free passage of pedestrians and vehicles along the streets and highways. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-8; Code 1983, § 9-106)
 
Sec. 10-25. License to be produced.
Every person having a license under the provisions of this article shall place and exhibit the same at all times while in force, in some conspicuous part of his or her place of business. A licensee shall produce or exhibit the license when applying for a renewal thereof, or when requested to do so by any police or other officer of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-8; Code 1983, § 9-107)
 
Sec. 10-26. Right of entry for inspection.
Any police officer shall have power to enter any place requiring a license hereunder, during business hours, to ascertain whether this article or other ordinances of the city are being complied with, and it is the special duty of all such officers to see that all licenses required hereunder are paid when due. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-9; Code 1983, § 9-108)
 
Sec. 10-27. Separate license required.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch of establishment or separate place of business in which the trade, calling, profession or occupation is carried on, and each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue, or conduct only that trade, calling, profession or occupation described in such license. 
(Prior Code, § 21-1-10; Code 1983, § 9-109)
 
Sec. 10-28. Business license fees.
All fees under this article shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 9-110; Ord. No. 490-07-06, 7-20-2006; Ord. No. 492-01-07, 2-21-2008)
 
Sec. 10-29. Occupation bonds.
In addition to the payment of a license tax or fee as set forth in the city fee schedule, no license shall be issued to the following occupations or professions until a good and sufficient bond in the amounts hereinafter set forth, with corporate surety, licensed to do business in the state, and acceptable to the city, conditioned that the applicant shall faithfully comply with the ordinances of the city, and pay all charges and fees that may be assessed against him. The bond shall be in the following amounts for the following occupations: 
Editor's note(s)—At this point, one or more pages are missing from the 1983 Code provided as source material for this recodification. The missing material contains the end of section 9-111 and sections 9-112 through 9-116. 
(Code 1983, § 9-111)
… galleries and domino tables. The term "coin operated amusement machine or table" is expressly defined to exclude any device or contrivance by the means of which merchandise of value is dispensed, sold or vended for a sum fairly commensurate with the value of the merchandise so sold, dispensed or vended and to further exclude pool, billiard and snooker tables. 
Operator means and includes every person who maintains for use or permits the use in any place, establishment or premises occupied by him, of any coin operated amusement machine. 
Person means and includes an individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, trust or estate. 
(Code 1983, § 9-116)
 
Sec. 10-30. Certificate of occupancy required.
Certificates of occupancy shall be required for business structures in the manner provided in chapter 8. 
(Code 1983, § 9-119; Ord. No. 490-07-06, 7-20-2006)
 
Secs. 10-31—10-48. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SPECIFIC TYPES OF BUSINESSES
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 10-49. Amusement devices.
(a)	Each operator of a coin operated amusement machine or table is required to pay to the city treasurer of the city the annual license fee with respect to each coin operated amusement machine or table owned or operated by him within the city. At the time of payment, each operator shall specify the number of coin operated amusement machines or tables for which license fees are being paid, and the location of such coin operated amusement machines or tables. A separate fee shall be paid for each such machine or table, and a separate license issued therefor as hereinafter provided. 
(b)	Upon payment of the license fee herein provided, there shall be issued by the city clerk to the operator paying the fee, upon a form to be prescribed by the clerk, a separate license for each machine or table, evidencing the payment of such fee, embodying a general description of the type of machine so licensed, and specifying the period for which such license is issued. The license period shall in all cases expire on June 30 succeeding the issuance of such license. 
(c)	For the purpose of computing the amount of license fee, the year commencing on July 1 shall be divided into quarters. For each such license purchased, the operator shall pay as many quarters of the annual license fee as there are quarters or partial quarters of the year remaining from the date of the issuance of such license to the next succeeding June 30. On each June 30 each such operator shall pay the full year's license fee upon each machine or table operated by him. The removal or cessation of operation of any machine or table for which a license has been issued after payment of the full year's license fee shall not entitle the operator to a rebate or refund for any unexpired portion of the license year. 
(d)	The license so issued to an operator shall be affixed and attached to the machine or table for which issued. A license issued for the operation of a particular type or class of machine or table may be transferred by the operator from the particular machine or table to any machine or table placed in operation in replacement of a machine or table for which originally issued, and may be transferred by the operator from one location to another within the city, but no license for the operation of a machine or table may be transferred from one person to another. 
(Prior Code, § 15-1.2; Code 1983, §§ 9-117, 9-118)
 
Secs. 10-50—10-71. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
 
Sec. 10-72. Auctioneer defined.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auctioneer, for the purpose of this division, means any person who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares and merchandise at public auction for another on commission or for a recompense, or any person who shall conduct a public sale at auction of any goods, wares and merchandise, irrespective of whether the goods sold or offered for sale are owned by another or the auctioneer. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.1; Code 1983, § 9-201)
 
Sec. 10-73. License required.
No auction sale of any class of merchandise shall be held or conducted except by an auctioneer holding a license or permit as set forth and provided in and under the terms of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.2; Code 1983, § 9-202)
 
Sec. 10-74. License, age of applicant.
Any person applying for such license must be over the age of 21 years. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.3; Code 1983, § 9-203)
 
Sec. 10-75. License application, information contained therein.
(a)	In addition to the qualifications otherwise prescribed in this division, any person applying for such license or permit, shall file with the designee of the city manager, a written application therefor which will set forth under oath: 
(1)	That the applicant is over the age of 21 years; 
(2)	The name of the person owning the goods, wares and merchandise that he sells at auction; 
(3)	The location of the place of business where such goods are to be sold at auction; 
(4)	The general nature or description of the goods to be sold; 
(5)	The period of time during which the auction is to be conducted; and 
(6)	Proof that the applicant possesses any applicable state license and sales tax permit. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.4; Code 1983, § 9-204)
 
Sec. 10-76. License, endorsement of application.
The written application provided for in section 10-75 shall bear the endorsement of two auctioneers certifying to the good character, honesty and integrity of the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.5; Code 1983, § 9-205)
 
Sec. 10-77. License, approval required.
Before any such license or permit is issued, the application and endorsement provided in sections 10-75 and 10-76 shall be submitted to designee of the city manager for his inspection and approval. Unless the designee of the city manager shall find that the applicant has fully complied with the regulations provided for by this division, it is his duty to disapprove such application and license shall not be issued to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.6; Code 1983, § 9-206)
 
Sec. 10-78. Compliance required.
No license or permit to act as auctioneer for the sale at auction of any type of merchandise shall be issued by the city until after the person applying for such license or permit shall first comply with the provisions of this division. License fee as provided for in this division shall be fully paid. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.7; Code 1983, § 9-207)
 
Sec. 10-79. Unlicensed auctioneers.
No auctioneer is employed in the conduction of any such sale until such party shall be licensed or have a permit as provided for in the terms of this division. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.8; Code 1983, § 9-208)
 
Sec. 10-80. False bidders or cappers.
No false bidder, capper or other person shall be employed by the owner of the merchandise being sold or by auctioneer in charge thereof, or by any person acting in behalf of either, for the purpose of submitting false bids or fictitious bids in order to boost or increase the sale price of any article so offered for sale at auction, nor shall any false bidder or capper be permitted or allowed to take part in any such auction sale. It is unlawful for any auctioneer or auctioneer's helper or assistant to falsely or fraudulently represent or imply that a bid has been made for any article so offered at auction unless a bona fide bid has been made by some person in attendance at the auction sale and who is not a false bidder or capper. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.9; Code 1983, § 9-209)
 
Sec. 10-81. Substitution of merchandise.
It is unlawful to substitute another article for and in place of the article sold to the purchaser. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.10; Code 1983, § 9-210)
 
Sec. 10-82. False representation of merchandise.
False representation as to the ownership, source of acquisition, character, origin, manufacturer, nature or quality of goods sold or offered for sale, or falsely representing goods to be bankrupt stock, damaged goods, or goods saved from fire, or false representation as to the previous history or character of goods shall be unlawful. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.11; Code 1983, § 9-211)
 
Sec. 10-83. Fee, amount.
Before any license is issued as provided in this article, the applicant shall first pay a fee as set forth in the city fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.14; Code 1983, § 9-212)
 
Sec. 10-84. Auction houses.
(a)	The term "auction house" means an auction that occurs in a regular place of business and whose location remains stationary. 
(b)	Prior to establishing an auction house within the city, prospective owners shall: 
(1)	Meet with all terms and conditions shown in article I of this chapter, except section 10-83 shall not apply. 
(2)	Pay an annual fee as set forth in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 9-250; Ord. No. 486-03-06, 8-17-2006)
 
Sec. 10-85. License revoked for violation.
Upon conviction in the municipal court of the violation of any of the provisions of this article, the license or permit issued to the party convicted shall immediately and automatically be thereby revoked, and all rights thereunder shall be deemed waived and terminated by the party to whom the license or permit shall be issued. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1.15; Code 1983, § 9-213)
 
Secs. 10-86—10-113. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. CLOSING OUT SALES
 
Sec. 10-114. License required, fee.
It is unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct or carry on in the city any sale of goods, wares or merchandise at retail that is represented as being bankrupt, bankrupt stock or price, insolvent, assignees, trustees, executors, administrators, receivers, wholesalers, jobbers, manufacturers, closing out, quitting business, going out of business, liquidation, closing stock, fire, fire damage, smoke, smoke damage, water, water damage or other similar sale without obtaining a license as required in this article. The fee for the license shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule, for a period not exceeding 30 days. The 30 days provided in this section shall mean calendar days exclusive of Sundays and legal holidays. At the end of the 30-day period upon application for renewal of the license sworn to by the applicant, a renewal license may be issued for a period of 30 days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded. The fee for such renewal license shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule for each 30 days, provided that only one such license shall be issued for any one person within a 12-month period, and no such license shall be issued or renewed for more than 30 days at a time. 
(Prior Code, § 7-2.1; Code 1983, § 9-220)
 
Sec. 10-115. Application, oath, inventory.
(a)	The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The nature of the occupancy of the place where such sale is to be held, whether by lease or otherwise, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy; and 
(2)	A full and complete statement of the facts regarding the proposed sale including reason why such sale is being conducted, the manner in which sale will be conducted, and the commencement and termination date of such sale. 
(b)	The application shall be signed by the person seeking to secure license or by the proper officer of the corporation, and the application shall be sworn to be the proper person signing such application which oath shall state that the information given herein is full and true and known by the affiant to be sold. 
(Prior Code, § 7-2.2; Code 1983, § 9-221)
 
Sec. 10-116. Grounds for cancellation of license.
It is unlawful for any person to receive a license under the provisions of this division to fail or refuse to give to the city clerk or any person designated by him for that purpose, all the facts connected with the stock of goods, wares and merchandise on hand, or the proper information regarding goods sold, or any other information that he may require in order that he may make a thorough investigation of all phases connected with this sale. The failure to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be sufficient grounds for the cancellation of license issued under the provisions hereof. 
(Prior Code, § 7-2.5; Code 1983, § 9-222)
 
Secs. 10-117—10-145. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. PRIVATE SECURITY OFFICERS
 
Sec. 10-146. Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to provide the procedures for licensing and regulation of private security officers or organizations offering their services as independent contractors within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9-301; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-147. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guard service means stationary armed guards serving private citizens at a particular and specified place or location. 
Patrol service means motorized armed patrol serving private citizens or companies in a specified geographical area, which area shall be established by naming the streets forming the exterior boundaries of the area served. 
Permanent security service means regularly armed scheduled service furnished hourly, daily, weekly, monthly or for any other period at a specified place area or location. 
Private security company means any organization or security system offering services as an independent contractor and employing armed security officers who are commissioned under the provisions of this chapter. A one-man operation shall not be considered a private security company. 
Private security officer means any officer commissioned to provide patrol or guard service as an independent contractor and under the provisions of this chapter who shall be authorized to carry firearms. 
Temporary security service means service not offered on a regular armed scheduled basis. 
(Code 1983, § 9-302; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-148. Commissions.
The chief of police, subject to the provisions of this division, is authorized to grant commissions to private officers and permits to private security companies in the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9-303; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-149. Applications and processing fees.
Each individual applicant for appointment for commission shall make written application on forms available at the police department. A fee as provided in the city fee schedule shall be charged for processing. Each private security company applying for a permit to furnish service within the city shall make written application on forms available at the police department. A fee as provided in the city fee schedule per annum per company shall be charged for processing. 
(Code 1983, § 9-301; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-150. Contents of applications.
Applications for commissions or permits shall contain the following information: 
(1)	For private security officer for guard service: 
a.	Company, if any, employing the applicant; 
b.	A standard personal history statement completed on a form provided by the chief of police; and 
c.	Such other and additional information deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(2)	For private security company permit for guard service: 
a.	Names of the officers, principals, or resident managers of the company; 
b.	A standard personal history statement completed on a form provided by the chief of police; and 
c.	Such other and additional information deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(3)	For private security officer commission for patrol service: 
a.	The specific places or area where services would be rendered; 
b.	Hours of the day when services would be rendered if the applicant is self-employed; and 
c.	A standard personal history statement completed on a form provided by the chief of police. 
(4)	For private security company permit for patrol service: 
a.	The names of the officers, principals or resident managers of the company; 
b.	A standard personal history statement completed on a form provided by the chief of police; and 
c.	The specific area or properties where the service would be furnished and the hours of the day that service would be furnished. 
(Code 1983, § 9-305; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-151. Time and place of permanent security service.
The chief of police shall designate the specific place or area and hours of the day that each private officer or company may furnish permanent security patrol service. 
(Code 1983, § 9-306; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-152. Restrictions on commissioned private officers.
Duly commissioned private officers or private security companies shall at all times service only the place or specifically defined area where they are authorized to serve under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1983, § 9-307; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-153. Application for changes in service areas.
(a)	Before a private security officer or company performing patrol service may service additional areas, application for permission must be made to and approved by the chief of police. 
(b)	Before a private security officer or company performing guard service may furnish permanent security service at an additional place or location, notification must be made to the chief of police. 
(c)	Before a private security officer or company shall furnish temporary security service at an additional place or location, the chief of police, or his designated representative, shall be notified of the company or officer, the place or location and the anticipated duration of service. 
(d)	When permanent service is discontinued in an area or at a location, written notification will be sent to the chief of police. 
(Code 1983, § 9-308; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-154. Annual application required for commission and permits.
Reapplication shall be made annually for each commission and permit. The application for renewal need not be processed, but shall be filed with the police department, by April 15. Unless the applications are received by April 15, the commissions or permit shall be terminated without further action on May 1. 
(Code 1983, § 9-309; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-155. Bond requirements.
Prior to the issuance of a commission, each individual applicant shall file with the city clerk a surety bond or certificate of insurance of general liability in the amount of $10,000.00, made by a duly qualified bonding or insurance company licensed to do business in the state. Each company filing an application may file a $10,000.00 bond or certificate of insurance which shall be renewed and filed annually with the application for renewal. A copy of a general liability bond or certificate of insurance on file with the state will satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 9-310; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-156. Investigation, interview, and persons ineligible for commissions.
(a)	Prior to the issuance of a commission, the police department shall conduct a complete background inquiry of the applicant, and the applicant shall be personally interviewed by the chief of police or his representative and the applicant's photograph and fingerprints shall be obtained. 
(b)	Each applicant will be interviewed as to his ability to safely handle firearms. 
(c)	It is the duty of the chief of police to refuse such commissions to all persons having been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or of the United States, or any offense involving moral turpitude, and to all minors, drug addicts, habitual drunkards, unnaturalized foreign born persons, and such other persons as he has reasonable cause to believe are not qualified. 
(Code 1983, § 9-311; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-157. Orientation required.
A commissioned private officer shall attend those classes of orientation reasonable and appropriate to his service to be rendered, as designed by the chief of police and given by his designated representative. 
(Code 1983, § 9-312; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-158. Rules and regulations.
The chief of police shall promulgate and publish those additional rules and regulations consistent with this division and as may be necessary to its implementation. Copies shall be furnished to applicants upon request. 
(Code 1983, § 9-313; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-159. Appointments of time.
If the chief of police, subject to the requirements contained herein, finds an applicant eligible for commission, the applicant may be appointed as a private officer to serve in accordance with this division. The chief of police shall act on applications and applications for renewal within 15 business days from the time of submission of the application. 
(Code 1983, § 9-314; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-160. Suspension or revocation of commission or permit.
The commissions of any private security officer or permit of any private security company may be suspended or revoked at any time by the chief of police for violation of any of the requirements necessary for a commission or permit or for violation of any rule or regulation established pursuant to this division. Upon a violation occurring, the chief of police or his representative shall give the private security officer or private company notice of any suspension or revocation hearing at least five days prior to the date of the public hearing, and such notice shall be furnished by mail. The suspension or revocation hearing will be conducted by a two-member board consisting of the chief of police or his representative, and the city manager or his representative. 
(Code 1983, § 9-315; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-161. No authority to arrest.
A duly commissioned private officer is not a member of the police department and shall not have the authority of a police officer. He shall, while on duty at his assigned place, have the right to carry a pistol or revolver and make arrests only as a private citizen is granted authority by state statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 9-316; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-162. Badge and uniform.
A duly commissioned private officer, when on duty, shall have on his person his commission and shall wear uniform, badge or other emblems of authority as approved by the chief of police, which shall in any event be clearly distinctive and different from that of regular city officers and shall designate the officer as a "private officer," "security officer" or "security service." 
(Code 1983, § 9-317; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-163. Non-liability of city.
Any commissioned private officer, when on duty as a private officer, shall not be an agent, servant or employee of the city, and the city shall not be liable for his actions to third parties, nor shall the city be liable for any injury or damage he might suffer. 
(Code 1983, § 9-318; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Sec. 10-164. License expiration.
Licenses issued under this division shall expire on April 30 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 9-319; Ord. No. 64A, 8-8-1974)
 
Secs. 10-165—10-181. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. PRIVATE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM INSTALLERS
 
Sec. 10-182. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Small sewage treatment system includes any septic tank, subsurface absorption field and open intermittent sand filter as described in the state department of health engineering bulletin number 0575. 
(Code 1983, § 9-401; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-183. License required.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to install, construct, repair or extend any small sewage treatment system within the city without first having been qualified and licensed to install small sewage treatment systems in accordance with the provisions of this division; provided, however, that such license shall not be required of any person holding a current plumbing contractor's license. 
(Code 1983, § 9-402; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-184. Examination and certificate.
(a)	The city manager is hereby empowered to prepare and administer an examination for applicants for a license to install small sewage treatment systems and determine whether such applicant has adequate knowledge of the design, construction, operation and use of small sewage treatment systems, for the purpose of installing, constructing or repairing such systems. 
(b)	If it is determined that such applicant is qualified, the city manager shall issue a certificate to that effect. 
(Code 1983, § 9-403; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-185. License; issuance; expiration; renewal.
(a)	The city manager, upon application and receipt of the fee provided for herein, shall issue a license for the installation of small sewage treatment systems to any person who holds a certificate from the city manager to the effect that such applicant is qualified for such license. 
(b)	A license may be applied for and secured at any time during the year but in no event shall the fee for such license be less than for a full year. All licenses shall expire on the last day of April and may be renewed without penalty within 90 days after the expiration thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 9-404; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-186. Bond.
(a)	Before a license is issued or renewed, each applicant shall give and keep in force, for the entire duration of such license, a bond with approved sureties, running to the city. The bond shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 and shall be conditioned that the licensee will comply with the provisions and requirements of this and other ordinances and regulations of the city. All such bonds shall also provide that the principal or licensee shall save harmless the city from any and all damages resulting from or in any way growing out of any injury or damage received by anyone due to the negligence or unskilled work on the part of the licensee, their agents or employees. All such bonds shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city council as to sufficiency and the same shall then be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)	The bond requirements of this section shall not apply to nor be required of those persons installing a small sewage treatment system for the personal use and benefit of the person and his family nor shall a bonded plumbing contractor be required to comply with this section. 
(Code 1983, § 9-405; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-187. Permit required.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to install, construct, repair or extend any small sewage treatment system within the city without first having obtained a permit from the city manager for such installation, construction, repair or extension, paying the fees for such permit as provided for herein and complying with the provisions of this and all other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9-407; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-188. Specifications and requirements.
Any small sewage treatment systems installed, constructed, repaired or extended under this chapter shall comply with the minimum specifications and requirements of the state department of health engineering bulletin number 0575 or its successor, a certified copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 9-408; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-189. Inspections required.
It is unlawful and an offense to use or operate any small sewage treatment system installed, constructed, repaired or extended hereunder without first having been inspected and approved by the city manager. The fee for such inspection is provided for herein and shall be paid at the time the permit is obtained. An additional fee shall be required in advance for each additional inspection required until the disposal system being inspected is approved. 
(Code 1983, § 9-409; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-190. Prepaid accounts.
(a)	License holders under this division shall have the option of establishing a prepaid account for percolation test, permit and inspection fees, with the city manager or pay for percolation test, permits and inspections on an individual basis. A prepaid account may be established by making application to the city manager and depositing in advance, not less than $50.00 with the city treasurer. 
(b)	With the establishment of a prepaid account, the licensee may telephone in request for a percolation test, permit or inspection and will not be required to come to the office of the city manager, provided that sufficient funds are on hand in the licensee's account to cover such cost. 
(Code 1983, § 9-410; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 10-191. Fees and permit charges.
The charges levied for permits and tests under this division as provided in the city fee schedule: 
(Code 1983, § 9-411; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Secs. 10-192—10-220. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 6. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS OR CANVASSERS
 
Sec. 10-221. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler includes the terms "hawker" and "huckster" and means any person, whether a resident of this city or not, who travels by foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise of whatsoever nature, offering and exposing the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from any vehicle or conveyance or on any public street or thoroughfare. 
Solicitor or canvasser means a person, whether a resident of this city or not, who travels by foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of whatsoever nature for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
(Code 1983, § 9-501; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-222. Exclusions.
(a)	The following persons or entities are hereby specifically excluded from the terms of the definitions given in section 10-221. They must however, make application for and secure a permit. No fee will be charged for such permit. 
(1)	Persons engaged in selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such property; 
(2)	Merchants having regular places of business in the city, and their employees, in taking orders at the houses of their customers for goods held in stock at such places of business, and in delivering the goods so ordered; 
(3)	Newspaper persons selling newspapers; 
(4)	Milk delivery men operating in compliance with the city-county health regulations; 
(5)	Any other delivery man delivering foodstuffs on a regular daily route, from house to house, operating in compliance with city-county health regulations; and 
(6)	Any church, synagogue, school, civic or charitable organization, etc. 
(Code 1983, § 9-502; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-223. Duty of police to enforce.
It is the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen peddling, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his peddler's permit and to enforce the provisions of this division against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1983, § 9-503; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-224. Permit required.
No person or any agency or employee thereof shall engage in the business of peddler, solicitor, canvasser, hawker or huckster as defined herein without first obtaining a permit therefor as herein provided, and paying the prescribed fees for same. 
(Code 1983, § 9-504; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-225. Application for permit required.
The applicant for a permit hereunder shall file with the city clerk in duplicate a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)	Name and brief description of applicant; 
(2)	Address, both legal and local; 
(3)	Nature of business, kinds of goods to be sold and, if applicant is a farmer or truck gardener, whether the goods are produced by him on lands he owns, cultivates and controls; 
(4)	If employed by another, the name and address of applicant's employer together with a brief description of credentials showing the exact relationship; 
(5)	Length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)	Description and license number or other identification of any vehicle to be used; and 
(7)	Applicants will be fingerprinted and photographed at a cost as provided by the city fee schedule before a license is issued. 
(Code 1983, § 9-505; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-226. Minimum age.
No permit hereunder shall be issued to any person under the age of 16 years. It is unlawful for any permittee hereunder to employ, apprentice, engage or to suffer, cause or allow any minor under the age of 16 years to be employed, apprenticed or engaged, either as a huckster, peddler, hawker, helper or solicitor in connection with the business permitted hereunder. 
(Code 1983, § 9-506; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-227. Investigation; issuance of permit.
Upon receipt of an application for a permit hereunder, the city clerk shall refer to the applicant and one copy thereof to the chief of police, who shall note thereon any record concerning the applicant and conduct such investigation as he deems necessary and return to the city clerk. The city clerk shall cause such other investigation or inquiry to be made concerning the applicant as he may deem necessary to determine the character and business responsibility of the applicant, and whether his application is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. If as a result of such investigation the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory and the application is in compliance with the terms and conditions herein, the city clerk, upon payment of the prescribed permit fee, shall issue the permit together with any badge, tag or plates properly an accompaniment thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 9-507; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-228. Appeal.
Any person denied a permit issuance or renewal under this division may appeal to the city council within ten days of denial by making written application to the clerk of the court. Upon receipt of the appeal, the clerk shall place the matter on the agenda for the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days from the date of filing of the appeal. 
 
Sec. 10-229. Permit fees.
Fees for permits under this division shall be as provided in the city fee schedule; however, nothing in this division shall require the payment of a fee by persons selling only grains, vegetables and articles of their own raising. 
(Code 1983, § 9-508; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-230. Free permits; rebates.
Except as provided in section 10-222, no free permits shall be granted nor rebates allowed for any cause, nor any sum accepted less than the amount herein specified, for a shorter period than therein required. 
(Code 1983, § 9-509; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-231. Regulations for issuing permits.
(a)	Fee prerequisite to permit. Except as provided in section 10-222, no permit shall be issued until the amount prescribed therefor shall have been paid to the city clerk. 
(b)	Permits not to be prorated, returned, transferred. No permit shall in any case be prorated, returned or transferred from person to person. 
(c)	Signing, sealing of permits. Permits shall be signed by the city clerk and the clerk shall affix the corporate seal of the city thereto. 
(d)	Expiration. All permits except as otherwise provided shall expire on December 31 next after the same are issued, provided that all permits that are issued for six months shall expire on June 1 and December 1 next after same are issued. 
(Code 1983, §§ 9-510—9-513; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Sec. 10-232. Duty to exhibit permit; misuse of permit prohibited; use of streets.
(a)	Duty to exhibit. Peddlers are required to exhibit their permits at the request of any citizen. 
(b)	Misuse. No permit or badge issued under the provisions of this division shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(c)	Use of streets. No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall he be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations may impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this division, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Code 1983, §§ 9-514—9-516; Ord. No. 237-A, 1-21-1986)
 
Secs. 10-233—10-257. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 7. RETAIL MERCHANTS SUBLETTING TO MULTIPLE BUSINESSES
 
Sec. 10-258. License tax or fee.
Merchants, retail, all kinds, which sublet to multiple business users, pursuant to sections 10-19 through 10-28, shall pay to the city a license tax or fee as set forth in section 10-28 per day for any space sublet to multiple business users. 
(Code 1983, § 9-601; Ord. No. 338-4-95, 8-10-1995)
 
Sec. 10-259. Definitions.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Multiple business users means more than one lessee or sublessee leasing space for business purposes from merchants, retail, all kinds, as provided in section 10-28, if such lessee or sublessee leases and utilizes such space for periodic short intervals of time, such as, for example, but not limited to, per day or per week, regardless of the duration of the lease or sublease agreement between the merchant, owner or operator and the lessee or sublessee. 
Swap meet orflea market means merchants, retail, all kinds, which sublet to multiple business users. The owner or operator of any swap meet or flea market within the city shall pay to the city a license tax or fee as set forth in section 10-28 per day for each booth, stall or space leased or subleased to vendors or sellers utilizing the facilities of such swap meet or flea market. 
(b)	Payment of the daily license tax or fee by the merchant, retail, all kinds, which sublet to multiple business users, or the owner or operator thereof, shall not be required for any day its space, booths or stalls are not leased, subleased or utilized by its lessees or sublessees. 
(Code 1983, § 9-602; Ord. No. 338-4-95, 8-10-1995)
 
Sec. 10-260. Revocation of licenses.
The city may revoke any license of the owner or operator of any merchants, retail, all kinds which sublet to multiple business users within the city, if the licensee refuses or fails to comply with this division, or any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of merchants, retail, all kinds which sublet to multiple business users, including refusal to allow inspection of the establishment as provided by city codes or ordinances. Upon revocation, the licensee shall immediately cease operation. 
(Code 1983, § 9-603; Ord. No. 338-4-95, 8-10-1995)
 
Secs. 10-261—10-283. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 8. GARAGE SALES
 
Sec. 10-284. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sale means any sale of what is held out to be or is commonly known as yard, porch, room, backyard, or patio sale or another type of general sale conducted from residences within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9-701; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-285. Permit required.
No person shall hold, conduct, engage in, or participate in any manner in a garage sale or other type of sale referenced in section 10-284 without submitting an application for a permit for same. A separate permit application shall be required for each location at which a garage sale is to be held. 
(Code 1983, § 9-702; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-286. Permit fee.
The fee for a garage sale shall be as set forth in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 9-703; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-287. Issuance of permit.
The city clerk or the clerk's designee is hereby authorized to grant a permit for garage sales for a period not to exceed three consecutive days to any person applying who otherwise complies with the requirements of this division. The city clerk or a designee may conduct an investigation as may be reasonably necessary to determine if there is compliance with this division. 
(Code 1983, § 9-704; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-288. Intervals between sales.
No person shall hold, conduct, engage in or participate in any manner or allow a garage sale to be held or conducted on premises under his control or ownership more than once in a 30-day period unless otherwise the provisions for inclement weather apply. 
(Code 1983, § 9-705; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-289. Rain checks for garage sale permits.
If the garage sale permit is issued and the sale is terminated during the first day of the sale due to inclement weather conditions, the city clerk or the clerk's designee may issue another permit to the applicant for another garage sale to be conducted at the same location within 30 days from the date when the first sale was to be held for no additional charge. 
(Code 1983, § 9-706; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-290. Signs.
Signs announcing garage sales must be removed within 24 hours of the completion of the sale. 
(Code 1983, § 9-707; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-291. Display of goods.
The sale area of any residential sale shall be confined to the premises for which the license has been issued. 
(Code 1983, § 9-708; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-292. Collection of sales tax on garage sales.
Citizens that have been granted a garage sale permit shall be required to file a sales tax report to the state tax commission within 30 days following the last day of the garage sale. 
(Code 1983, § 9-709; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Sec. 10-293. Exemptions.
Charitable organizations conducting sales on their premises when all gross sales from the sale are used directly for charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis, auctions, and persons acting pursuant to a court of competent jurisdiction shall be exempt from section 10-286 and section 10-292. Charitable organizations shall be required to show proof of nonprofit status. 
(Code 1983, § 9-710; Ord. No. 442-07-04, 4-19-2004)
 
Secs. 10-294—10-320. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 9. RENTAL PROPERTY REGISTRY
 
Sec. 10-321. Scope.
(a)	This division shall apply to any structure or part thereof that is let for occupancy by persons other than the owner pursuant to an oral or written rental or lease agreement regardless as to any monetary or other valuable consideration. Such structures shall include all residential uses or structures, including manufactured homes, whether purpose-built or converted, whether attached or unattached, regardless of zoning district, which are being used as rental housing. 
(b)	This division shall not apply to buildings or building areas described in one or more of the following subsections: 
(1)	Hotel, motel, dorm, medical or long-term care facilities, bed and breakfast establishments, group homes or assisted living group homes zoned as such; 
(2)	A dwelling unit that constitutes the owner's principal residence; 
(3)	A single-family detached dwelling owned by an express private trust duly registered under the laws of the state that is occupied by an individual who is designated a trustee, a designated beneficiary or the person named within a living trust; or 
(4)	A single family detached dwelling owned by an individual which is not designated for tax purposes as a rental property and within which an immediate family member, within one degree of consanguinity, resides without payment of rent or other tangible compensation. 
(c)	In order to qualify for an exemption under the provisions under this section, the city may require the filing of an affidavit of exemption signed by an owner or legally designated representative of the owner, along with proof attached to such affidavit in support of the exemption. 
(d)	This diision shall be governed and administered in conjunction with the provisions of the most recently adopted version of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the Midwest City Council. 
(Ord. No. 543-12-11, § 1(5-2001), 1-19-2012)
 
Sec. 10-322. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in the International Property Maintenance Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated therein. 
Local agent means an individual representing the owner, operator, manager or other agency. 
Multi-housing unit means apartment complexes designed for multifamily dwelling. 
Purpose built multi-unit housing means any building that was originally built for the purpose of multi-unit (two or more units) housing. 
Rental housing orrental property means any structure or part thereof which is let for occupancy by persons pursuant to an oral or written rental or lease agreement regardless as to any monetary or other valuable consideration required of any occupant therein. 
Semi-detached housing or semi-detached family dwelling includes those rental dwelling units to include duplexes, townhomes, condominiums which are non-owner occupied, and any other rental dwelling units that do not include those dwellings defined as single-family detached dwellings or multi-housing units. 
Single-family detached dwelling means a dwelling unit designed for single-family occupancy with no other family dwelling units attached. 
(Ord. No. 543-12-11, § 1(5-2002), 1-19-2012)
 
Sec. 10-323. Single-family detached dwelling and semi-detached family dwelling rental registration.
(a)	Requirements. After January 1, 2012, it shall be unlawful for any owner of rental property to lease or operate residential rental property without registering each rental property with the city, designating a local agent, and complying with the provisions of this division, together with all other applicable ordinances of the city. Every owner of any rental dwelling unit is required to register the rental property pursuant to this ordinance and shall comply with the following: 
(1)	All existing rental property shall be registered by July 1, 2012. The registration shall be valid for a one-year period and shall be renewed annually by August 1 of each year. 
(2)	A valid registration shall be non-transferable when the owner of a rental property changes during the course of the year. The new owner must re-register each rental property within 30 days of the date of the sale or closing. New owners of rental property are responsible for the completion of the re-registration process. 
(3)	All newly constructed residential structures which are to be used as rental housing, including those that are legally being converted from owner-occupied housing to rental housing, shall be registered prior to any use or occupancy as rental housing. 
(4)	The owner must designate a local agent and/or service agent if the owner of such subject rental property does not reside within the county. When the owner is a corporation, partnership, trust, or other non-individual legal entity, a local agent and/or service agent shall also be designated. The owner is required to designate a local agent and/or service agent at the time of registration and each subsequent re-registration, designating an individual with a physical address within the county or within an immediately adjacent county to Oklahoma County to accept service of legal process on behalf of the owner. The registration shall require the signature of the designated individual who shall be the local agent and/or service agent. The local agent and/or service agent shall be responsible for the conveyance of all notices, orders, and citations relative to property maintenance to the owner and shall answer on behalf of the owner for the purpose of responding to notices, orders or citations and appearance for hearings. An individual owner may designate himself as his own local agent if he resides within the county or within a county immediately adjacent to Oklahoma County. 
(b)	Process.
(1)	Registration forms shall be made in such form as prescribed by the city clerk and in accordance with instructions as may be provided by the city clerk and shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
a.	The name of the owner of the property, including the trustee if the ownership is a trust, the officers' or partners' names if the ownership is a corporation or partnership, and their related contact information; 
b.	The name of the person authorized to manage the rental property and their related contact information; 
c.	The name of the individual authorized to act for and on behalf of the owner for the purpose of receipt of service of process, and receiving and receipting for notices, including their related contact information if different from subsection (b) above; and 
d.	The address of all residential rental properties and number of units therein associated with each ownership. 
(2)	The owner of the rental property must keep the information required to be furnished by this section current and the owner shall notify the city of any change in the information within ten days. Changes in the registration information shall be submitted in writing to the city, identifying the address of such rental dwelling property. 
(3)	The registration form for rental properties may be completed by the local agent if authorized by the property owner in writing. 
(4)	The city shall issue an acknowledgment of registration upon submission of a properly completed registration form with all required information and payment of all required fees. 
(c)	Fees.
(1)	There shall be no fee assessed for the initial registration process during the first effective year of registration, provided a registration form has been submitted with all required information by July 1, 2013. Thereafter, for each registration submitted after that initial date or for each registration renewal that is due by July 1 of each subsequent year, an annual fee as provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid. There will be no proration of this fee. There shall be no fee for updating registration information provided within the one-year duration of a valid registration. A late fee as provided in the city fee schedule may be assessed for late registrations or renewals. Late registration fees shall be assessed beginning August 1 of each calendar year. 
(2)	Registration fees may be waived for active duty military personnel who receive permanent change of station orders as long as the below listed criteria are met. If the listed criteria are not met, the military personnel must pay the full registration or renewal fee as provided in the city fee schedule: 
a.	Owner of the dwelling intends to rent the dwelling; 
b.	Owner of the dwelling intends to reoccupy the dwelling as a primary residence upon completion of station duty; 
c.	Owner provides a copy to the city of the permanent change of station orders; 
d.	Owner does not own more than one dwelling within the city; 
e.	Renewal registration is submitted timely each calendar year, with a late fee as provided in the city fee schedule assessed if renewal is made after August 1 of any calendar year. 
(3)	Residential rental property is ineligible for new utility services until the rental registration is completed. 
(Ord. No. 543-12-11, § 1(5-2002), 1-19-2012)
 
Sec. 10-324. Multi-housing rental registration.
(a)	Requirements. After January 1, 2012, it shall be unlawful for any owner to lease or operate rental property without registering each rental property with the city, designating a local agent, and complying with the provisions of this division, together with all other applicable ordinances of the city. Every owner of a residential rental property must register the property pursuant to this division and shall comply with the following: 
(1)	The registration shall be valid for a one-year period and shall be renewed annually by July 1 each year. 
(2)	A valid registration shall be non-transferable if the owner of the rental property changes during the course of the year. The new owner shall be required to re-register each subject property within 30 days of the date of the sale or closing. New owners of rental property are responsible for the completion of the re-registration process. 
(3)	All newly constructed multi-housing structures that are to be used as residential rental property, shall be registered prior to any use or occupancy. 
(4)	A local agent is required to be designated if the owner of such subject rental property does not reside within the county. A local agent and/or service agent shall also be designated when the owner is a corporation, partnership, trust, or other non-individual legal entity. The owner is required to designate a local agent at the time of registration and each subsequent re-registration, designating an individual with a physical address within the county who shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the subject rental property as well as a person with a physical address designated to accept service of legal process on behalf of the owner. The registration shall require the signature of the designated individual who shall be the local agent and/or person to accept service of legal process. The local agent shall be responsible for the operation of the owner's residential rental properties located within the city pursuant to the registration. 
(b)	Process.
(1)	Registration forms shall be made in such form as prescribed by the city clerk and in accordance with instructions as may be provided by the city clerk and shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
a.	The name of the owner of the property, including the trustee if the ownership is a trust, the officers' or partners' names if the ownership is a corporation or partnership, and their related contact information; 
b.	The name of the person authorized to manage the rental property and their related contact information; 
c.	The name of the individual authorized to act for and on behalf of the owner for the purpose of receipt of service of process, and receiving and receipting for notices, including their related contact information if different from subsection (b) above; and 
d.	The address of all residential rental properties and number of units therein associated with each ownership. 
(2)	The owner of the residential rental property must keep the information required to be furnished by this section current and the owner shall notify the city of any change in the information within ten days. Changes in the registration information shall be submitted in writing to the city, identifying the address of such rental dwelling property. 
(3)	The registration form for rental properties may be completed by the responsible local agent if authorized by the property owner in writing. 
(4)	The city shall issue an acknowledgment of registration upon submission of a properly completed registration form with all required information and payment of all required fees. 
(c)	Fees.
(1)	There shall be no fee assessed for the initial registration process during the first effective year of registration, provided a registration form has been submitted with all required information by July 1, 2012. Thereafter, for each registration submitted after that initial date or for each registration renewal that is due by July 1 of each subsequent year, an annual fee as provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid for each rental unit within the multi-housing complex. There will be no proration of this fee. There shall be no fee for updating registration information provided within the one-year duration of a valid registration. A late fee as provided in the city fee schedule per unit may be assessed for late registrations or renewals. Late registrations fees shall be assessed beginning August 1 of each calendar year. 
(2)	All penalties and late fees must be paid prior to the issuance of a utility account of rental dwelling property on each and/or any individual unit. 
(Ord. No. 543-12-11, § 1(5-2003), 1-19-2012)
 
Sec. 10-325. Penalty.
(a)	Any owner of a residential rental property who fails to register each rental property, fails to maintain registration in compliance with this division, or fails to comply with any other provision of this division, the International Property Maintenance Code, or any other applicable ordinance, shall be guilty of an offense. Upon conviction, a fine as provided in the city fine schedule per unregistered residential rental property and the associated court costs may be assessed as directed by the municipal court. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate punishable offense. 
(b)	Failing to register or renew registration of a residential rental property shall be defined as any residential rental property not registered or renewed by August 1 of each calendar year. 
(c)	It is unlawful and shall be a violation of this division for any person to provide any false or inaccurate information on a rental registration form or for any person to file a rental registration form without the proper authority to do so. 
(Ord. No. 543-12-11, § 1(5-2004), 1-19-2012)
 
Sec. 10-326. Revocation.
The city may revoke a rental registration at any time for just cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	A finding that information submitted in a rental registration form is false; 
(2)	A rental property that has been registered has failed to comply with the requirements of this division on more than two occasions or the owner has been convicted of more than two violations of a city ordinance or the International Property Maintenance Code relative to any property maintenance issue within a single registration year; or 
(3)	Change of ownership of a registered rental property within the city. The revocation of a rental registration shall require the city to give notice to the last known and listed local agent within ten days of the effective date of the revocation, except where a change of ownership has occurred. The revocation of a rental registration shall not be subject to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 543-12-11, § 1(5-2005), 1-19-2012)
 
Chapter 12 COURTS AND JAILS
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 12-1—12-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. MUNICIPAL COURT
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 12-19. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the peace officer in charge of the police force of the city. 
Clerk means the city clerk, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office. 
Court means the municipal court of the city. 
Judge means the judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge or alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this article. 
Judicial district means the district court judicial district of the state wherein the government of this city is situated. 
(Code 1983, § 6-102; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-20. Organization of municipal court.
This article shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal criminal court of the city as put into operation by resolution duly passed on June 11, 1981, and filed in accordance with state law. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this article and the provisions of any ordinance of this city, the provisions of this article shall control. The court shall be operative on or after June 11, 1981. 
(Code 1983, § 6-101; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-21. Jurisdiction of court.
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this city is charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 1983, § 6-103; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Secs. 12-22—12-45. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. JUDGES
 
Sec. 12-46. Judge; qualifications.
There shall be one judge of the court who must be duly licensed to practice law in this state. The judge of the court may engage in the practice of law in other courts, but he shall not accept employment inconsistent with his duties as judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become the subject of proceedings therein. 
(Code 1983, § 6-104; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-47. Appointment of judge.
The judge of the court shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. A proposed appointment shall be submitted in writing to the city council at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and shall be acted upon at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The city council may decide upon the proposed appointment by a majority vote of a quorum present and acting. Failure of decision upon a proposed appointment shall not prevent action thereon at a later regularly scheduled meeting of the city council unless the mayor withdraws the proposed appointment. 
(Code 1983, § 6-105; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-48. Term of judge.
The official term of the judge shall be two years expiring on February 1 in each odd numbered year. Each judge, unless sooner removed for proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1983, § 6-106; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-49. Alternate and acting judges.
There shall be appointed for each judge of the court an alternate judge possessed of the same qualifications as the judge. His appointment shall be for the same term and made in the same manner as the judge. He shall sit as acting judge of the court in any case if the judge is: 
(1)	Absent from the court; 
(2)	Unable to act as judge; or 
(3)	Disqualified from acting as judge in the case. 
(Code 1983, § 6-107; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-50. Selection of acting judge.
If at any time there is no judge or alternate judge, duly appointed and qualified, available to sit as judge, the mayor shall appoint some person, possessing the qualifications required by this article for the judge, who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters until such time as a judge or alternate judge shall be available. 
(Code 1983, § 6-108; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-51. Salary and payments to judges.
(a)	A judge, other than an alternate judge or an acting judge, shall receive a salary as fixed by the city council, paid in the same manner as the salaries of other officials of this city. 
(b)	The city council shall provide for the compensation of an acting or alternate judge of the court, as required. 
(Code 1983, § 6-109; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-52. Removal of judge.
(a)	Judges shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a verified written petition setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by (i) the mayor; or (ii) 25 or more qualified electors of this city. Verification of the number or qualifications of electors shall be executed by one or more of the petitioners. 
(b)	The city council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally upon the judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, the judge shall be entitled to: 
(1)	Representation by counsel; 
(2)	Present testimony and to cross examine the witnesses against him; and 
(3)	Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing. 
So far as they can be applicable, the provisions of the state Administrative Procedures Act governing individual proceedings shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of the city council, in favor of such removal. 
(Code 1983, § 6-110; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-53. Vacancy in office of judge.
A vacancy in the office of judge shall be filled in the same manner as provided for the appointment of the judge in the first instance. 
(Code 1983, § 6-111; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Secs. 12-54—12-79. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. OTHER COURT PERSONNEL
 
Sec. 12-80. Court marshal, police chief.
All writs or processes of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to the chief of police, or to some other appropriate peace officer, who shall be the principal officer of the court. 
(Code 1983, § 6-114; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-81. Clerk of the court; duties.
(a)	The city clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be the clerk of the court. The clerk shall: 
(1)	Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in preparing writs, processes or other papers; 
(2)	Administer oaths required in proceedings before the court; 
(3)	Be responsible for the entry of all pleadings, processes, and proceedings in the dockets of the court; 
(4)	Perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct; and 
(5)	Receive and give receipt for forfeitures, fines, fees, deposits, and sums of money payable to the court. 
(b)	Such sums of money and funds shall be deposited and disbursed upon appropriate vouchers as directed by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 6-115; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-82. Prosecuting attorney; duties; conflict of interest.
The attorney for this city, or his duly designated assistant, shall be the prosecuting officer of the court. He shall prosecute all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his discretion, to prosecute and resist appeal, proceedings in error and review from this court to any other court of the state, and to represent this city in all proceedings arising out of matters in this court. 
(Code 1983, § 6-116; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-83. Bond of judge and court clerk.
The clerk of the court shall give bond in the form provided by 12 O.S. § 27-111, in a sum to be determined by the city council. When executed, the bond shall be submitted to the city council for approval. The city council may require that the judge, alternate judge and an acting judge, or any of them, give bond to the city. If bond is required, it shall be in an amount to be fixed by the city, conditioned in the same manner as the bond that is required of the clerk of the court. The bonds of the clerk and any judges shall be approved by the city. When approved, it shall be filed with the clerk of the city and retained in the city archives. 
(Code 1983, § 6-117; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Secs. 12-84—12-109. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. RULES OF PROCEDURE
 
Sec. 12-110. Rules of court.
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the ordinances of this city, for the proper conduct of the business of the court. 
(Code 1983, § 6-113; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-111. Change of venue, disqualification.
In prosecutions before the court no change of venue shall be allowed from the municipal court, but the judge before whom the case is pending may certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting under the same terms and conditions provided by law for courts of record. If a judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate or acting judge appointed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 6-112; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-112. Fees, fines and forfeitures.
All of the fees, fines and forfeitures which come into the municipal court shall be paid by the clerk of the court to the city treasurer. The treasurer shall credit such deposits to the fund designated by the city. The court clerk shall make duplicate receipts for the fees, fines and forfeitures collected by him, one of which shall be retained by the treasurer together with a detailed statement of the items of all costs, the style of the case in which they were paid, and the name of the party paying the same. 
(Code 1983, § 6-118; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-113. Enforcement of rules.
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against processes issued by him, in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 6-119; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-114. Written complaints to prosecute ordinance violations.
All prosecutions commenced in the municipal court shall be by complaint which shall be subscribed by the person making complaint and shall be verified before a judge, the court clerk, a deputy court clerk, or a police officer. However, no warrant for arrest shall be issued until the complaint has been approved by the municipal attorney or the judge of the court. All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances shall be styled: The City of Spencer vs. ___________ (naming the person or persons charged). 
(Code 1983, § 6-120; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-115. Fines in lieu of appearance.
The city council by ordinance may prescribe a schedule of fines which the defendant may pay in lieu of his appearance before the court and such payment shall constitute a final determination of the cause against the defendant. 
(Code 1983, § 6-121; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-116. Bail; release on own recognizance; traffic citations.
(a)	Whenever a resident is arrested for the violation of any ordinance, traffic or nontraffic, by a law enforcement officer, the officer shall immediately release such person if he acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it unless it reasonably appears to the officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others or damage to property if released or that the person will not appear in response to the citation. If such person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be compelled. 
(b)	Whenever a resident is arrested by a law enforcement officer for the violation of any ordinance and is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided in subsection (a) of this section, he shall be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or released on his own recognizance. 
(c)	Whenever a nonresident is arrested for a violation, other than a traffic violation, by a law enforcement officer, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail before or after arraignment. 
(d)	The city shall require a person who is arrested for a municipal traffic violation by a law enforcement officer to comply with the procedures provided in section 12-120 and by law in 22 O.S. § 1114.1 for state traffic violations with respect to release of the arrested person and the methods of posting bail. 
(e)	The amount and conditions of bail granted under subsection (b) and (c) of this section shall be determined by the judge who shall prescribe rules for the receipt of bail and for the release by recognizance. In the event of arrests at night, or other emergency, or when the judge is not available, the chief of police or his designated representative shall be authorized by the judge under such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the accused, but in no event shall the cash bond be more than the maximum fine provided by ordinance for each offense charged. The chief of police or his designated representative is authorized subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge to release a resident on his own recognizance. 
(Code 1983, § 6-123; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-117. Failure to appear according to terms of bond; forfeiture.
If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court or before the magistrate may be lawfully required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon the court minutes, thereby declaring the bond to be forfeited. Court costs shall be collectable from the proceeds of the bond. 
(Code 1983, § 6-124; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-118. Summons for arrest.
(a)	Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of any ordinance, the judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has given bond for appearance, he shall issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the court on a certain day, after the summons is served upon him, and including such other pertinent information as may be necessary. 
(b)	The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 6-125)
 
Sec. 12-119. Form of arrest warrant.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in the ordinances of this city, upon the filing of a complaint approved by the endorsement of the attorney of this city or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form: 
The City of Spencer to the Marshal of the Municipal Court of Spencer, Oklahoma. 
Complaint upon oath having this day been made by ___________ (naming complainant) that the offense of ___________ (naming the offense in particular but general terms) has been committed and accusing ___________ (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefore forthwith to arrest the above named defendant and bring ___________ before me, at the municipal courtroom, Witness my hand this ___ day of ___________, 20___. 
Judge of the Municipal Criminal Court 
Spencer, Oklahoma. 
(b)	It is the duty of the marshal, personally, or through a duly constituted member of the police force of this city, or through any other person lawfully authorized so to act, to execute a warrant as promptly as possible. 
(Code 1983, § 6-126)
 
Sec. 12-120. Bail procedures for traffic violations.
(a)	In addition to other provisions of law for posting bail, any person, whether a resident of this state or a nonresident, who is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a state traffic law or municipal traffic ordinance shall be released by the arresting officer upon personal recognizance if: 
(1)	The arrested person has been issued a valid license to operate a motor vehicle by this state, another state jurisdiction within the United States, or any party jurisdiction of the nonresident violator compact; 
(2)	The arresting officer is satisfied as to the identity of the arrested person; 
(3)	The arrested person signs a written promise to appear as provided for on the citation; and 
(4)	The violation does not constitute: 
a.	A felony; 
b.	Negligent homicide; 
c.	Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while impaired or under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating substances; 
d.	Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer; 
e.	Operating a motor vehicle without having been issued a valid driver's license, or while the license is under suspension, revocation, denial or cancellation; 
f.	An arrest based upon an outstanding warrant;. 
g.	A traffic violation coupled with any offense stated in subsections (a)(4)a through (a)(4)f of this section; 
h.	An overweight violation, or the violation of a special permit exceeding the authorized permit weight; or 
i.	A violation relating to the transportation of hazardous materials. 
(b)	If the arrested person is eligible for release on personal recognizance as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, then the arresting officer shall: 
(1)	Designate the traffic charge; 
(2)	Record information from the arrested person's driver's license on the citation form, including the name, address, date of birth, personal description, type of driver's license, driver's license number, issuing state, and expiration date; 
(3)	Record the motor vehicle make, model and tag information; 
(4)	Record the arraignment date and time on the citation; and 
(5)	Permit the arrested person to sign a written promise to appear as provided for in the citation. 
The arresting officer shall then release the person upon personal recognizance based upon the signed promise to appear. The citation shall contain a written notice to the arrested person that release upon personal recognizance based upon a signed written promise to appear for arraignment is conditional and that failure to timely appear for arraignment shall result in the suspension of the arrested person's driver's license in this state, or in the nonresident's home state pursuant to the nonresident violator compact. 
(c)	Procedures for arraignment, continuances and scheduling, timely appearances, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere, posting bail, payment of fines and costs, issuance of arrest warrants, and requests for suspension of driver's license, shall be required in, 22 OS §§ 1115.1 through 1115.5. 
(d)	A defendant released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before he is required to appear for arraignment by indicating such plea on the copy of the citation furnished to him or on a legible copy thereof, together with the date of the plea and his signature. The defendant shall be responsible for assuring full payment of the fine and costs to the court clerk. The defendant shall not use currency for payment by mail. If the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as provided for in this subsection, such plea shall be accepted by the court and the amount of the fine and costs shall be as prescribed by ordinance for the violation charged or as prescribed by the court. 
(e)	If, pursuant to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, the defendant does not timely elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere and fails to timely appear for arraignment, the court may issue a warrant for the arrest of the defendant and the municipal or district court clerk, within 120 calendar days from the date the citation was issued by the arresting officer, shall notify the state department of public safety that: 
(1)	The defendant was issued a traffic citation and released upon personal recognizance after signing a written promise to appear for arraignment as provided for in the citation; 
(2)	The defendant has failed to appear for arraignment without good cause shown; 
(3)	The defendant has not posted bail, paid a fine, or made any other arrangement with the court to satisfy the citation; and 
(4)	The citation has not been satisfied as provided by law. 
(f)	The court clerk shall request the state department of public safety to either suspend the defendant's driver's license to operate a motor vehicle in this state, or notify the defendant's home state and request suspension of the defendant's driver's license in accordance with the provisions of the nonresident violator compact. Such notice and request shall be on a form approved or furnished by the state department of public safety. The court clerk shall not process the notification and request provided for in this subsection if, with respect to such charges: 
(1)	The defendant was arraigned, posted bail, paid a fine, was jailed, or otherwise settled the case; 
(2)	The defendant was not released upon personal recognizance upon a signed written promise to appear as provided for in this section or if released, was not permitted to remain on such personal recognizance for arraignment; 
(3)	The violation relates to parking or standing, an overweight violation, an overweight permit, or the transportation of hazardous materials; or 
(4)	A period of 120 calendar days or more has elapsed from the date the citation was issued by the arresting officer. 
(g)	The court clerk shall maintain a record of each request for driver's license suspension submitted to the state department of public safety pursuant to the provisions of this section. When the court or court clerk receives appropriate bail or payment of the fine and costs, settles the citation, makes other arrangements with the defendant, or otherwise closes the case, the court clerk shall furnish proof thereof to such defendant, if the defendant personally appears, or shall mail such proof by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the defendant at the address noted on the citation or at such other address as is furnished by the defendant. Additionally, the court or court clerk shall notify the home jurisdiction of the defendant as listed on the citation, if such jurisdiction is a member of the nonresident violator compact, and shall in all other cases, notify the state department of public safety of the resolution of the case. The form of proof and the procedures for notification shall be approved by the state department of public safety; provided, however, the court or court clerk's failure to furnish such proof or notice in the manner provided for in this subsection shall in no event create any civil liability upon the court, the court clerk, the state or any political subdivision thereof, or any state department or agency or any employee thereof but duplicate proof shall be furnished to the person entitled thereto upon request. 
(Code 1983, § 6-127)
 
Sec. 12-121. Arraignment and pleadings by defendant.
Upon making his appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned. The arraignment shall be made by the court. The judge or the prosecuting attorney shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, including the right of trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, and the case is not for jury trial, the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date. 
(Code 1983, § 6-128; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-122. Procedure; judicial notice of statutes and ordinances; writs and processes.
The code or procedure in the municipal court, except as may be otherwise provided herein, shall be the same as is now provided by law for the trial of misdemeanors. The court shall take judicial notice of state statutes and the ordinances of the city in which it is located. Writs and processes of the court may be issued by the judge or clerk thereof to any proper officer. 
(Code 1983, § 6-129; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-123. Trial by jury and waiver.
(a)	In all prosecutions for violations of ordinances punishable by fine of more than $100.00, including costs, or by imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment, trial shall be by jury, unless waived by the defendant and the city. If trial by jury is waived, and for all other offenses, trial shall be to the court. 
(b)	A jury in the court shall consist of six jurors, good and lawful men or women, citizens of the county in which the court sits, possessing the qualifications of jurors in district court. A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the vote of five jurors. 
(c)	At arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he demands or waives trial by jury. His election shall be recorded in the minutes of the arraignment and entered on the docket of the court respecting proceedings in the case. 
(d)	An election waiving jury trial, made at arraignment, may be changed by the defendant at any time prior to the day for which trial by the court is set; an election demanding jury trial may be changed at any time prior to the commencement of proceedings to impanel the jury for the trial, but if that change occurs after the case has been set for jury trial, it may not thereafter be rechanged so as again to demand trial by jury. 
(Code 1983, § 6-130)
 
Sec. 12-124. Selection and summons of jurors.
Jurors in the municipal court shall be selected under the same terms and conditions as are provided for by law for the district courts. Upon written request of the judge of the municipal court for a stated number of jurors to the chief judge of the appropriate district court, it is the duty of the clerk of the district court to draw from the jury wheel a requested number of jurors in the same manner as is provided by law for the district court until the number requested, who from their addresses appear to reside within the city, is drawn, and to prepare a list of names drawn and certify such list to the judge of the municipal court. On completion of the draw, the clerk shall immediately return to the jury wheel all names drawn which are not placed on the certified list. The judge of the municipal court shall make written request to the chief judge of the district court for a stated number of additional jurors if, after allowance of claimed statutory exemptions, the listed number is found to be insufficient. Summons of the prospective jurors shall be issued as provided by law, and may be served in person by the chief of police or any member of the police force of the city, or may be served by the clerk of the municipal court by mail. 
(Code 1983, § 6-131; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-125. Fees and mileage for jurors.
Jurors shall receive for their services the sum of $12.50 per day, plus mileage at the rate of 20 cents per mile for each mile necessarily traveled by the most direct route in going to and from the court from their respective places of residence. The claims for such compensation shall show the location of the juror's residence and the route and miles traveled, and must be verified as other claims against the city are verified. Jurors shall be paid out of the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 6-132; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-126. Enforcement of payment of fines or costs by imprisonment; persons unable to pay.
If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a fine or costs or both, payment may be enforced by imprisonment until the same shall be satisfied at the rate of $5.00 per day. If the defendant is without means to pay the fines or costs, the municipal judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court of Oklahoma County where it shall be entered upon the district court docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court judgment. Thereupon the same remedies shall be available for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor. 
(Code 1983, § 6-133; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-127. Deferred sentence, suspension of judgment or costs, reconfinement, administration fee.
(a)	The judge of the municipal court imposing a judgment or sentence, at his discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce or suspend or defer the imposition of such sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation for a period not to exceed six months from the date of sentence, upon such terms or conditions as the court may specify. Procedures relating to suspension of the judgment or cost, or both, shall be as provided in 11 O.S. § 27-123. Upon completion of the probation term, the defendant shall be discharged without a court judgment of guilt, and the verdict, judgment of guilty or plea of guilty, shall be expunged from the record, and the charge dismissed with prejudice to any further action. Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of probation have been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty. 
(b)	The judge of the municipal court may continue or delay imposing a judgment or sentence for a period not to exceed six months from the date of sentence. At the expiration of such period of time, the judge may allow the charge to be amended to a lesser offense. 
(c)	If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee, in an amount not to exceed $100.00, may be imposed as additional court costs in the case. 
(Code 1983, § 6-134; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981; Ord. No. 261-A, 6-9-1988)
 
Sec. 12-128. Supervision of juveniles on parole or probation.
In addition to the duties otherwise provided by law, the judge, or some other person designated by the city council, shall be required to supervise all juveniles who are either on parole or serving probation terms or suspended sentences pronounced and adjudged by the municipal court. 
(Code 1983, § 6-135; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-129. Contempt of court.
The judge shall have power to enforce due obedience to orders, rules and judgments made by him and may fine or imprison for contempt offered to the judge while holding his court or to process issued by him in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 6-136; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-130. Fines and costs.
If judgment of conviction is entered, the clerk of the court shall tax the costs to the defendant in the sum as set by the court, which costs may not exceed $15.00, or the maximum amount set by state law, whichever is greater, all of which the defendant shall pay, in addition to any fine that may be imposed. In no event shall the total of fine and costs exceed that set out in section 1-8. Fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses as provided for in this article are payable by the defendant, in addition to any fine and costs assessed. 
(Code 1983, § 6-137; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981; Ord. No. 262-A, 6-9-1988)
 
Sec. 12-131. Appeals.
(a)	An appeal may be taken from a final judgment of the municipal court by the defendant by filing in the district court in the county where the situs of the city government is located within ten days from the date of the final judgment a notice of appeal and by filing a copy of the notice with the municipal court. In case of an appeal, a trial de novo shall be had, and there shall be a right to a jury trial, if the offense is punishable by a fine of more than $100.00, including costs. 
(b)	Upon conviction, at the request of the defendant, or upon notice of appeal being filed, the judge of the municipal court shall enter an order on his docket fixing an amount in which bond may be given by the defendant, in cash or sureties for cash in an amount of not less than $50.00 or more than $200.00; except that if the conviction involved a fine only, the amount of the bond shall be no greater than twice the amount of such fine. Bond shall be taken by the clerk of the court. Any pledge of sureties must be approved by the judge. 
(c)	Upon appeal being filed, the judge shall, within ten days thereafter certify to the clerk of the appellate court the original papers in the case. If the papers have not been certified to the appellate court, the city attorney shall take the necessary steps to have the papers certified to the appellate court within 20 days of the judgment, and failure to do so, except for good cause shown, shall be grounds for dismissal of the charge by the appellate court, the cost to be taxed to the city. The certificate shall state whether or not the municipal judge hearing the case was a licensed attorney in the state. 
(Code 1983, § 6-138; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Sec. 12-132. Witness fees.
(a)	Witnesses in any proceeding in the court other than the police officers or peace officers shall be entitled to $7.50 per each day of attendance, plus five cents for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance if their residence is outside the limits of the city. However, no witness shall receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for each witness to be summoned, but such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out: 
(1)	The names of no more than three witnesses; 
(2)	That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide the fees and mileage allowed by law; 
(3)	That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and 
(4)	That their attendance at the trial is necessary for his proper defense. 
(b)	The fees of such witnesses shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 6-139)
 
Sec. 12-133. Conduct of sessions of court; notice.
The judge of the municipal court shall conduct regular sessions of the municipal court. The regular court dates shall be on the first and third Tuesdays of each month commencing at 6:30 p.m. If any of these dates fall on a legal holiday, the judge may set a date in lieu of the holiday. Notice of the sessions shall be given as prescribed in the Oklahoma Open Meetings Law, 25 O.S. § 301 et seq. 
(Code 1983, § 6-140; Ord. No. 83A, 11-11-1976; Ord. No. 142A, 6-11-1981)
 
Chapter 14 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 14-1—14-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. LOCAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION
 
Sec. 14-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create an emergency management organization for the city to be prepared for, and to function in the event of, emergencies endangering the lives and property of the people of such city. The duty of such emergency management organization shall be the protection of the lives and health of the citizens of the city and of property rights, both private and public, and to perform all functions necessary and incident thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.1; Code 1983, § 13-301)
 
Sec. 14-20. Department of emergency management created.
There is hereby established under the executive branch of the government of the city a department of emergency management, which shall consist of: 
(1)	A director of emergency management who shall be nominated by the mayor of the city and serve at his pleasure; 
(2)	A emergency management advisory committee. This committee shall consist of the mayor as chairman and five members appointed by the mayor and serving at his pleasure. The committee shall select from its members a vice-chairman and secretary. It shall hold such meetings as are directed by the mayor or the director of emergency management. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.2; Code 1983, § 13-302)
 
Sec. 14-21. Director of emergency management; powers and duties.
The director of emergency management shall be the executive head of the department of emergency management, and shall be responsible for carrying out the emergency management program of the city. He shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. It shall be the duty of the director of emergency management, as soon as practicable after his appointment, to perfect an organization to carry out the purposes set forth in this article. He shall have all necessary power and authority to form committees or other bodies and to appoint and designate the chairman or chief officer of such bodies as may be necessary to perfect such an organization. He shall have such further duty and responsibility to cooperate with all emergency management agencies of other governmental units including the state and federal government. He shall be an officer of the city and shall have the power necessary to enforce the duties provided in the article. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.3; Code 1983, § 13-303)
 
Sec. 14-22. Further powers and duties.
The director of emergency management is further authorized to formulate written plans and gather information and keep written records thereof to govern the functions of the emergency management organization. He may carry out plans with the state officials of emergency management in cooperating with the federal government and to make available to the city and county program the benefits of Public Law 85-606, subject to the approval of the city council, the county, and the emergency management committee. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.4; Code 1983, § 13-304)
 
Sec. 14-23. Emergency management; emergency powers.
In the event of an enemy-caused emergency or emergency resulting from natural causes, the director of emergency management, after due authorization from the city council, shall have the power and authority to enforce all rules and regulations relating to emergency management and, if necessary, take control of transportation, communications, stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and public utilities for the purpose of protecting the civilian population. He shall cooperate in every way with the activities of other governmental agencies or emergency management organizations. If required by the mayor, he shall have control over any and all funds allocated from any source for the purpose of alleviating distress conditions in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.5; Code 1983, § 13-305)
 
Sec. 14-24. Enforcement of laws and ordinances.
The director of emergency management and other members of the emergency management organization created by him shall have the power and authority to enforce the laws of the state and ordinances of the city during the period of emergency, and shall at such time have the further power to make arrests for violations of such laws or ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.6; Code 1983, § 13-306)
 
Sec. 14-25. Service without compensation; not liable for injuries.
All members of the emergency management organization created hereunder shall serve without compensation, and the city shall not be liable for any personal injury received by any member of such organization while acting in line of duty. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.7; Code 1983, § 13-307)
 
Secs. 14-26—14-53. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. ALARM REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 14-54. Purpose and scope.
(a)	The purpose of this article is to enhance and protect the emergency services of the city. 
(b)	This article governs burglary, robbery and fire alarm systems, requires permits, establishes fees, provides for revocation of permits, provides for punishment of violations and establishes a system of administration. 
(c)	The provisions of this article shall apply only to systems located in whole or in part within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 13-601; Ord. No. 274-A, 4-13-1989)
 
Sec. 14-55. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means the code enforcement officer or his designee designated by the city manager to perform the administrative functions of this article. 
Alarm business oralarm industry means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility. The term "alarm business" or "alarm industry" does not include any person who installs his own alarm on his own property to protect his personal property. 
Alarm system means one or more devices designed to detect and signal unauthorized intrusion, entry, robbery, fire or other emergency condition, which signals are responded to by public law enforcement officers, fire department personnel, private security guards or security officers. This provision excludes systems installed in motor vehicles. 
Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
Audible alarm system means an alarm system not interconnected to an alarm business or the police service communication center, but is activated by sounding a bell, siren, or other device that makes an audible or visual signal at the location protected by the alarm system, indicating a need for police, fire or other emergency response. This provision excludes alarm systems installed within motor vehicles. 
Burglary alarm system means an alarm system signaling entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the alarm system. 
Enhanced 9-1-1 system means an emergency phone system which is designed to received emergency phone calls when the three-digit number 9-1-1 is dialed. The system places the person requesting emergency service in touch with fire, police and ambulance services by dialing a single number. 
False alarm means the activation of a burglary, robbery, fire or other alarm for the purpose of summoning emergency assistance or which causes the police or fire department to be summoned, at a time when no emergency exists. 
(1)	False alarms include those caused by: 
a.	Error or mistake; any action by any person, firm, corporation or other entity or agent thereof, owning or operating any dwelling, building or place which results in the activation of any alarm system when no emergency exists; 
b.	Malfunction; any activation of any alarm system caused by a flaw in the normal operation, design, installation, maintenance of the system, faulty equipment, change in environment or premises upon or within which the alarm system is operating; 
c.	Intentional misuse; any intentional activation of an alarm system when no burglary, robbery, vandalism, fire or other emergency is in progress. This article shall not apply to testing during installation and regular maintenance when the user notifies the police service in advance and receives permission for the test; 
(2)	Exceptions. An alarm will not be considered a false alarm if it is determined that the alarm was the result of: 
a.	Natural or manmade catastrophe, or an act of God. Such events include tornadoes, floods or other similarly violent conditions; 
b.	Vandalism causing physical damage to the premises; 
c.	Attempted entry of a location causing visible, physical or other evidence of damage to the location; 
d.	Severe weather causing physical damages to the premises; or 
e.	If the alarm user calls the police service and cancels the alarm before the police department responds by using his personal identification number assigned when the alarm permit was issued. 
Fire alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of fire or other activity requiring urgent attention and to which the fire department personnel are expected to respond. This provision excludes alarm systems installed within motor vehicles. 
Interconnect means to connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system. 
Robbery alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Telephone dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for police, fire or medical response. 
User fee means the amount assessed to alarm users for false alarm responses in excess of the maximum number allowed in any one fiscal year. The fee is figured on a per response basis for false alarms as defined in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 13-602)
 
Sec. 14-56. Alarm user permits required, for display of permit.
(a)	Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user's permit for each type of alarm, from the alarm administrator or his designee, upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and prior to the use of the alarm. Application for a burglary, robbery, holdup or fire alarm user's permit and a fee as set by the city for each type of system at each residence, business, or other facility, except as excluded by this article, shall be filed with the city every fiscal year. The permit application shall include information as to the number of and type of alarms installed, alarm company providing the service, monitoring agent and numbers to be called in the event an emergency shall occur. Permits are also required for audible alarms and alarms with automatic dialing devices attached. This provision does not pertain to alarm systems installed within motor vehicles. Each approved application and permit shall bear the signature of the alarm administrator or his designee. 
(b)	A charge set by the city will be added to the fee provided for in subsection (a) of this section if a user fails to renew a permit or obtain a permit upon installation of an alarm system. 
(c)	An alarm user which is a governmental unit, and persons 62 years of age or older, whose alarm system is installed on the lot or parcel hosting their primary permanent residence, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter; but a permit will be issued without payment of the fee provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)	Every alarm user shall display all permit stickers for the current year. 
(1)	These stickers shall be located on the front of any facility containing such alarm so that such stickers will be readily noticeable and available for viewing by police, fire, or other emergency personnel responding to an alarm; and 
(2)	Containing such other supplemental information regarding the alarm system as may be requested, in advance during normal business hours, by the alarm administrator or police or fire chiefs or their designated representatives. 
(Code 1983, § 13-603)
 
Sec. 14-57. Alarm business.
(a)	Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm system which is installed on the user's premises, shall furnish the user with instructions that provide adequate information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the alarm system. 
(b)	No business or individual shall operate within the city limits who offers alarm equipment for sale or lease, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, replacement or service without a state license, as required by 59 O.S. § 1800.6. 
(c)	Every business providing any of the following alarm services: 
(1)	Installing; 
(2)	Maintenance; 
(3)	Modifying; 
(4)	Repairing; 
(5)	Selling; or 
(6)	System monitoring; 
shall be required to register with the city for each fiscal year (commencing on each July 1 and continuing through the following June 30) the numbers and copies of state licenses of the company or individuals providing alarm service to the user. If monitoring services are provided the alarm company must furnish a 24-hour-per-day phone number. Failure to register with the city shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13-604)
 
Sec. 14-58. Automatic dialing device; certain interconnections prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to any telephone line which, when activated, dials the digits 9-1-1. When a permit is issued, the alarm user will be given a phone number to be programmed into his system which goes directly to the police service communication center. It is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to dial the digits 9-1-1, or whose permit has been revoked, after receiving notice from the alarm administrator or his designee. 
(Code 1983, § 13-605)
 
Sec. 14-59. False alarms; user fee and permit revocation.
(a)	When records in the city's possession indicate that at least five false alarms have occurred within one fiscal year, the alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of the number of false alarms on record. The alarm user will also be notified that any more than ten responses to false alarms, as defined in section 14-55, in any one fiscal year will result in the alarm user being billed at the rate of $25.00 per false alarm response. 
(b)	When the city's records indicate ten false alarms within one fiscal year, the alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail of the number of false alarms on record. The alarm user will also be notified that, for the remainder of that fiscal year, responses to false alarms as defined in section 14-55 will result in the alarm user being billed $25.00 per response. 
(c)	The alarm administrator shall, in both his notifications by certified mail, per subsections (a) and (b) of this section, inform the alarm user of the revocation penalty, noted in subsection (d) of this section, and its applicability should future false alarm billings not be paid. 
(d)	If the amount billed to the alarm user for emergency responses to false alarms is not paid within 30 days of the statement date, the alarm administrator or his designee may revoke the alarm user's permit. 
(e)	The city's notice of revocation to the alarm user shall specifically state that the permit holder does have the right to appeal to the city manager, as noted in subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)	If the alarm user's permit is revoked, the alarm user may appeal the revocation to the city manager, provided such appeal is made within ten calendar days from the date of revocation. 
(g)	If the alarm user's permit is revoked, and the alarm user seeks to operate his alarm for the remainder of the fiscal year, the alarm user must first make application to the city and pay the appropriate fee. 
(h)	It shall be a violation of this article to operate an alarm system when the permit for that system has been revoked by the alarm administrator or his designee, and a new alarm permit has not yet been obtained. 
(i)	No alarm permit will be issued to an individual or business who owes billings to the city, which result from implementing the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 13-606)
 
Sec. 14-60. Enforcement and penalties.
Enforcement of this article will be the alarm administrator or his designee, or by the police and fire chiefs or their designees. 
(Code 1983, § 13-607)
 
Secs. 14-61—14-78. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. AMBULANCE SERVICES
 
Sec. 14-79. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambulance means any vehicle which is equipped to transport patients, in a reclining position, to or from healthcare facilities or providers. 
Base station physician means a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state, knowledgeable in the medical protocols, radio procedure and general operating policies of the ambulance system, and a person from whom ambulance personnel may take medical direction by radio or other remote communications device, who shall be approved by the medical director. 
EMS means emergency medical service. 
EMS control center orcontrol center means the single facility which is the central communications center from which all ambulances operating in the service area shall be dispatched and controlled, and which receives all 911 emergency medical calls. 
EMT (emergency medical technician), or variants thereof, have the meaning ascribed by state law. 
Emergency medical personnel means those persons as defined and described in 63 O.S. § 330.74 who shall have the authority to perform the acts described therein. 
First responder means any person, fire department vehicle, police vehicle or nontransporting ambulance unit capable of providing appropriate first responder service, under the first responder program administered by the medical director. 
Helicopter rescue unit means any rotary wing aircraft providing basic or advanced life support and transportation of patients. 
Medical director means the licensed physician serving as administrative officer in carrying out the duties described in section 14-80. 
Medical protocol means any diagnosis specific or problem oriented written statement of standard procedure, or algorithm, promulgated by the medical director as the medically appropriate standard of prehospital care for a given clinical condition. 
Mutual aid agreement means a written agreement between one or more providers of emergency medical services whereby the signing parties agree to lend aid to one another under conditions specified in the agreement and as approved by the medical director as to quality of care and medical accountability. 
Patient means an individual who is either ill, sick, injured, wounded, helpless or otherwise incapacitated, and who is in need of, or is at risk of needing, medical care or assessment during transport to or from a healthcare facility, and who is reclining or should be transported in a reclining position under applicable medical protocols. 
Permit means that document required to be obtained annually by each: 
(1)	Provider; 
(2)	Emergency medical personnel; and 
(3)	Ambulance under section 14-80(a)(3) or 14-84. 
Primary provider means a public or private ambulance service organization which has been designated by one or more governmental entities to provide emergency ambulance coverage throughout a defined geographic area. 
Priority type calls: 
(1)	Code 1 call means the nonemergent type of call. This call is made without the use of emergency equipment. A "nonemergency call" is any call that is a routine transport for either medically urgent or advanced scheduled and nonlife/nonlimb threatening. 
(2)	Code 3 call means an emergent type of call. This call is made with the use of emergency equipment (lights and sirens). An "emergency call" is defined as any request for ambulance services suspected of being life or limb threatening in nature, and requiring the immediate response of an ambulance provider. 
Provider means any ambulance operator granted a permit by this jurisdiction to provide ambulance service in the service area. 
Response time means the actual elapsed time between receipt of notification at the EMS control center that an ambulance is needed at a location and the actual arrival of an ambulance, staffed and equipped to operate at not less than the EMT/advanced level at that location within the service area. 
Response time standards means the response time for all emergency calls will be eight minutes or less, with a reliability of 90 percent or better, calculated, maintained and reported on a monthly basis. All nonemergent scheduled transfers shall be serviced within one hour of the scheduled time. 
Service area means that primary service area which is contained within the boundaries of the municipalities which have adopted and agreed to enforce this uniform ambulance code. 
System standard of care means the written body of standards and policies governing clinical aspects of the EMS system. As used in this context, the term "system standard of care" is a comprehensive term including: 
(1)	Input standards (e.g., personnel certification requirements, in service training requirements, equipment specifications, on board inventory requirements, and other requirements which the system must fulfill before receipt of a request for service); 
(2)	Performance standards (e.g., priority dispatching protocols and prearrival instructions, medical protocols, standing orders, response time standards, and other performance specifications describing how the system should behave upon receipt of a request for service); and 
(3)	Outcome standards are results the system intends to achieve by meeting its input and performance standards. 
System status plan means the dispatching plan and protocols which determine how many ambulances will be available for dispatch, protocols for event driven deployment and redeployment of those ambulances. 
(Code 1983, § 13-701; Ord. No. 288-A, 2-8-1990; Ord. No. 464-2-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 14-80. Medical director.
(a)	The medical director shall: 
(1)	Promulgate a system standard of care to include medical protocols designed to achieve a state of the art medical quality of emergency medical care within the service area; 
(2)	Prescribe EMS data system and reporting standards by rule or regulation; 
(3)	Prescribe and administer written and practical tests and criteria for the certification and licensing of emergency medical personnel and ambulance vehicles; and 
(4)	Prescribe and administer a first responder and an emergency medical technician/defibrillator (EMT/D) program. 
(b)	The salary of the medical director shall be borne pro rata by providers. 
(Code 1983, § 13-702; Ord. No. 288-A, 2-8-1990)
 
Sec. 14-81. Mandatory centralized dispatch.
(a)	All providers rendering emergency service under this chapter shall be dispatched and controlled through the city of Midwest City PSAP (public safety answering point). It shall be unlawful for any provider to publish or advertise any telephone number for the purposes of receiving requests for emergency ambulance service except the emergency number (911) of the PSAP. Requests for ambulance service received at the city PSAP will be transferred to the Midwest City emergency operations center. 
(b)	The PSAP shall, at all times, have the authority to direct the positioning, movements and run response of all ambulance units of all providers at all times. 
(Code 1983, § 13-703; Ord. No. 464-2-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 14-82. Mandatory EMS data system and reporting standards.
(a)	As a condition of maintaining its permit in good standing, each provider shall comply with the EMS data system and reporting standards as prescribed by the medical director. 
(b)	Failure to comply with data system and reporting requirements, or to keep the PSAP completely informed concerning the location and status of all units at all times, or failure to carry out PSAP directives shall constitute grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the provider's permit. 
(Code 1983, § 13-704; Ord. No. 288-A, 2-8-1990)
 
Sec. 14-83. Insurance requirements.
(a)	Each provider shall keep in full force and effect a policy of public liability and property damage insurance, issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state, with coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of the provider's ambulances, and providing that the amount of recovery shall be in limits of not less than the following sums: 
(1)	For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident, not less than $1,000,000.00; 
(2)	For damage arising out of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, not less than $1,000,000.00; 
(3)	For any injury to or destruction of property in any one accident, not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(b)	Each provider shall keep in full force and effect a general comprehensive liability and professional liability policy issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state, with coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any persons or property by reason of the actions of the provider or any of his employees, and providing that the amount of recovery shall be in limits of not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(c)	Each provider shall furnish, prior to issuance of its permit, original and duplicate certificates of insurance, which shall indicate the types of insurance, the amount of insurance and the expiration dates of all policies carried by the operator. Each certificate of insurance shall contain a statement by the insurer issuing the certificate that the policies of insurance listed thereon will not be canceled or mutually altered by said insurer absent 30 days' written notice received by the city. 
(d)	Cancellation or material alteration of a required insurance policy or coverage shall automatically revoke the provider's permit and the provider shall thereupon cease and desist from further ambulance service operations. 
(Code 1983, § 13-705; Ord. No. 288-A, 2-8-1990; Ord. No. 464-2-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 14-84. Ambulance permits.
(a)	No person shall provide ambulance service on an emergency or routine basis or transport or treat patients in an ambulance within this jurisdiction without first obtaining a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, except for those uses exempted below: 
(b)	No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual fee in the amount previously established by ordinance, for the right to engage in the ambulance business, and the amount established by ordinance each year for each vehicle bearing a vehicle permit authorized under ordinances. 
(c)	No permit shall be assignable or transferable by the person to whom issued, except as herein provided. 
(d)	No transfer or assignment of existing permits shall be effective absent the assent and approval of the city. 
(e)	Any transfer of shares of stock or interest of any person or provider so as to cause a change in the directors, officers, shareholders, or managers of such person or provider shall be deemed a transfer or assignment, subject to these provisions. 
(f)	The issuance of any permit by the city shall be made only to a provider holding a valid state permit, and such permit shall be conditioned upon written submission of and approval by the medical director of the following items: 
(1)	Pro forma system status plan which shall describe the applicant's system status plan, for the entire service area, and which shall include post locations and priorities, and which shall show assumed response time reliability based thereon; 
(2)	Pro forma medical quality assurance plan, which shall describe the applicant's medical quality assurance plan, and which shall demonstrate applicant's ability to deliver medical care meeting the system standard of care, as promulgated by the medical director; 
(3)	Pro forma staffing plan providing for staffing at not less than the EMT/paramedic level in accordance with state statutes; 
(4)	Pro forma equipment plan, which will show compliance with the state department of health requirements for paramedic life support service unit equipment and drugs. All drugs carried shall be described in the patient care protocols, and approved for use by the medical director. In addition to the described equipment and drugs, all units shall have the following diagnostic equipment: 
a.	Noninvasive cardiac pacemaker; 
b.	Portable ventilator and demand valve; 
c.	Pulse oximetry; 
d.	Electronic intravenous infusion control device; 
e.	Electronic blood flow detection device (Doppler); 
f.	Method for blood glucose determination; and 
(5)	Evidence of insurance, as required in section 14-83. 
(g)	Upon approval by the medical director of applicant's submission, applicant shall receive a probationary permit. Such probationary permit shall allow applicant to provide, from the effective date of the probationary permit, ambulance service within this jurisdiction. 
(h)	Each provider shall comply with its preformed system status plan and its preformed medical quality assurance plan, from the effective date of its probationary permit. 
(i)	During the first six months of provider's probationary permit period, provider's response times and clinical quality of care will be carefully evaluated. If provider's performance is consistently and substantially within its preformed plans, and in compliance with the terms of this chapter, such probationary permit shall become a valid permit, renewable annually upon continual compliance with this article. 
(j)	Thereafter, chronic failure to comply with response time standards or clinical quality of care shall be grounds to revoke plan provider's permit. 
(k)	If any provider's permit is suspended three times within any three-year period for failure to make required payments, such permit shall be automatically revoked, upon the third event. 
(l)	No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual license fee as provided in the city fee schedule for the right to engage in the ambulance business and $15.00 each year for each vehicle bearing a vehicle permit authorized under the license of public convenience and necessity. Every applicant or registration as a chauffeur or attendant shall pay an annual fee of $10.00 for such registration for the first year and shall be entitled to a renewal thereafter upon payment of the renewal registration fee of $5.00. The amounts of the permit fees herein prescribed shall not be prorated for fractional parts of a fiscal year. The license shall be renewed on or before July 1 of each year. 
(m)	Midwest Regional Medical Center EMS is hereby granted a permit to be issued annually as a regular permit unless terminated by either the city or Midwest Regional EMS upon 60 days' written notice to the other party. 
(Code 1983, § 13-706; Ord. No. 288-A, 2-8-1990; Ord. No. 464-2-05, 2-17-2005)
 
Sec. 14-85. Response time performance required.
Every provider, as a condition of maintaining its permit, shall employ sufficient personnel, acquire sufficient equipment, and manage its resources as necessary to achieve the response time standards on all emergency calls or requests for routine transport originating within the city limits, received by, or referred to the provider as defined in this article. 
(Code 1983, § 13-707; Ord. No. 288-A, 2-8-1990)
 
Sec. 14-86. Prohibition against refusal to transport.
It shall be a violation of this article for any provider to fail to respond to a call or to transport or to render first aid treatment, as is necessary, or to otherwise refuse or fail to provide any ambulance services originating within the service area because of the patient's perceived, demonstrated or stated inability to pay for such services, or because of the location of the patient within the service area or because of the unavailable status of any provider's ambulance units at the time of the request. Chronic violation of this provision shall be grounds to revoke a provider's permit. 
(Code 1983, § 13-708; Ord. No. 288-A, 2-8-1990)
 
Sec. 14-87. Violations.
(a)	It shall be unlawful: 
(1)	To perform duties as an ambulance driver or attendant (EMT or paramedic) without a current permit; 
(2)	To permit a person to work as an ambulance driver or attendant without a current permit; 
(3)	To use, or cause to be used, any ambulance provider or other than a provider holding a valid permit, except those services described in subsection (b) of this section; 
(4)	For any person, firm or organization to provide ambulance service, within this jurisdiction, other than a provider which is a holder of a valid permit; 
(5)	To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance or helicopter rescue unit. 
(b)	It shall be a defense to an alleged violation that the vehicle or ambulance is: 
(1)	A privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of transporting patients who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless; 
(2)	A vehicle rendering services as an ambulance in the event of a major catastrophe or emergency when ambulances with permits based in the locality of the catastrophe or emergency are incapacitated or insufficient in number to render the service needed; 
(3)	An ambulance owned or operated by the federal or state government; 
(4)	An ambulance transporting a patient to a location within this jurisdiction, which transport originated from a point outside the service area; 
(5)	Assigned to a call pursuant to a mutual aid agreement with a licensed provider; 
(6)	Owned and operated by a hospital, and used exclusively for specialized mobile intensive care or for interinstitutional transfers of admitted patients of the owner hospital, provided the ambulance or helicopter rescue unit has a valid special use permit issued by the medical director on a need and necessity basis. 
(Code 1983, § 13-709; Ord. No. 288-A, 2-8-1990)
 
Chapter 16 ENVIRONMENT
 
Sec. 16-1. Mitigation plan adopted.
The City of Spencer: 
(1)	Adopts in its entirety, the 2019 Update of the Oklahoma County Mitigation Plan (the "plan") as the jurisdiction's natural hazard mitigation plan and resolves to execute the actions identified in the plan that pertain to this jurisdiction. 
(2)	Will use the adopted and approved portions of the plan to guide pre- and post-disaster mitigation of the hazards identified. 
(3)	Will coordinate the strategies identified in the plan with other planning programs and mechanisms under its jurisdictional authority. 
(4)	Will continue its support of the mitigation planning committee as described within the plan. 
(5)	Will help to promote and support the mitigation successes of all participants in this plan. 
(6)	Will incorporate mitigation planning as an integral component of government and partner operations. 
(7)	Will provide an update of the plan in conjunction with the planning partnership no less than every five years. 
(Ord. No. 19-12-19 , 12-19-2019)
 
Chapter 18 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 18-1—18-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 18-19. Personnel; composition.
The personnel of the fire department of the city shall consist of a fire chief and such assistant chiefs, officers, and personnel as may from time to time be authorized by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 13-1.1; Code 1983, § 13-201)
 
Sec. 18-20. Appointment and qualifications of personnel.
The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager. He shall reside within a 20-mile radius of the city for the purpose of answering emergencies. He shall have had five years' actual experience as a paid firefighter. The assistant chief and paid members shall be appointed by the chief, by and with consent and approval of the city manager. The assistant chief shall have had three years' actual experience as a paid or volunteer firefighter. The chief may appoint such other or additional nonpaid members as in his judgment will redound to the best interest of the city. A list of appointments shall, at all times, be furnished to and kept on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 13-202; Ord. No. 421-02-03, 6-26-2003; Ord. No. 441-07-04, 7-15-2004; Ord. No. 477-08-05, 8-18-2005)
 
Sec. 18-21. Chief to make and enforce rules.
The chief makes and enforces all rules and regulations not inconsistent with the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city, as may be necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the department and the members thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 13-1.3; Code 1983, § 13-203)
 
Sec. 18-22. Control of the department.
The chief and, in his absence, the assistant chief or senior officer on duty, shall have full and absolute control of the entire department and the members thereof, and shall see that all members of the department conform with all rules and regulations of such department, the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. He shall have the full power and command over all persons whosoever are present at fires, and shall direct the use of all equipment and command all firefighters in the discharge of their duties. He shall take such measures as he deems necessary in the preservation and protection of property and the extinguishing of fires. 
(Prior Code, § 13-1.4; Code 1983, § 13-204)
 
Sec. 18-23. Duties of chief.
The chief shall: 
(1)	Conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, and new methods may be adopted from time to time to conform with generally recognized modern practices; 
(2)	Have the care of the equipment and see that the same is in proper repair and functioning, and see that such equipment is properly housed when not in use. The chief shall see that all fire hydrants within the city are flushed at least once every six months to ensure proper function thereof; 
(3)	Make duplicate inventory of all property in the department with its valuation estimate and shall revise the same from time to time, the original of which shall be filed with the city clerk for use of the council and city manager; 
(4)	Make or cause to be made and maintained a record of all calls of whatsoever nature made by the department showing the nature of the call, the location of the call and whether within or without the limits of the city, the number of firefighters or other personnel taken, whether paid or volunteer, and the time spent on such call. A copy of the record shall be filed with the city clerk each month covering the month just completed for the use of the council and the city manager; 
(5)	Prepare an itemized statement, showing by item the wants and needs of the department for the ensuing fiscal year, for use of the city manager in the preparation of the budget, at such times as requested by the city manager; 
(6)	Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as he deems necessary all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares in the city for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected, any condition liable to cause fire, or any violation of the provisions of any ordinance of the city affecting the fire hazard; 
(7)	Inspect all plans and specifications for extension to the water system in the city and shall make recommendations as to the location, size and type of fireplug or other facilities to be used in fighting fires; and 
(8)	Investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation to begin within the time provided by law, and communicate and report to the state fire marshal, on forms to be furnished by him the cause of the fire and all facts relating to the cause and origin of such fire, as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 13-1.5—13-1.12, 29-1.2; Code 1983, § 13-205)
 
Sec. 18-24. Chief to answer all calls.
The chief shall be responsible for the answering of all fire calls within the city and shall use such equipment and firefighters as the occasion requires. 
(Prior Code, § 13-1.15; Code 1983, § 13-208)
 
Sec. 18-25. Fire equipment to be equipped with siren and red light.
All fire trucks and other firefighting equipment shall be equipped with a siren or bell with a red warning light and appropriate signal shall be given in answering fire calls indicating the presence of such firefighting equipment on the street. 
(Prior Code, § 13-2.1; Code 1983, § 13-209)
 
Sec. 18-26. City may furnish fire protection outside of its limits.
The city council may, pursuant to law, enter into contracts with any political subdivision, or any person or organization, to provide fire protection to such subdivisions, persons or organizations, under such terms or conditions as may be agreed to between the parties, and a copy of any such contract shall be furnished the parties. 
(Prior Code, § 13-2.2; Code 1983, § 13-210)
 
Sec. 18-27. Answering calls out of city.
The chief shall answer all fire calls outside the limits of the city when so required by a valid contract made with the city for fire protection service and he shall furnish such men or equipment as may be necessary and when answering any such fire call outside the limits of the city, the city shall be acting in its governmental capacity as an agent for the state. 
(Prior Code, § 13-2.3; Code 1983, § 13-211)
 
Sec. 18-28. Chief authorized to enter premises for inspection.
The chief is hereby authorized to enter any premises or building within the city at any reasonable hour to examine and determine the condition of any building which, for want of proper repair, or by reason of age and dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that a fire would endanger persons or other property therein. The chief shall order such building to be repaired, torn down, demolished, materials removed and all dangerous conditions removed. 
(Prior Code, § 13-1.13; Code 1983, § 13-206)
 
Sec. 18-29. Combustible and explosive material.
If the chief finds in a building or upon any premises, any combustible or explosive material, rubbish, rags, waste, oils, gasoline or inflammable conditions of any kind, dangerous to the safety of buildings or property, he shall order such materials removed or condition remedied. Such order shall be made against the owner, lessee, agent or occupant of the building or premises, and thereupon such order shall be complied with within the time fixed in the order. If the owner, lessee, agent or occupant deems himself aggrieved by the order and desires a hearing, he may complain or appeal to the state fire marshal within three days from the service of the order, and thereafter all proceedings shall be as provided by state law. It is unlawful and an offense for any owner, lessee, agent or occupant to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the order unless the complaint is made or appeal taken, as above provided. 
(Prior Code, § 13-1.14; Code 1983, § 13-207)
 
Sec. 18-30. Not to remove or injure property.
No person shall willfully and without proper authority remove, take away or conceal any tool, appliance or other article belonging to the fire department or anything used in connection with the fire department and it is unlawful and an offense against this Code for any person to willfully damage in any manner any hose, fire engine or other apparatus belonging to the department; or to damage any building used for housing the same. 
(Prior Code, § 13-3.3; Code 1983, § 13-212)
 
Sec. 18-31. Obedient to lawful commands.
Every person at or near a fire, who shall conduct himself so as to hinder, obstruct or delay the fire department, or any member thereof, or who neglects or refuses to obey promptly any order of the chief of the fire department or any officer thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 13-3.5; Code 1983, § 13-213)
 
Sec. 18-32. Not to interfere with alarms.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to interfere with the fire alarm or cut any wires leading thereto or to, in any manner, render such fire alarm out of repair or in disorder. 
(Prior Code, § 13-3.6; Code 1983, § 13-214)
 
Sec. 18-33. Not to connect hose with fire hydrants.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to use, molest or connect any hose or any apparatus with any of the fire hydrants or plugs within the city without first securing permission in writing from the chief of the fire department or utility superintendent as authorized by the fire chief. 
(Prior Code, § 13-3.8; Code 1983, § 13-215)
 
Sec. 18-34. Duty of police.
It is the special duty of the chief of police and other officers who may be on duty and available for duty, to respond to all fire alarms and assist the department in the protection of life and property, in regulating traffic, maintaining order, and in enforcing observance of all sections of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13-3.9; Code 1983, § 13-216)
 
Secs. 18-35—18-56. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
 
Sec. 18-57. Established.
There is hereby created and established a volunteer fire department for the city. 
(Prior Code, § 29-1.1; Code 1983, § 13-231)
 
Sec. 18-58. Duties of the assistant chief.
In the absence of the chief, the assistant chief on duty shall command the department and be held responsible therefor in all respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the chief. 
(Prior Code, § 29-1.3; Code 1983, § 13-232)
 
Sec. 18-59. Company officers.
Company officers shall be selected by the chief based upon the following criteria: 
(1)	Knowledge of firefighting; 
(2)	Leadership ability; and 
(3)	Knowledge of firefighting equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 29-1.4; Code 1983, § 13-233)
 
Sec. 18-60. The secretary-treasurer.
One member elected by the members of the fire department shall be a secretary-treasurer. His duties shall consist of the following: 
(1)	Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting; 
(2)	Keeping the minutes of each meeting; and 
(3)	Collecting any money due the department by the members. 
(Prior Code, § 29-1.5; Code 1983, § 13-234)
 
Sec. 18-61. New members.
New members of the department shall be appointed by the chief and shall be on probation for one year after their appointment. New volunteer members, upon completion of their probationary period, must be approved by the city manager and a majority of the members of the volunteer department. 
(Prior Code, § 29-1.6; Code 1983, § 13-235)
 
Sec. 18-62. Bylaws.
The bylaws of the department shall include the following: 
(1)	All volunteer fire department members are required, when notified, to respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies; 
(2)	A member is required to be present at all regular meetings, called meetings and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters; 
(3)	At least one regular business meeting of the members shall be held each month; 
(4)	Any member having two unexcused absences in succession or three unexcused absences in a period of three months will be dropped from the fire department rolls; 
(5)	Any member leaving the city for an extended period of time is required to notify the chief; 
(6)	Any member refusing to attend training classes provided for members of the department will be dropped; and 
(7)	Any member of the fire department may be dropped from the rolls for the following offenses: 
a.	Conduct unbecoming a firefighter; 
b.	Any act of insubordination; 
c.	Neglect of duty; 
d.	Any violation of rules and regulations governing the fire department; 
e.	Conviction of a felony; or 
f.	By majority vote of the members of the department and approval of the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 29-1.7; Code 1983, § 13-236)
 
Sec. 18-63. Rules and regulations.
The city council by motion or resolution may adopt and change regulations relating to the fire department, its organization, operation and compensation. 
(Prior Code, § 1-31; Code 1983, § 13-237)
 
Secs. 18-64—18-84. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. FIRE REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 18-85. Adoption of fire prevention code.
There is hereby adopted by the city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as fire prevention code recommended by the National Fire Protection Association being particularly the 2011 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by this Code. At least one copy of the fire prevention code is on file in the fire department. The fire prevention code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and from the date on which this Code shall take effect the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 13-101; Ord. No. 364-9-97, 10-9-1997)
 
Sec. 18-86. Fire department to enforce code.
(a)	The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the fire department of the city, under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The city may appoint such inspectors as the council may authorize. The terms "bureau of fire prevention" and "chief of the bureau of fire prevention," wherever found in the fire prevention code, shall mean fire department and chief of the fire department, respectively, of this city. Whenever the term "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it means this city. 
(b)	The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as may from time to time be necessary. 
(Code 1983, § 13-102)
 
Sec. 18-87. Life safety.
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the protection of life and property, that certain code known as the life safety code, recommended and copyrighted by the national fire protection association, being particularly the latest edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as may hereafter be deleted, modified or amended. Not less than one copy of the life safety code has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 33-1.1; Code 1983, § 13-103)
 
Sec. 18-88. Modifications.
The chief of the fire department, with the approval of the city council, shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code and the life safety code upon request, submitted in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code. However, in such modifications the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire chief and council thereon shall be entered upon the records of the council, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1983, § 13-104)
 
Sec. 18-89. New materials, processes or occupancies that may require permits.
The chief of the fire department and two persons appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1983, § 13-105)
 
Sec. 18-90. Appeals.
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1983, § 13-106)
 
Sec. 18-91. Fire district established.
There is hereby created and established in the city a fire district which shall be the same as that defined as fire limits in section 8-54. All buildings constructed within the fire district established hereby shall be constructed in conformity with the city's building code for such fire districts. 
(Prior Code, §§ 13-3.10, 13-4.1; Code 1983, § 13-107)
 
Sec. 18-92. Burning prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to burn or permit to be burned, set fire to or ignite any garbage, trash, refuse, paper, or other inflammable material. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the fire chief or his designee from issuing a special permit for the burning of waste material under such circumstances or conditions as would justify same when the conditions are such that burning will be safe, and it shall not constitute an annoyance or nuisance to others. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the burning of trash or paper or other combustible material in a duly licensed, approved incinerator operated and regulated pursuant to the city ordinances and state law. 
(1)	The city shall levy a fee as provided in the city fee schedule per permit issued for the burning of waste material for the protection and safety of the city and its inhabitants. The material to be burned shall comply with the fire prevention code as adopted by the city council. The fire chief or his designee shall have the authority to issue permits based on adopted criteria after a full and complete inspection of the waste material to be burned. The fire department shall maintain a record of each burn permit issued within the city limits for a minimum of five years. Permits shall include the name, address, telephone number, or other valid contact information before a permit is issued. Permits to burn waste material shall be valid for a total of 30 days from the date of original inspection. 
(2)	Funds collected for burn permits shall be earmarked for the purchase and/or replacement of personal protective equipment required for safety and protection of the full-time or volunteer members of the city fire department. 
(3)	When one property owner possesses multiple parcels of land, unless parcels are adjoining, contiguous, or share borders, the property owner shall obtain separate burn permits for each parcel. No more than two parcels of land will be allowed per burn permit. 
(Prior Code, § 13-4.2; Code 1983, § 13-108; Ord. No. 426-07-03, 7-31-2003; Ord. No. 470-04-05, 4-21-2005)
 
Sec. 18-93. Penalties.
(a)	Any person who violates any of the provisions of the fire prevention code or the life safety code adopted in this chapter or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall, for every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine as provided in the city fine schedule. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
(b)	The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, and the city may institute any proper action or proceeding to enforce this article. 
(Prior Code, §§ 34-1.2, 33-1.2; Code 1983, § 13-109)
 
Chapter 20 HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 20-1. County health department designated to enforce health-related regulations.
Anywhere in this chapter where the term "health officer" is used it shall be construed to mean the director of the county health department or his duly designated representative. It is the intent and purpose of the mayor and city council to delegate the enforcement of the health ordinances of this city as set out in this section and any such decisions rendered under this section shall be subject to review by the governing board upon an appeal from an offender. 
(Code 1983, § 8-601)
 
Sec. 20-2. Obstructing health officer.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct or interfere with any health officer or physician charged with the enforcement of the health laws of this city. 
(Code 1983, § 8-602)
 
Sec. 20-3. Quarantine; violations.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully violate or refuse or omit to comply with any lawful order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation of the board of health, or any officer charged with enforcement of such order, direction, prohibition, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1983, § 8-603)
 
Secs. 20-4—20-24. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FOOD AND MILK
 
Sec. 20-25. U.S. food service sanitation ordinance adopted.
(a)	The unabridged form of the latest edition of the "United States Public Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and Code" is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code by reference. At least one copy of the sanitation ordinance and code shall be on file in the office of the municipal clerk. The sanitation ordinance and code shall govern the definitions; inspection of food service establishments; the issuance, suspension, and revocation of permits to operate food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated or misbranded food or drink and the enforcement of this section. In the sanitation ordinance and code, however, all parenthetical phrases referring to grading and the following subsections shall be understood to be deleted: subsection H.2.e., H.7. and H.8. 
(b)	The term "health authority" means the director of the county health department of this county or his designated representative. 
(c)	In addition to all other applicable penalties and remedies for violation of this article, any person convicted of violation may be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
(Code 1983, § 8-301)
 
Sec. 20-26. Milk ordinance adopted.
The production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination, grading, labeling, and sale of all milk and milk products sold for the ultimate consumption within the city, or its police jurisdiction; the inspection of dairy herds, dairy farms, and milk plants; and the issuing and revocation of permits to milk producers, haulers, and distributors shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of the "Milk Ordinance Recommendations of the Public Health Service Revised to Comply with Oklahoma State Statutes," a certified copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Sections 9 and 16 of the unabridged ordinance shall be replaced, respectively by this section and section 20-27. 
(Code 1983, § 8-302)
 
Sec. 20-27. Grades of milk which may be sold.
Only certified pasteurized and Grade A pasteurized, and certified raw or Grade A raw milk and milk products shall be sold to the final consumer, or to restaurants, soda fountains, grocery stores, or similar establishments. However, in an emergency, the sale of pasteurized milk and milk products which have not been graded, or the grade of which is unknown, may be authorized by the health authority, in which case, such milk and milk products shall be labeled "ungraded." 
(Code 1983, § 8-303)
 
Sec. 20-28. Enforcement by whom.
All sampling, examining, grading, and regrading of milk and milk products and all inspections, and issuing and suspension of revocation of permits shall be done by the director of the county health department or his authorized representative, who shall be a registered professional sanitarian. 
(Code 1983, § 8-304)
 
Secs. 20-29—20-59. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. FOOD SERVICE OPERATORS
 
Sec. 20-60. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require training and certification of supervisory personnel of food service establishments, so that supervisory personnel shall have knowledge of safe techniques for storage, preparation, display and service of foods with the underlying purpose of preventing food borne illness and protecting the public health and so that supervisory personnel shall have knowledge to train employees under their supervision regarding same. 
(Code 1983, § 8-701; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-61. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Food means any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. 
Food service establishment means any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portion service, and includes the site at which individual portions are provided. The term "food service establishment" includes those establishments which are covered by the permit, license or certificate requirement of the "United States Public Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and Code." The term "food service establishment" includes any such place regardless of whether consumption is on or off the premises and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. The term "food service establishment" also includes delicatessen-type operations that prepare sandwiches intended for individual portion service. The term "food service" does not include private homes where food is prepared or served for individual family consumption, the location of food vending machines, and supply vehicles. 
Food service operator update course means a minimum of three hours, review and update referring back to original course outlined in subsection (b) of section 20-63 and approved by the regulatory authority. 
Law means federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
Numerous critical violations means violation of three or more items having a demerit value of four or more points each, on any inspection, and action to abate has not been taken with two weeks. 
Packaged means bottled, canned, cartoned, or securely wrapped. 
Person in charge means the individual present in a food service establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the food service establishment at the time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employee present is the person in charge. 
Regulatory authority means the state or local enforcement authority having jurisdiction over the food service establishment. 
Repeated violation means violation of the same item on three consecutive inspections. 
Supervisory personnel means the certificate holder, individuals having supervisory or management duties and any other person working in a food service establishment who may be in charge of its operation. 
Temporary means a food service establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(Code 1983, § 8-702; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-62. Food service operator's certification required.
(a)	Except as provided in section 20-63, it shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing any food service establishment within the city limits to fail to employ or fail to keep in his employment at least one certified food service operator who is a full-time supervisory personnel employee of the establishment and who has a valid and current food service operator's certificate as issued by the city clerk or his authorized representative. A certified operator must be an on-site employee and only use his certificate at this location. 
(b)	Whenever the food service operator holding the certificate terminates employment, is terminated, or transferred to another food establishment, the person owning, operating or managing the food establishment shall be allowed 30 days from the date of termination or transfer of the certificate holder to comply with this section. The person owning, operating or managing the food establishment shall have ten days to notify the regulatory authority in writing of termination or transfer of the supervisory personnel certificate holder. 
(Code 1983, § 8-703; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-63. Exemption of requirement.
(a)	A food service operator's certificate shall not be required of food service establishments which are exempt from the permit requirement of the "United States Public Health Service Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and Code." Exemption shall also include establishments providing only beverages or prepackaged foods, temporary food service establishments and establishments that do not engage in preparation of food. 
(b)	Exempted establishments shall be required by the regulatory authority to obtain certification if there are numerous critical or repeated food code violations in the establishment, or in the judgment of the regulatory authority and nature of the operation requires food operator certification. 
(c)	Notification or changes to the exemption status of an establishment will be made in writing to the owner, manager or person in charge of the establishment. 
(Code 1983, § 8-704; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-64. Issuance of food service operator's certificate.
A food service operator's certificate shall be issued to anyone who submits the required fee and application to the city clerk and: 
(1)	Provides evidence of certification by an agency or organization who has on file with the United States Food and Drug Administration a statement of intent for reciprocity of Certificate Food Service Operator Training and Food Protection attested to by an official of the United States Food and Drug Administration; 
(2)	Show evidence of completion of a course of study which meets the course content requirements set forth in DHEW Publication (FDA) 76-1009 issued by the United States Food and Drug Administration, attested to by the state health department, and achieves the required minimum score of 75 points out of a possible 100 points on a written examination approved by the state health department. An applicant who fails to achieve a minimum score of 75 on the written examination may repeat the examination one time without repetition of the certification course. If an applicant fails to pass the examination for certification the second time, the applicant must repeat the course of training before taking another examination, or he may appeal to the panel for a hearing as provided for in section 20-66. The panel, after reviewing the credentials and past records of the individual may, on rare occasions, issue a one-year certificate par excellence to allow the individual time to prepare to successfully pass the examination; or 
(3)	He may challenge the course by paying a fee as provided in the city fee schedule and taking and successfully passing a test approved by the state health department and administered by the regulatory authority. If applicant fails to pass the examination, he must complete an approved training course before taking another examination. 
(Code 1983, § 8-705; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-65. Term of certification.
Unless revoked by the regulatory authority, a food service operator's certificate shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance. The expiration date will be written on each certificate issued. A person who was certified by another agency or organization as provided for in subsection (a) of section 20-63 shall be certified for unused time of their present certificate but in no case shall it exceed three years. 
(Code 1983, § 8-706; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-66. Renewal of certification.
(a)	A holder of a food service operator's certificate who desires to renew the certificate must attend an approved food service operator's update course within the six-month period prior to the date of expiration of the certificate and submit the required fee and application along with proof of completion of an approved update course to the city clerk prior to the date of expiration of the certificate, or by section 20-63. 
(b)	Provided that the applicant meets the requirements of subsection (a) of section 20-65 and has not had numerous critical violations as a result of his negligence in the food service establishment where the applicant acts in a supervisory capacity, or has not tried to interfere with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duty, and has not been fraudulent in this application or the use of the certificate, the regulatory authority shall reissue a food service operator's certificate for a subsequent three-year period. If the regulatory authority refuses to reissue a certificate, the applicant shall have the right to the hearing process as provided in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 8-707; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-67. Revocation of certificate.
(a)	The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke a food service operator's certificate for numerous critical violations of the current food service sanitation code of the city, or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duty, or for a fraudulent statement on the holder's application, or for fraudulent use of the certificate. 
(b)	The hearing provided for in this article shall be conducted before a three-member panel composed of one representative from the board of health, one representative from the food service industry selected by the Oklahoma Restaurant Association, and one representative to be selected by the mayor. 
(c)	Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify, in writing, the holder of the certificate, the person in charge of the food service establishment, and the person owning, operating or managing the food service establishment of the specific reason for which the certificate is to be revoked and the certificate shall be revoked at the end of ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory authority within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the certificate becomes final. 
(d)	A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the certificate, the person in charge of the food service establishment, and the person owning, operating or managing the food service establishment, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the certificate, the person in charge of the food service establishment, and the person owning, operating or managing the food service establishment. A copy of the notice shall be placed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(e)	The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the panel at a time and place designated by it. Any oral testimony given at the hearing shall be recorded verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision for sufficient copies of the transcript for all parties. The panel shall make a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the certificate and the owner of the food service establishment by the panel. 
(f)	Any operator or employee whose certificate has been revoked as provided in this section may appeal from such action to the district court having jurisdiction of the parties hereto. Upon such appeal, the matter shall be tried de novo. 
(g)	Whenever a revocation of a certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked certificate may make written application for a new certificate after a six-month waiting period from the date of the revocation and after repeating an approved course as outlined in section 20-63(b). 
(Code 1983, § 8-708; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-68. Certificate to be displayed in establishment.
The food service operator's certificate shall be prominently posted in the establishment. 
(Code 1983, § 8-709; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-69. Certificate not transferable.
A food service operator's certificate is not transferable from one to another person. 
(Code 1983, § 8-710; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-70. Fees.
All fees associated with a food service operator's certificate shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 8-711; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Sec. 20-71. Injunctive relief.
In the addition to and cumulative of all other penalties, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any or all violations of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 8-713; Ord. No. 254-A, 1-14-1988)
 
Chapter 22 HUMAN RELATIONS AND SOCIAL SERVICES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 22-1—22-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FAIR HOUSING
 
Sec. 22-19. Scope.
It is declared to be the policy of the city in the exercise of its authority to ensure the public safety, public health, and general welfare and ensure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent housing facilities regardless of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability and, to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any persons. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1301; Ord. No. 446-09-04, 9-16-2004)
 
Sec. 22-20. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Covered multifamily dwellings means: 
(1)	Buildings consisting of four or more units if the buildings have one or more elevators; and 
(2)	Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
Discrimination or discriminatory housing practice.
(1)	The term "discrimination" or "discriminatory housing practice" means any difference in treatment based upon race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability or any act that is unlawful under this article. 
(2)	For purposes of disability discrimination in housing pursuant to this article, the term "discrimination" includes: 
a.	A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises, provided that such person also provides a surety bond guaranteeing restoration of the premises to their prior condition, if necessary to make the premises suitable for nondisabled tenants; 
b.	A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
c.	In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings, for first occupancy 30 months after the date of enactment of the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 28 USC 2341 et seq. or 42 USC 3601 et seq., a failure to design and construct those dwellings in a manner that: 
1.	The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons; 
2.	All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs; and 
3.	All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
(i)	An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
(ii)	Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
(iii)	Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
(iv)	Usable kitchen and bathrooms so that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically disabled people, commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.1," suffices to satisfy the requirements of this subsection (2)c of this definition. 
(3)	Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
Financial institution includes any person engaged in the business of lending money or guaranteeing losses. 
Housing accommodation ordwelling means any building, manufactured home or trailer, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed, or intended for occupancy, as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, manufactured home or trailer, structure, or portion thereof or any "real property," as defined herein, used or intended to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this definition. 
Mortgage broker means an individual who is engaged in or who performs the business or services of a mortgage broker as the same are defined by state law. 
Open market means the market which is informed of the availability for sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, whether informed through a real estate broker or by advertising by publication, signs or by any other advertising methods directed to the public or any portion thereof, indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase, rental or lease. 
Owner includes a lessee, sublessee, cotenant, assignee, managing agent or other person having the right of ownership or possession, or the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation. 
Real estate broker orreal estate salesman includes any individual, qualified by law, who, for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable consideration or, who with the intention or expectation of receiving or collecting same, lists, sells, purchases, rents, or leases any housing accommodations, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate such activities or who advertises or holds himself out as engaged in such activities or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan, secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing accommodation or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract whereby he undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation through its listing in a publication issued primarily for such purpose or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
Real property includes buildings, structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds, cooperatives and condominiums. 
Residential real estate related transaction means: 
(1)	Making or purchasing loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.	To purchase, construct, improve, repair, or maintain a dwelling; or 
b.	To secure residential real estate; or 
(2)	Selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.2; Code 1983, §§ 5-1302, 5-1303)
 
Sec. 22-21. Unlawful practices.
(a)	It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person, or any agent or employee of such person: 
(1)	To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of any housing, or otherwise make unavailable or deny any housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(2)	To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of housing, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with any housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(3)	To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of housing that indicates any preference, limitation, discrimination, or intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(4)	To represent to any person, for reasons of discrimination, that any housing is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such housing is in fact so available because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(5)	To deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions of access, membership, or participation in such an organization, service, or facility because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(6)	To include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of housing any restrictive covenant that discriminates, or for any person to honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise, any discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(7)	To refuse to consider the income of both applicants when both applicants seek to buy or lease housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(8)	To refuse to consider as a valid source of income any public assistance, alimony, or child support, awarded by a court, when that source can be verified as to its amount, length of time received, regularity, or receipt because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(9)	To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions, or privileges relating to the obtaining or use of financial assistance for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of any housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or disability; 
(10)	To discharge, demote, or discriminate in matters of compensation or working conditions against any employee or agent because of the obedience of the employee or agent to the provisions of this section; 
(11)	To solicit or attempt to solicit the listing of housing for sale or lease, by door to door solicitation, in person, or by telephone, or by distribution of circulars, if one of the purposes is to change the racial composition of the neighborhood; 
(12)	To knowingly induce or attempt to induce another person to transfer an interest in real property, or to discourage another person from purchasing real property, by representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of real property owned, used, or occupied by persons of any particular race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability, or to represent that such existing or potential proximity shall or may result in: 
a.	The lowering of property values; 
b.	A change in the racial, religious, or ethnic character of the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is located; 
c.	An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or 
d.	A decline in quality of the schools serving the area; 
(13)	To refuse to rent or lease housing to a blind, deaf, or disabled person on the basis of the person's use or possession of a bona fide, properly trained guide, signal, or service dog; 
(14)	To demand the payment of an additional nonrefundable fee or an unreasonable deposit for rent from a blind, deaf, or disabled person for such dog. Such blind, deaf, or disabled person may be liable for any damage done to the dwelling by such dog; 
(15)	To discriminate in the sale or rental or otherwise make available or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of that buyer or renter, or a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available, or any person associated with that buyer or renter; or 
(16)	To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability of that person, or a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available, or any person associated with that person; 
(b) (1) This section does not prohibit discrimination against a person because the person has been convicted under federal law or the law of any state of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
(2)	Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(c)	A person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions may not discriminate against a person in making a real estate related transactions available or in the terms or conditions of a real estate related transaction because of race, color, religion, gender, disability, familial status, national origin or age. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.3; Code 1983, § 5-1303)
 
Sec. 22-22. Exemptions.
This article does not apply to: 
(1)	A religious organization, association, or society or private club, a religious nonprofit institution or organization or controlled by, or in conjunction with, a religious organization, association, or society "which limits the sale, rental, or occupancy, of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than commercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or which gives preference to such persons, unless membership in such a religion is restricted on account of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability;" 
(2)	A private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, and which limits the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or gives preference to its members; 
(3)	Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided further that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or served on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, the sale or rental of any such single-family house is excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented: 
a.	Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
b.	Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of the provisions of 42 USC 3604(c) or of section 22-20; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(4)	Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.4; Code 1983, § 5-1304)
 
Sec. 22-23. Procedure.
Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this article may file a complaint with the chairman of the fair housing board within 30 days after the aggrieved person becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice, and in no event more than 60 days after the alleged unlawful practice occurred. The chairman or his duly authorized representative shall investigate each complaint and attempt to resolve each complaint. Failure to achieve a resolution acceptable to both parties and compliance with this article shall cause the chairman of the fair housing board to forward the complaint and his findings to appropriate state and federal officials. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.5; Code 1983, § 5-1305)
 
Sec. 22-24. Other remedies.
Nothing herein contained prevents any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled or from filing his complaint with any appropriate governmental agency. 
(Prior Code, § 10-1.6; Code 1983, § 5-1306)
 
Sec. 22-25. Fair housing board.
There is hereby created a fair housing board of the city. The fair housing board shall be composed of five members to be appointed by the mayor and the city council. Three members shall constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of those present at any given meeting shall be required for any action. The fair housing board shall appoint from its members a chairman and vice chairman to preside at meetings as prescribed by the open records and meetings act of the state. 
(Ord. No. 446-09-04, 9-16-2004; Code 1983, § 5-1307)
 
Sec. 22-26. Procedure.
(a)	Any person aggrieved by a discriminatory housing practice prohibited by ordinance may file with the chairman of the board a complaint in writing. The complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved and shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have violated the provisions of this article and shall further set forth the particulars of the violation and may include such other information as may be required by the board. Any failure to file a complaint within the time specified in this chapter is considered a waiver of the application of this article. 
(b)	The board chairman or his designee will investigate each complaint filed with the board and attempt an adjustment of the complaint by means of conference and conciliation. Sixty days shall be allowed for the purpose of investigation, conference and conciliation. Upon determination that a complaint is not well founded, the chairman may dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and respondent in writing of the dismissal. 
(c)	If the board chairman has not dismissed the complaint or if conference or conciliation has not resulted in withdrawal of the complaint within 60 days from the date it was filed, the chairman shall transmit his findings in writing to the fair housing board. 
(d)	Upon receipt of the findings and complaint, the fair housing board will hold a hearing to determine whether a violation of this chapter appears to have occurred. At least ten days prior to such hearing the person named in the complaint and the complainant shall be notified in person in writing of the time and place of the hearing. The person named in the complaint may file a written response to the complaint and appear at the hearing on the complaint in person or by legal counsel. The board, when conducting such hearing, shall permit amendments to the complaint on the answer and any testimony heard at the hearing may be transcribed at the request of either party or at the direction of the board. It the board finds at the hearing that the person named in the complaint appears to have engaged in any discriminatory housing practice prohibited by this article, it shall so state in written findings which shall be furnished to the respondent and to the city attorney for consideration. If the board, upon hearing, finds that the person named in the complaint does not appear to have engaged in any discriminatory housing practice, it shall so state its findings and dismiss the complaint. The board shall establish rules and regulations to be approved by the city council to govern, expedite and effectuate the foregoing provisions. 
(e)	Unless the complaint is withdrawn by the complaining party or the city attorney finds that there is insufficient information upon which to base the filing of such a charge, the charge shall be filed in municipal court within ten days after the city attorney's receipt of the findings of the fair housing board. 
(Ord. No. 93A, 11-10-1977; Code 1983, § 5-1308)
 
Chapter 24 LAW ENFORCEMENT
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 24-1—24-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 24-19. Established; chief appointed and selection of other officers.
The city has created a police department, the head of which is the police chief, appointed by the city manager to serve during the manager's pleasure. The police chief is an officer of the city, and has supervision and control of the police department. There shall be such other police officers as authorized by the council. The city manager shall select and employ all police officers of the department. The chief and all officers shall at all times be under the supervision and control of the city manager. All police officers shall be officers of the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 31-1.1, 31-1.2; Code 1983, § 13-401)
 
Sec. 24-20. Duties.
The police department shall have the power to apprehend and arrest on view or on warrant and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to suppress all riots, affrays and unlawful assemblies which may come to their knowledge, and generally to keep the peace; to serve all warrants, writs, executions and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law, as provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authorities; and in all respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of police officers. The police department shall have control and operation of the city jail; however, the council may make arrangements with the board of county commissioners for use of the county jail for city purposes. 
(Code 1983, § 13-402)
 
Sec. 24-21. Chief to have custody of equipment.
The chief shall have custody of the equipment and cars of the police department and shall be accountable to the city manager for their care and safekeeping. He shall inventory all equipment and cars, giving its estimated value and revise the same from time to time, which he shall furnish to the city manager, a copy thereof to be filed with the city clerk for use by the council. 
(Prior Code, § 31-1.3; Code 1983, § 13-403)
 
Sec. 24-22. Chief to submit annual itemized statement of department needs to city manager.
The chief shall prepare an itemized statement, showing by item the needs of his department for the ensuing fiscal year, which shall be furnished to the city manager at such times as requested by the manager for his use in the preparation of the city budget. 
(Prior Code, § 31-1.4; Code 1983, § 13-404)
 
Sec. 24-23. Warrant or writ service incentive.
(a)	Any full-time or reserve police officer of the police department shall receive $25.00 for each successful warrant or writ of the city municipal court served. All writs or warrants of the court must be served in person to be eligible for the incentive. The fee will be paid the last pay period of the month in a manner as prescribed by the city clerk-treasurer or designee of the city finance department. 
(b)	Writs and warrants of the municipal court shall be executed in a manner consistent with chapter 12 courts and jails. Nothing in this section is meant to supersede or replace the general processes and past practices that are referenced herein. 
(Code 1983, §§ 13-410, 13-411; Ord. No. 427-07-03, 7-31-2003)
 
Sec. 24-24. Unauthorized persons riding in police vehicles.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to ride in any police vehicle other than members of the police force, the city manager or persons on official business. It is considered misconduct in office for any member of the police force to permit any unauthorized person to ride in the vehicle, unless the person shall have the express consent of the city manager or the police chief. 
(Prior Code, § 31-1.6; Code 1983, § 13-405)
 
Secs. 24-25—24-51. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PART-TIME POLICE FORCE
 
Sec. 24-52. Established.
A part-time police force is established to augment the regular police force in the event of emergency or disaster or at other times as deemed necessary. All members of the part-time force will be subject to the rules and regulations established by this division. 
(Code 1983, § 13-420; Ord. No. 248-A, 7-14-1987)
 
Sec. 24-53. Organization.
The part-time force shall consist of not more than 12 persons, who shall be under the direct supervision of the police chief. In the absence of the police chief, a designated member of the regular police force shall assume the full responsibilities and powers as chief of the part-time force. This member will be designated by the police chief or city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 13-421; Ord. No. 180-A, 3-10-1983)
 
Sec. 24-54. Company officers.
(a)	The company officers of the part-time force will be recommended by the part-time force to the police chief for his approval and concurrence and his recommendation to the city manager for his concurrence and final approval. 
(b)	A secretary-treasurer shall be selected from the members of the part-time force as set out in subsection (a) of this section. It is his duty to make a roll call at the beginning of each meeting, and to collect any donated money due the part-time force. All such donated monies collected shall be reported to the city manager and shall be subject to audit by the mayor and council. The secretary-treasurer shall be authorized to write checks from such donated funds with the approval of the police chief. 
(Code 1983, § 13-422; Ord. No. 248-A, 7-14-1987)
 
Sec. 24-55. Selection of recruits.
Selection of recruits will be made by the police chief on merit and qualifications and recommended to the city manager for his approval and hiring, for a one-year probationary period, after which time applicants will be reevaluated for possible permanent status. Members of the part-time force must live within a reasonable distance of the city limits as determined by the city manager with the recommendation of the police chief. 
(Code 1983, § 13-423; Ord. No. 248-A, 7-14-1987)
 
Sec. 24-56. Training.
(a)	All members of the part-time force both permanent and probationary will be required to attend regular training sessions which will be established by the police chief. 
(b)	Members of the part-time force will be required to accompany a regular officer or another part-time officer after dark, and may operate by themselves on the day shift only, on a rotating basis, not to exceed 25 hours per week, except in an emergency. Each member of the part-time force will be required to successfully complete the basic police course within the probationary period. 
(Code 1983, § 13-424; Ord. No. 180-A, 3-10-1983; Ord. No. 248-A, 7-14-1987)
 
Sec. 24-57. Use and qualification with firearms.
(a)	The minimum caliber of the principal weapon of the part-time force will be either .38 or .357 caliber. Any second weapon will be concealed. Qualification standards will be established by the police department. 
(b)	The riot type shotgun will be used by the part-time force but only after the standards of qualification have been met by all members concerned. 
(c)	The wearing, carrying, transporting or use of any unauthorized weapon except when directed by competent higher authority shall be grounds for immediate dismissal from the part-time force. 
(Code 1983, § 13-425; Ord. No. 180-A, 3-10-1983)
 
Sec. 24-58. Uniform and equipment.
A distinctive uniform and insignia will be worn by all members of the part-time force. Headgear and insignia will be furnished by the city. All other items of equipment and uniform will be furnished by the member. 
(Code 1983, § 13-426; Ord. No. 180-A, 3-10-1983)
 
Sec. 24-59. Compensation.
All part-time police force officers shall be compensated in an amount per hour established by the city council from time to time. Part-time officers shall not work more than 24 hours per week. No health, dental, retirement, pension or life insurance shall be available to part-time police officers. 
(Code 1983, § 13-427; Ord. No. 502-07-07, 7-19-2007)
 
Sec. 24-60. Dismissal.
Grounds for dismissal from the part-time force may be for, but not necessarily limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)	For cause, or for the good of the department; 
(2)	Any act of insubordination; 
(3)	Misconduct such as to bring discredit to the regular or part-time force; 
(4)	Unauthorized disclosure of official information; 
(5)	Neglect of duties; 
(6)	Violation of rules, regulations, or directives; 
(7)	Conviction of a felony; or 
(8)	Missing three meetings in a calendar year without the approval of the commander. 
(Code 1983, § 13-428; Ord. No. 180-A, 3-10-1983)
 
Secs. 24-61—24-78. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. RESERVE POLICE FORCE
 
Sec. 24-79. Volunteer reserve police force.
The city has established a volunteer reserve police force to augment the regular police force in the event of emergency or disaster or at other times as deemed necessary. All members of the reserve force will be subject to the rules and regulations established by this division. 
(Code 1983, § 13-429; Ord. No. 387-11-00, 2-15-2001)
 
Sec. 24-80. Organization.
The reserve force shall consist of not more than 18 people, who shall be under the direct supervision of the police chief. In the absence of the police chief, a designated member of the regular police shall assume the full responsibilities and powers as chief of the reserve force. This member will be designated in writing by the police chief or the city manager. 
(Code 1983, § 13-430; Ord. No. 498-07-07, 7-19-2007)
 
Sec. 24-81. Company officers.
(a)	A commander of the reserve force shall be appointed by the police chief. 
(b)	A secretary-treasurer shall be selected from the members of the reserve force. It shall be his duty to make a roll call at the beginning of each meeting, and to collect any money due the reserve force. All monies collected shall be reported to the city manager and shall be subject to audit by the mayor and council. The secretary-treasurer shall be authorized to write checks with the written approval of the commandeer. 
(Code 1983, § 13-431; Ord. No. 387-11-00, 2-15-2001)
 
Sec. 24-82. Selection of recruits.
Selection of recruits will be made by the police chief for a one-year probationary period, after which time applicants will be reevaluated for possible permanent reserve status. Members of the reserve force must live within a reasonable reporting time of the city limits as determined by the city manager with the recommendation of the police chief. 
(Code 1983, § 13-432; Ord. No. 387-11-00, 2-15-2001)
 
Sec. 24-83. Training.
(a)	All members of the reserve force, both permanent and probationary, will be required to attend regular training sessions, which will be established by the police chief. 
(b)	Members of the reserve force will be required to accompany a regular officer or another reserve officer after dark or by himself on day shift only, on a rotating basis, not to exceed 25 hours per week, unless otherwise approved by the city manager. Each member of the reserve force will be required to successfully complete the basic police course of 120 hours within his probationary period at the expense of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 13-433; Ord. No. 387-11-00, 2-15-2001)
 
Sec. 24-84. Use and qualification with firearms.
(a)	The principal weapon of the reserve officer will meet the following criteria: .38/.357 caliber. Any second weapon will be concealed. Qualification standards will be established by the police chief. 
(b)	The riot type shotgun will be used by the reserve force only after the standards of qualification have been met. 
(c)	The wearing of any unauthorized weapon except when directed by a competent higher authority, police chief, shall be grounds for immediate dismissal from the reserve force. 
(Code 1983, § 13-434; Ord. No. 387-11-00, 2-15-2001)
 
Sec. 24-85. Uniform and equipment.
The reserve force will be authorized to wear the designated uniform and insignia of the police department as designated by the police chief. No other uniform will be authorized for wear during duty hours. The city will furnish one uniform complete with insignia and headgear. The member will furnish all other equipment required. 
(Code 1983, § 13-435; Ord. No. 387-11-00, 2-15-2001)
 
Sec. 24-86. Compensation.
The reserve force will be exclusively volunteer status; accordingly, no compensation will be authorized or paid to any member of the reserve force. 
(Code 1983, § 13-436; Ord. No. 387-11-00, 2-15-2001)
 
Sec. 24-87. Dismissal.
Grounds for dismissal from the reserve force may be for, but not necessarily limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)	For the good of the service; 
(2)	Any act of insubordination; 
(3)	Misconduct such as to bring discredit to the regular or reserve force; 
(4)	Unauthorized disclosure of official information; 
(5)	Neglect of duties; 
(6)	Violation of rules, regulations, or directives; 
(7)	Conviction of a felony; 
(8)	Missing three meetings in a calendar year without the prior approval of the commander. 
(Code 1983, § 13-437; Ord. No. 387-11-00, 2-15-2001)
 
Secs. 24-88—24-98. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. MUTUAL AID
 
Sec. 24-99. Assistance to another community.
Approval is hereby given for service of members of the regular police department of this city as police officers of any other city, town or county, in an emergency situation, when such service is requested by the mayor or police chief of the city or town, or sheriff of the county, in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1983, § 13-406)
 
Sec. 24-100. Request for aid.
Requests for service under section 24-99 shall be made by writing or by telephone, or other means of communication, to the city manager, who, if he determines that the request can be granted consistently with the continuance of the proper police protection to the inhabitants of this city, shall direct the police chief to furnish the number of officers requested and to arrange for their transportation to the requesting municipality or county. 
(Code 1983, § 13-407)
 
Sec. 24-101. Reimbursement required.
Any municipality or county requesting and receiving service by members of the police department of this city shall reimburse this city for the cost of the transportation to and from such municipality of the officers so serving and the pro rata cost of their salaries, insurance and other benefits attributable to their service in such municipality or county. 
(Code 1983, § 13-408)
 
Sec. 24-102. Contract required, except in public emergency.
Except in cases of extreme public emergency, no services shall be rendered hereunder to any municipality or county unless such service is in accordance with the terms of sections 24-99 to 24-101. The city manager is authorized to negotiate and execute contracts with the proper contracting officers of such municipalities or counties, which shall be on a reciprocal basis, thereby securing to this city the service of members of the police departments of such municipalities or counties should an emergency arise necessitating such service here. All such contracts shall be submitted to the city council for approval before becoming effective. 
(Code 1983, § 13-409)
 
Secs. 24-103—24-110. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PRIVATE PROPERTY IN CUSTODY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
Sec. 24-111. Complete record required.
All personal property which comes into the possession of any police officer, which has been found or stolen or taken off the person or out of the possession of any prisoner or person suspected of, or charged with, being a criminal, and which is not known to belong to some person laying claim thereto, shall be, by the officer securing possession thereof, delivered into the charge of the police chief. The chief shall, in a permanent record book kept for that purpose, make a record sufficient to identify the property, with: 
(1)	The date and circumstances of the receipt thereof; 
(2)	The name of the person from whom it was taken if known; 
(3)	The place where it was found; and 
(4)	The subsequent disposal thereof, giving the date of sale, name and address of the purchaser, and the amount for which it was sold. 
(Prior Code, §§ 27-2.1, 27-2.2; Code 1983, § 13-501)
 
Sec. 24-112. Disposition of certain unclaimed property.
(a)	Except for lost and found property subject to section 24-113, the police chief shall dispose of personal property or money or legal tender which has come into the possession of the police chief in any manner if: 
(1)	The owner of the personal property or money or legal tender is unknown or has not claimed the property; 
(2)	The property or money or legal tender has been in the custody of the police chief for at least 90 days; and 
(3)	The property or money or legal tender or any part thereof is no longer needed to be held as evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any litigation. 
(b)	The police chief shall file an application in the district court in which the situs of government of the municipality is located requesting the authority of the court to conduct a sale of the personal property which has a fair market value of more than its face value. The police chief shall attach to the application a list describing the property including any identifying numbers and marks, the date the property came into the possession of the police chief, and the name of the owner and the person in last possession, if different, and the address of the person, if known. The court shall set the application for hearing not less than ten days or more than 20 days after filing of the application. 
(c)	In any instance where the property has an actual or apparent value of more than $250.00, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, written notice of the hearing shall be sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to each owner at the address as listed in the application. If the owner of any property with an actual or apparent value exceeding $500.00 is unable to be served written notice by first-class mail, notice shall be provided by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the property is in custody. The notice shall contain a brief description of the property of the owner and the place and date of the hearing. The notice shall be posted at the assigned place for the posting of municipal notices, and at two other public places in the municipality. 
(d)	If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property at the hearing, the court shall enter an order authorizing the police chief to dispose of the property as follows: 
(1)	Donate the property having value of less than $500.00 to a not-for-profit corporation as defined by state law for use by needy families; 
(2)	Sell the personal property for cash to the highest bidder, after at least five days' notice of the sale has been published; 
(3)	Transfer the property to a third-party agent under contract with the governing body of the police chief for sale by internet or other electronic means, regardless of whether the sale structure or distribution site is within the state; or 
(4)	By any other means as determined appropriate by the court, including, but not limited to, destruction. 
Regardless of the means of disposition, the police chief shall make a return of the donation or sale and the order of the court confirming the donation or sale shall vest title to the property in the recipient or purchaser. After payment of court costs and other expenses, the remainder of money received from the sale of the personal property shall be deposited in the municipal general fund. 
(e)	All money or legal tender which has come into the possession of the police chief pursuant to the circumstances provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be transferred by the police chief to the municipal clerk for deposit in the municipal general fund. Prior to any transfer, the police chief shall file an application in the district court requesting the court to enter an order authorizing the police chief to transfer the money for deposit in the municipal general fund. The application shall describe the money or legal tender, the date the same came into the possession of the police chief, and the name of the owner and the address of the owner, if known. Upon filing the application which may be joined with an application as described in subsection (b) of this section, a hearing shall be set not less than ten days nor more than 20 days from the filing of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. The notice shall state that upon failure of anyone to appear to prove ownership to the money or legal tender, the court shall order the same to be deposited in the municipal general fund. The notice may be combined with a notice to sell personal property as provided for in subsection (b) of this section. If no one appears to claim and prove ownership to the money or legal tender at the hearing, the court shall order the same to be transferred to the municipal general fund as provided in this subsection. 
(f)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dangerous or deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives, or any property of any kind or character, of which, possession is prohibited by law. By order of the trial court, any property filed as an exhibit or held by the municipality shall be destroyed or sold or disposed of, pursuant to the conditions prescribed in the order. 
(Prior Code, §§ 27-2.3—27-2.5; Code 1983, § 13-502)
 
Sec. 24-113. Lost and found property.
The finder of lost property within the city may elect either of two options under this section: 
(1)	The finder may deposit the found property with the city police department provided that the finder relinquishes any future claim to the property to the police department. Only property in which the finder relinquishes any future claim of ownership will be stored in by the city in police property rooms or other city storage facilities; or 
(2)	The finder may retain possession of the property after registering its description and the finder's identity with the police department. 
(Prior Code, § 27-2.7; Code 1983, § 13-503)

Chapter 26 NUISANCES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 26-1. Nuisance defined; public nuisances; private nuisances.
(a)	A nuisance is unlawfully doing an act, or omitting to perform a duty, or is anything or condition which either: 
(1)	Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; 
(2)	Offends decency; 
(3)	Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage, any lake or navigable river, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street or other public property; or 
(4)	In any way renders other persons insecure in life or in the use of property. 
(b)	A public nuisance is one which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal. 
(c)	Every nuisance not included in subsection (b) of this section is a private nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 8-401)
State law reference(s)—Power to define and abate nuisances, 50 O.S. § 1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-2. Persons responsible.
Every successive owner of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property, created by a former owner, is liable therefor in the same manner as the one who first created it. 
(Code 1983, § 8-402)
 
Sec. 26-3. Time does not legalize.
No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance amounting to an actual obstruction of public right. 
(Code 1983, § 8-403)
 
Sec. 26-4. Remedies against public nuisances.
The remedies against a public nuisance are: 
(1)	Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court; 
(2)	Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court; 
(3)	Civil action; or 
(4)	Abatement: 
a.	By person injured as provided 50 O.S. § 12; or 
b.	By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 8-404)
 
Sec. 26-5. Remedies against private nuisances.
The remedies against a private nuisance are: 
(1)	Civil action; and 
(2)	Abatement: 
a.	By person injured as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14, 15; or 
b.	By the city in accordance with law or ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 8-405)
 
Sec. 26-6. City has power to define and summarily abate nuisances.
As provided in 50 O.S. § 16, the city has power to determine what is and what shall constitute a nuisance within its corporate limits and, for the protection of the public health, the public parks, and the public water supply, outside of its corporate limits. Whenever it is practical to do so, the city has the power summarily to abate any such nuisance after notice to the owner and an opportunity for him to be heard, if this can be done. 
(Code 1983, § 8-406)
 
Sec. 26-7. Certain public nuisances in the city declared.
In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this Code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)	The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made; 
(2)	The sale, offering for sale, or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city, or keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale, or furnished in violation of the state law or ordinances of the city; 
(3)	The exposure, display, sale, or distribution of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects or the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed; 
(4)	The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot machines, punchboards or otherwise; 
(5)	The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse, or other immoral acts are practiced; 
(6)	The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on; 
(7)	The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of the ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held; 
(8)	The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease; 
(9)	The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises; 
(10)	The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which materially or unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others; 
(11)	Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance; 
(12)	Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk; 
(13)	All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned, or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
(14)	Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse, or other things, which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin, or disease germs; and the premises on which such exist; 
(15)	Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition; 
(16)	Any pit, hole, or other thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety; 
(17)	Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety; 
(18)	Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health, morals, safety or welfare; 
(19)	Any motor vehicle (whether in operating condition or not) or any trailer without a current vehicle plate and current safety inspection sticker as required by law for vehicles used on the public highways, when stored or kept in a residence district; 
(20)	Any stable or other place where animals are kept that may become obnoxious or annoying to any resident of this city, by reason of any noise made by the animal therein, or by reason of lack of sanitation; and 
(21)	Every building or other structure that shall become unsafe and dangerous from fire, decay or other cause, or shall become hazardous from fire, by reason of age, decay or construction, location or other cause, or shall be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of this city or its inhabitants from any cause. 
The above enumeration of certain public nuisances shall be cumulative and not limit other provisions of law or ordinances defining public or private nuisances either in more general or more specific terms. 
(Code 1983, § 8-407)
 
Sec. 26-8. Summary abatement of nuisances.
(a)	Officials authorized to declare public nuisance. The city manager, the city's appointed health officer, the code enforcement officer, the police chief, and the fire chief may declare a private premises within the corporate boundaries of the city a public nuisance in accordance with this code. 
(b)	Method of relieving public nuisance. In addition to section 26-6, the appropriate city officials shall have such authority as to any private premises within the corporate limits of the city, and shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the county to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or within such other time as might be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of such owner, occupant or agent, if known and within the state. 
(c)	Method of notification for unoccupied residences and properties. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of such owner, occupant or agent is unknown, or is without the state, such order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the county. 
(d)	Collection of cost of removal; ad valorem taxes/liens. If such order is not complied with, the city manager shall cause the nuisance to be removed by executing the order to be complied with in order to protect the health and welfare of the city and the cost thereof shall be certified to the county clerk, who shall add the same to the ad valorem taxes assessed against the property, and such cost shall be a lien against the property, until paid, and shall be collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes against the property, and when collected shall be paid to the city issuing the order, for reimbursement of the funds used to pay such cost. 
(e)	Collection of cost of removal; amounts to be added to utility bills. As per 63 O.S. § 1-1011(c), the city is enacting this section to authorize staff to place the cost of removing or abating any such nuisances on the municipal utility bills and be collected in the same manner as such bills. 
(Code 1983, § 8-408; Ord. No. 488-06-06, 6-15-2006)
 
Sec. 26-9. Abatement by suit in district court.
In cases where it is deemed impractical summarily to abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in the district court of the county where the nuisance is located, as provided in 50 O.S. § 17. 
(Code 1983, § 8-409)
 
Sec. 26-10. Nuisance unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, any owner, lessee, or other person to create or maintain a nuisance within the city or to permit a nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city. 
(Code 1983, § 8-410)
 
Sec. 26-11. Health nuisances; abatement.
(a)	Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the health officer has authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or within such other time as may be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the health officer or by a policeman, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of the owner, occupant, or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of the owner, occupant, or agent is unknown, or is outside the state, the order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. 
(b)	If the order is not complied with, the health officer may cause the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified to the city clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant if he is a user of water from the city water system or such other utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added, and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations relating to delinquency in payment, as the utility bill itself. If such owner or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost, after certification to the city clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any other debt due the city may be collected. 
(Code 1983, § 8-411)
 
Sec. 26-12. Toilet facilities required; nuisance.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Human excrement means the bowel and kidney discharge of human beings. 
Sanitary pit privy means a privy which is built, rebuilt, or constructed so as to conform with the specifications approved by the state health department. 
Sanitary water closet means the flush type toilet which is connected with a sanitary sewer line of such capacity and construction as to carry away the contents at all times. 
(b)	Every owner of a residence or other building in which humans reside, are employed, or congregate within this city shall install, equip, and maintain adequate sanitary facilities for the disposal of human excrement by use of a sanitary water closet or a sanitary pit privy. The closets and toilets hereby required shall be of the sanitary water closet type when located within 200 feet of a sanitary sewer and accessible thereto, and of the sanitary water closet type (notwithstanding a greater distance from a sanitary sewer) or the water closet type emptying into a septic tank system or the pit privy type. A septic tank system or a pit privy may be used in such cases only if it meets the standards of and is approved by the state health department. 
(c)	All human excrement disposed of within this city shall be disposed of by depositing it in closets and privies of the type provided for in this section. It is unlawful for any owner of property within the city to permit the disposal of human excrement thereon in any other manner, or for any person to dispose of human excrement within the city in any other manner. 
(d)	All privies shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times, and the covers of the seats of privies shall be kept closed at all times when the privies are not being used. No wash water, kitchen slop, or anything other than human excrement and toilet paper shall be emptied into a privy. No excrement from any person suffering from typhoid fever, dysentery, or other serious bowel disease shall be deposited in any sanitary pit privy or sanitary water closet until it is disinfected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the health officer. 
(e)	All facilities for the disposal of human excrement in a manner different from that required by this section, and all privies and closets so constructed, situated, or maintained as to endanger the public health, are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and may be dealt with and abated as such. Any person maintaining any such nuisance is guilty of an offense, and each day upon which any such nuisance continues is a separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 8-412)
 
Sec. 26-13. Procedure cumulative.
The various procedures for abating nuisances prescribed by this chapter and by other provisions of law and ordinance shall be cumulative onto any other penalties or procedures authorized. 
(Code 1983, § 8-413)
 
Sec. 26-14. Water or putrid substance.
(a)	It is unlawful and an offense for the owner and occupant of any lot or piece or parcel of ground in the city to suffer or permit water or putrid substances, whether animal or vegetable, to accumulate thereon, so as to cause an offensive odor to be emitted therefrom, or to become in a condition injurious or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood. Any such condition on any lot or piece of ground is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the same may be abated as provided by this Code. 
(b)	It is unlawful and an offense for the owner and occupant of any lot or piece or parcel of ground in the city to suffer or permit sludge, whether municipal or industrial, to be applied thereon, without written consent from the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 16-3.8; Code 1983, § 8-414; Ord. No. 324-3-94, 3-10-1994)
 
Sec. 26-15. Offensive odors.
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or piece or parcel of ground in the city to suffer or permit any refuse matter, animal or vegetable, or any putrid or unwholesome substance to accumulate thereon, or to suffer or permit any cellar, stable, barn, henhouse, dog kennel or any place where an animal are kept, or any water closet or privy, septic tank or cesspool thereon, to become in such a condition as to emit offensive odors, or to be injurious or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood. Any such condition above described is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the same may be abated as provided in this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 16-3.9; Code 1983, § 8-415)
 
Sec. 26-16. Manure.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner or occupant of any premises, within the city, to pile any manure or refuse on the premises, or on the premises of another, or on any public property, or in any street, alley or highway within the city. Any such piling above prohibited is hereby declared to be nuisance, and the same may be abated as provided by this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 16-3.10; Code 1983, § 8-416)
 
Sec. 26-17. Loud noise or music prohibited.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise disturbance or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(b)	The following acts, among others and not to exclude other such acts, are declared to be excessive or unusual noises in violation of this chapter, except and unless in the urgent interest of public health, welfare, and safety, a permit has been issued by the city manager for continuance or performance over such time periods as may be so stated: 
(1)	Owning, maintaining, harboring or maintaining for hire any animal or bird which, by frequent or prolonged barks, whines, howls, noisemaking, cause or tend to cause excessive sound levels, whether originating from public or private facilities, except publicly owned or publicly operated zoos; 
(2)	Playing or operating any radio, television set, record, tape, or other recorder type replayer, sound amplifier or other electronic audio device, musical instrument or similar device such as to emit loud music, noise or words. However, this section shall not prohibit religious bodies from playing chimes, bells, carillons or other religious music; 
(3)	Shouting, carousing, singing or other prolonged noisemaking such as to cause or tend to cause excessive sound levels; 
(4)	Sounding of horns, whistles, sirens, firearms or other such alarm or announcement device, whether manual or power operated, or the detonation of fireworks or explosives except as required as warning of fire, natural disaster or other impending or incidental danger, or which may be required as a part of fire or law enforcement; 
(5)	Operation of any motorized vehicle such as to cause or tend to cause excessive sound levels. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-309; Ord. No. 343-7-95, 7-17-1995)
 
Secs. 26-18—26-37. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. JUNK AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
Sec. 26-38. Purpose, intent and applicability.
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property, and shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards, prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law violations, protection of the public rights in the use of streets and thoroughfares from obstructions placed and left in derogation of those rights, and for safeguarding and protecting recovered stolen vehicles. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1301(A); Ord. No. 337-4-95, 4-13-1995)
 
Sec. 26-39. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer as designated by the city manager or any police officer of the city. 
Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property means any street or highway which includes the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel and also means any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1301(B); Ord. No. 337-4-95, 4-13-1995)
 
Sec. 26-40. Keeping or storing prohibited.
(a)	No person shall deposit, store, keep or permit to be deposited, stored or kept in the open upon public or private property a dismantled, unserviceable, inoperable, junked or abandoned vehicle or any vehicle legally or physically incapable of being operated, for a period exceeding 48 hours unless such vehicle, or parts thereof, is completely enclosed within a building, or stored in connection with a business lawfully established pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the city, or stored on properly lawfully designated under the zoning ordinances of the city as a place where such vehicles may be stored. 
(b)	The accumulation or storage of one or more vehicles or parts thereof as described in this section shall constitute a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. It is the duty of the owner of such vehicle, or the parts thereof, or the owner of the private property, lessee or other person in possession or control of the property upon which such vehicle is located, to remove the vehicle from such property or have the vehicle housed in a building where it will not be visible from the street or other private property, the removal or enclosure shall be made within 48 hours after notice has been given to the owner of the vehicle or the owner, lessee or person in control of the property upon which such vehicle is located. The 48-hour time may be extended by the enforcement officer in the case of obvious hardship. 
(c)	Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city or its designee, the owner or occupant of the private property where same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(d)	The enforcement officer is empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the issuance of citations. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1301(C)—(F); Ord. No. 337-4-95, 4-13-1995)
 
Sec. 26-41. Place of impoundment.
Every vehicle that is impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be removed to the nearest garage or place of safekeeping designated by the city and to no other place. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1302)
 
Sec. 26-42. Duration of impoundment.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided, any vehicle impounded under the authority of this chapter shall be stored and held safely until an order for its release is received from an officer of the traffic violations bureau or other proper police officer. 
(b)	The order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be conditioned upon the payment by the person to whom the release is issued of all impoundment costs and accrued storage charges assessed against the vehicle. 
(c)	No order of release of an impounded vehicle shall be issued until all fines and costs due the city because of traffic law or other law violations involving the vehicle have been paid. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1303)
 
Sec. 26-43. Police granted authority to impound vehicles.
Members of the police department are hereby authorized within the limits set forth in this chapter to impound vehicles under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated. No impoundment shall be valid unless made under order of an authorized police officer and in strict adherence with the procedures required in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1304)
 
Sec. 26-44. Disabled vehicles.
A disabled vehicle upon a street or highway may be impounded under the following circumstances: 
(1)	If left unattended and improperly parked on street or highway and constitutes a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; 
(2)	If the person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to such extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal and the vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or a hazard; or 
(3)	When a derelict vehicle has been parked upon public right-of-way for a period of 72 hours. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1305; Ord. No. 337-4-95, 4-13-1995)
 
Sec. 26-45. Vehicles on bridge.
An unattended vehicle left upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube or tunnel, where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hazard, may be impounded. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1306)
 
Sec. 26-46. Arrest and detention of driver of vehicle.
Whenever the driver or person in charge of any vehicle is placed under arrest and taken into custody and detained by police under circumstances which leaves or will leave a vehicle unattended on any street or highway, the vehicle may be impounded. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1307)
 
Sec. 26-47. Vehicle constitutes traffic hazard.
A vehicle left unattended upon any street, alley or thoroughfare and so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic shall be impounded. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1308)
 
Sec. 26-48. Illegal trespass by vehicle.
(a)	An unattended vehicle found to be in violation of this Code may be impounded when the required complaint has been properly made and filed as provided in this section. 
(b)	If a violation of the provisions of this Code occurs, the owner or legal occupant who complains shall sign a complaint against the person parking the vehicle on the owner's or legal occupant's property, or if the identity of the person parking the vehicle is unknown, then the complaint may be filed against the registered owner of the vehicle. The complaint shall be verified and shall allege that the complaining party is the owner or legal occupant of the property upon which the vehicle is parked or standing. 
(c)	Upon filing of the complaint by the property owner or legal occupant, and if there appears to be proper cause to believe the provisions of this Code have been violated, the police department shall cause the vehicle to be impounded from the property and placed in storage. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1309)
 
Sec. 26-49. Vehicles parked overtime.
Any unattended vehicle which has been parked for more than one hour in excess of the time allowed for parking in any place shall be impounded, and any vehicle parked in violation of this Code, regarding more than 24 hours, shall be impounded. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1310)
 
Sec. 26-50. Vehicles blocking fire exits or hydrants.
Any vehicle illegally parked in such a manner that it blocks a fire escape ladder, device or exit or blocks ready access to a fire hydrant shall be impounded. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1311)
 
Sec. 26-51. Vehicles parked in intersection.
Any unattended vehicle illegally parked in any street intersection shall be impounded. A disabled vehicle in an intersection with the person in charge of the vehicle being present, shall be moved out of the intersection and to the nearest available legal parking space at the street curbing. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1312)
 
Sec. 26-52. Stolen vehicles; recovery by police.
(a)	Whenever a stolen vehicle is located by police and the registered owner cannot be found within a reasonable time not exceeding one hour, or cannot be determined from the registration papers or other identifying media in the vehicle or from records or information available from reports of stolen cars, the vehicle may be removed to the nearest authorized place to impoundment and the registered owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the location of the place of impoundment as soon as possible by the police department. 
(b)	If the registered owner is identified, located and notified of the recovery of the stolen vehicle, the owner shall be given the right to make his own arrangement for the removal of the vehicle within the period of one hour from the time he is actually notified of its recovery, and if the owner is unable or unwilling to affect the removal within the time specified the vehicle may be impounded. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1313)
 
Sec. 26-53. Vehicles with outstanding traffic citations.
Any vehicle for which two or more citations have been issued, for violation of an ordinance, and have not been presented as required, may be impounded if parked in violation of any provision of this part. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1314)
 
Sec. 26-54. Evidence in a crime.
When a vehicle is of evidentiary value or involved in the commission of a crime, the vehicle shall be impounded. 
(Code 1983, § 15-1315; Ord. No. 337-4-95, 4-13-1995)
 
Sec. 26-55. Expired tag.
When, in accordance with 47 O.S. § 1115.1, after 90 days from the expiration date for annual registration of a vehicle, the vehicle is not bearing or displaying a proper license plate required by the Oklahoma Vehicle License and Registration Act, the vehicle may be impounded. 
(Code 1983, § 15-1317; Ord. No. 337-4-95, 4-13-1995)
 
Sec. 26-56. Failure to produce security verification.
Members of the police department shall impound a vehicle from any street, highway or public property when the person operating the vehicle fails to produce valid security verification in addition to committing any one of the following violations: reckless driving, careless driving, driving under the influence, driving while impaired, driving under a suspended license, driving with improper or faulty equipment, or driving with an expired or no tag displayed. 
(Code 1983, § 15-1318; Ord. No. 337-4-95, 4-13-1995)
 
Secs. 26-57—26-85. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. AIR QUALITY CONTROL
 
Sec. 26-86. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air contaminant means any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinder, dirt, noxious, obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or radioactive substances, waste particulates, solid, liquid or gaseous matter in the atmosphere which when in sufficient quantities is capable of injuring human, plant or animal life or depriving the enjoyment thereof. 
Air pollution means the emission of any air contaminants in such place or manner which when by itself or combined with other air contaminants present in the atmosphere is detrimental to or endangers the health, comfort or safety of any person or which may cause injury or damage to property or premises. 
Atmosphere means the air that envelops or surrounds the earth. 
Board means the air quality control variance board. 
Certified visible emissions reader shall be anyone certified by the state health department, air quality service as having satisfactorily completed their visible emissions training course. 
Chimney or stack means chimney, stack, conduit, duct, vent, flue or opening of any kind whatsoever arranged to conduct any products to the atmosphere. 
Combustible materials and fuels means any substance which will readily burn and shall include those substances which, although generally considered noncombustible, are or may be included in the mass of the combustible material burned or to be burned. 
Director means the director of the city-county health department, or his designated employees or representatives. 
Emission means the emission of air contaminants into the atmosphere. 
Evaporating loss control system means a system or device designed and installed in such a manner as to reduce or prevent the emission to the atmosphere of the vapors of the hydrocarbon fuel contained in the fuel tank, carburetor or fuel pump of the motor vehicle. 
Exhaust emission control system means a system, device or engine modification designed and installed in such a manner as to reduce or prevent the emission to the atmosphere of air pollutant gases, vapors and particulate matter released from the motor vehicle engine through the exhaust manifold and tailpipe. 
Fuel burning equipment means any equipment, machinery, device, structure or contrivance, and all appurtenances thereto, including ducts, breeching, fuel-feed equipment, ash removal equipment, internal combustion engines, combustion controls, stacks and chimneys, which burn fuel or combustible material for the purpose of producing heat or energy, but shall not mean process equipment or operations or incinerators. 
Fugitive emissions shall mean an emission or dust emanates from some point other than a point source. 
Incinerator means any device, structure or contrivance used to dispose of refuse or other waste by burning or the processing of salvageable material by burning but excluding flares. 
Motor vehicle means a self-propelled, wheeled vehicle designed for normal use on public streets and highways. 
Motor vehicle pollution control device means any or all of the devices or systems referred to in this section and designed to control or prevent air pollution emissions from motor vehicles. 
Multiple chamber incinerator means any incinerator consisting of two or more combustion chambers of in line or retort type physically separated by curtained walls with gas passage ports or ducts and designed for maximum combustion of the material to be burned. 
Opacity means the percent of reduction of light visible through the emission. 
Open burning means the burning of combustible materials or refuse in such a manner that the products of combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere. 
Open-pit incinerator means a device consisting of a pit (into which the material to be burned is placed), nozzles, pipes and other appurtenances designed and arranged in a manner to deliver additional air and/or auxiliary fuel to, or near, the zone of combustion so that theoretically complete combustion is accomplished or approached. 
Particulate matter means discrete particles of liquid (except uncombined water) or solid matter or both which may or may not be suspended in air. 
Positive crankcase ventilator means a system or device designed and installed in such a manner as to prevent or reduce the release or emission into the atmosphere of gases or vapors produced or otherwise present in the crankcase of the engine of a motor vehicle. 
Process equipment or operation means any equipment, machinery, device or premises used for the treating, processing or manufacturing of materials, products or substances which operation may emit smoke, particulate matter or other air contaminants. 
Process weight means the total weight of all materials introduced into any specific process, equipment or operation. Solid fuels shall be considered as part of the process weight but liquids and gases used solely as fuel shall not. 
Process weight per hour means the weight derived by dividing the total process weight by the number of hours in one complete operation from the beginning of any given process to the completion thereof excluding any time during which the equipment is idle. 
Products of combustion means all particulate matter and other air contaminants emitted as a result of the burning of refuse and combustible materials. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish, trade waste, leaves, salvageable material, agricultural waste and other wastes. 
Source means any physical arrangement or structure which may emit air contaminants. It includes, but is not limited to, stacks, chimneys, building openings, open fires, vehicles, processes, equipment, structures and premises. 
Source gas volume means the total amount of gas including air contaminants, emitted from any process, equipment or operation into the atmosphere. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.2; Code 1983, § 8-501)
 
Sec. 26-87. Enforcement authority.
The director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.3; Code 1983, § 8-502)
 
Sec. 26-88. Air pollution prohibited.
No person shall permit or cause an air contaminant to be emitted from any source or premises under his jurisdiction or control in sufficient amounts as to exceed those permissible under this chapter, or in quantities such that it interferes with the health, comfort or safety of any person or which may cause injury or damage to property or premises. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.15; Code 1983, § 8-503)
 
Sec. 26-89. Emission of dense smoke prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit the emission of dense visible emissions from any source whatever except as specifically permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.16; Code 1983, § 8-504)
 
Sec. 26-90. Incinerators; permit and specifications; emissions.
(a)	No person shall install or make any alteration or modification to an incinerator which affects the emission of air contaminants without first having obtained a permit from the director and paying the fee provided for in the general schedule of fees. 
(b)	A person making application for a permit shall furnish such information concerning the incinerator as the director may request including the plans, specifications, manufacturer's descriptive literature and test reports. 
(c)	All incinerators installed after the effective date of this chapter shall be multiple chambered, gas fired in the primary and secondary chamber and water scrubbed. All incinerators shall have a capacity of 75 pounds per hour or greater provided that this capacity shall not be applicable to incinerators designed and used exclusively as pathological incinerators. An incinerator of different construction may be used when the director determines that the incinerator will be equally effective in controlling the emission of air contaminants and approves its installation. 
(d)	All incinerators shall be maintained and operated according to good practices. 
(e)	Incinerators with a maximum burning capacity of 200 pounds per hour or more shall not emit particulate matter in excess of 0.2 grains per dry cubic foot corrected to 12 percent CO 2 of exhaust gas under standard conditions. Incinerators with a maximum burning capacity of less than 200 pounds per hour or more shall not emit particulate matter in excess of 0.3 grains per dry cubic foot corrected to 12 percent of exhaust gas under standard conditions. 
(f)	Incinerators may emit dense smoke up to but not exceeding an opacity designated as 40 percent as recorded by a certified visible emissions reader, for periods not exceeding five minutes in any 60-minute period and not exceeding 20 minutes in any 24-hour period. 
(g)	No permit shall be granted for the proposed installation, alteration or modification of an incinerator unless the conditions contained in section 28-180 are satisfied. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.17; Code 1983, § 8-505)
 
Sec. 26-91. Fuel burning equipment.
(a)	Fuel burning equipment shall not emit particulate matter in excess of that indicated on table 1 or chart 1. 
(b)	Fuel burning equipment in operation prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not emit particulate matter in excess of six-tenths pound per million BTU heat input provided that all such existing fuel burning equipment shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter within 12 months after it becomes effective. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.18; Code 1983, § 8-506)
 
Sec. 26-92. Process equipment or operations.
(a)	Process equipment or operations shall not emit from the premises upon which such equipment or operation is located, particulate matter in excess of that indicated on either table 2, table 3 or chart 2. 
(b)	The owner or operator of any process equipment or operation shall maintain dust control of the plant premises and plant owned, leased or controlled access roads by paving, oil treatment or other suitable measures. Good operating practices, including water spraying or other suitable measures, shall be employed to minimize dust generation and emission when bins are pulled. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.19; Code 1983, § 8-507)
 
Sec. 26-93. Hot mix asphalt plants.
(a)	Hot mix asphalt plants installed or commenced after effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not emit particulate matter into the atmosphere in excess of the quantity set out in table 4. Existing hot mix asphalt plants shall not emit particulate matter into the atmosphere in excess of the quantity emitted at plants exhibiting good operation and economic control. Within one year all hot mix asphalt plants shall comply with the emission rate shown on table 4 or a new rate to be determined by testing and experience. 
(b)	Hot mix asphalt plants may emit dense smoke not exceeding a shade or the equivalent opacity of the shade designated at number three on the Ringelmann Chart, for periods not exceeding four minutes in any 60-minute period. 
(c)	No hot mix asphalt plant shall be operated unless it is equipped with a fugitive dust control system for the hot aggregate which prevents the emission of particulate matter from any other chimney. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.20; Code 1983, § 8-508)
 
Sec. 26-94. Open burning prohibited.
No person shall cause or permit an open burning in any public or private place outside any building, provided that open burning may be conducted if no public nuisance is or will be created, as follows: 
(1)	Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of firefighting personnel when authorized by the fire chief; 
(2)	Fires set for the elimination of fire hazards or hazardous materials when there is no other practical or lawful method of disposal, and such burning is authorized by the director and the fire chief; 
(3)	Camp fires and other fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial purposes or for outdoor non-commercial preparation of food; 
(4)	Fires purposely set for the management of forest or game in accordance with practices recommended by the state department of agriculture or the United States Forest Service and which are authorized by the fire chief; 
(5)	The burning of refuse and other combustible materials generated in the operation of a domestic household when no regular garbage services are available; 
(6)	The burning of combustible material in an open pit incinerator which is designed and operated for the control of smoke and particulate matter; 
(7)	The burning of hydrocarbons by atmospheric flares when no other means of disposal is practical; and 
(8)	The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter for the purpose of clearing land and agricultural crop burning when: 
a.	The burning is not within 150 feet of an occupied residence or structure other than those located on property where the burning is conducted; 
b.	Care is used to minimize the amount of dirt on the material being burned; 
c.	Oils, rubber and other similar materials which produce unreasonable amounts of air contaminants and smoke are not burned; 
d.	The burning occurs between three hours after sunrise and three hours before sunset; and 
e.	No traffic hazard is created. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.21; Code 1983, § 8-509)
 
Sec. 26-95. Motor vehicle pollution control devices.
(a)	This section shall apply to all motor vehicles registered or subject to registration with the state tax commission in which, as new vehicles, motor vehicle pollution control devices have been installed by virtue of federal laws and regulations, in effect now and hereafter, requiring such devices to be installed. However, nothing in this article shall supersede or otherwise modify such federal laws and regulations, nor shall anything in this section be construed to require the installation of motor vehicle pollution control devices on motor vehicles not referred to by such federal laws and regulations. 
(b)	No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the removal, disconnection or disabling of a motor vehicle pollution control device which is on a motor vehicle. 
(c)	Operation of a motor vehicle or its engine which uses liquefied petroleum gas as fuel is hereby exempt from provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.22; Code 1983, § 8-510)
 
Sec. 26-96. Fugitive dust control.
No person shall permit, allow or cause fugitive dust or emissions from any facility under his control or jurisdiction without having exhausted all known methods of controlling the same. 
(Code 1983, § 8-511)
 
Sec. 26-97. Notice.
All notices required under this article, unless otherwise specified, shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person being given notice personally or mailed to his last known address, postage prepaid. The date of mailing shall be considered as the date such notice is given. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.11; Code 1983, § 8-512)
 
Sec. 26-98. Tests; data sampling.
Upon written notice, the director may require from any person subject to this article, data to establish the nature, extent, quantity or degree of air contaminants which are or may be discharged by a source under such person's control and may require that such data be certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. The director may, at his expense, designate an agent to independently gather data as to the nature, extent, quantity and degree of any air contaminants which are or may be discharged from the source. An agent as so designated is authorized to inspect any facilities and equipment necessary to gather the data. The owners of the premises being inspected will make the same available to inspection and shall permit the director to install and maintain sampling and testing apparatus as is reasonable and necessary for measurement of emissions of air contaminants, provided that they shall not unduly interfere with the operations of the owner. The director may, in writing, require the owner to provide, and maintain means of access to locations for sampling and testing purposes, in order to secure data that will disclose the nature, extent and quantity or degree of air contaminants discharged into the atmosphere. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.6; Code 1983, § 8-513)
 
Sec. 26-99. Air quality control variance board.
There is hereby created a variance board which shall consist of the personnel of the board of adjustment of the city. The members of the board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, require the production of records, documents and other matters and administer oaths. Three members shall constitute a quorum. No variance shall be granted or revoked without the concurrence of at least three members. Meetings and hearings of the board shall be called by the chairman. The board shall make rules and regulations concerning the procedures in granting or revoking variance as they shall deem necessary. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.8; Code 1983, § 8-514)
 
Sec. 26-100. Applications for variance.
Any person may make an application for a variance from the terms of this article by paying the required fee and by filing a written application with the director. The application form shall be verified by the applicant and set forth all information required by the board including the full name and address of the applicant, the nature of the violation and the extent to which a variance is sought. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.9; Code 1983, § 8-515)
 
Sec. 26-101. Fees.
Any applicant for a variance shall pay to the city clerk a fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. Such fee shall be paid each time a variance is sought, provided that the board may in its discretion review any variance denied within 90 days from the date of each denial without additional cost to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.12; Code 1983, § 8-516)
 
Sec. 26-102. Variances.
(a)	Variances from the strict provisions of this article may be granted by the board pursuant to applications therefor when: 
(1)	Due to conditions beyond the control of the person in violation, and which are not self-imposed, compliance with this article shall result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of the property or the practical closing and elimination of any lawful business, occupation or activity; and 
(2)	There are not sufficient corresponding benefits or advantage to the public in the reduction of air pollution. 
(b)	Variances shall be for a specified time but not to exceed one year. Upon expiration of a variance, additional variances may be granted. 
(c)	A variance shall be personal to the applicant and not transferable. 
(d)	All variances granted are subject to review and revocation by the board. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.7; Code 1983, § 8-517)
 
Sec. 26-103. Public hearings.
No variance shall be granted or revoked without first holding a public hearing. No less than ten days' notice shall be given to all interested persons as appear in the file and records of the board. In addition, notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and published within the city not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.10; Code 1983, § 8-518)
 
Sec. 26-104. Nuisance declared.
The emission of air contaminants in violation of this article pertaining to air quality control is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the director as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.13; Code 1983, § 8-519)
 
Sec. 26-105. Abatement procedure.
(a)	In addition to any penalties, upon determination by the director that a violation of this chapter has occurred and that the person in violation has not furnished satisfactory proof that corrective measures have been or are being taken to abate the nuisance, the director shall give written notice to the person in violation to abate the nuisance. The notice shall specify the section which is being violated and a reasonable time not exceeding 20 days within which to abate the nuisance. 
(b)	If at the end of the time allowed in subsection (a) of this section, the violation has not been corrected, the director shall abate the nuisance as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 8-520)
 
Sec. 26-106. Emergency.
When a violation of this article creates a hazardous or dangerous condition capable of immediately harming life or property, the director shall summarily abate the nuisance immediately and without notice. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.5; Code 1983, § 8-521)
 
Sec. 26-107. Liability.
Any person owning, operating or controlling a source of air contaminants which violates this article shall be subject to all penalties and liabilities for such violation. Each day of any such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 11-1.14; Code 1983, § 8-522)
 
Sec. 26-108. Table and charts.
The following tables and charts, on file in the office of the city clerk, were adopted as part of this Code and are hereby incorporated by reference as fully as if set out in full herein: 
(1)	Table 1; 
(2)	Chart 1; 
(3)	Chart 2; 
(4)	Table 2; 
(5)	Table 3; and 
(6)	Table 4. 
(Code 1983, § 8-524)
 
Secs. 26-109—26-169. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. TRASH, WEEDS AND GRASS
 
Sec. 26-170. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Trash means any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal, waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned. 
Owner means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer. 
Weeds includes, but is not limited, to poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac and all vegetation at any stage of maturity which: 
(1)	Exceeds 12 inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or produce for human consumption or own in a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community of a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of the weeds; 
(2)	Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash; 
(3)	Harbors rodents or vermin; 
(4)	Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors; 
(5)	Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or 
(6)	Is dead or diseased. 
The term "weed" does not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use; 
(Code 1983, § 8-102)
 
Sec. 26-171. Accumulation of trash or weeds unlawful.
It is unlawful for any owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land situated wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city to allow trash or weeds to grow, stand or accumulate upon such premises and it is the duty of such owner to remove or destroy any such trash or weeds. 
(Code 1983, § 8-101)
 
Sec. 26-172. Reports of accumulation of grass, weeds or trash on property.
(a)	Any officer or employee of the city who discovers an accumulation of trash or the growth of grass and weeds, or both these conditions, upon any premises within the limits of the city, shall report the condition to the city clerk if, as a result of the accumulation or growth, the premises appear to be: 
(1)	Detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community; 
(2)	A hazard to traffic; or 
(3)	A fire hazard to property. 
(b)	The chief or assistant chief of police, chief or assistant chief of the fire department, or the county sanitarian or other representative of the department of public health, and any other person authorized by the city manager shall, on citizen complaint or upon their own notice, inspect subject property. If their inspection reveals a violation of one or more of the above named conditions, and their decision must be unanimous, they shall report their findings to the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 8-103)
 
Sec. 26-173. Receipt of report, hearing and notice.
(a)	Upon receiving the report provided for in section 26-172, or upon receipt of equivalent information from any reliable source, the city manager shall place the matter upon the agenda of the city council for hearing and consideration at an appropriate date which will permit the giving of the notices prescribed by state law. At the hearing the council shall consider whether the premises, by reason of the conditions specified, are detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community, or a hazard to traffic, or a fire hazard to property. 
(b)	At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city clerk shall give written notice of the hearing by posting upon the premises and by forwarding a copy thereof by certified mail with return receipt requested to the owner of the property at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer. If the return receipt shows that the property owner cannot be located or if the return receipt is not returned within ten days from the date of mailing by the city clerk-treasurer, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation one time not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)	If the city council anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance, in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, the notice, whether by certified mail or by publication, shall state: 
(1)	That any accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner's property occurring within six months after the removal of trash or cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may be summarily abated by the city council; 
(2)	That costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner; and 
(3)	That a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner. 
(d)	At least ten days from the date of receipt of the notice by the owner and upon the date specified in the notice, the city council shall hear the matter and shall receive information thereon, including anything which may be presented by the owner of the premises, personally or by agent or attorney. 
(e)	If after the hearing, in subsection (d) of this section, the council determines that any of the conditions specified in section 26-171 exist upon the premises, and whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit, and welfare of the public and the community; has caused a hazard to traffic; or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property; then, upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes such a detriment or hazard and the property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the city council may: 
(1)	Order the property cleaned of trash, or other trash, or weeds or grass to be cut, removed or destroyed; and 
(2)	Authorize the agents of the city, whether staff or contracting bidder, to exercise the right of entry upon the property for the removal of trash, cutting, mowing, and removal and destruction of weeds or grass, and the performance of such other necessary duties as a governmental function of the city. 
(f)	A hearing need not be held, though noticed, if within ten days from the date of the receipt of the notice: 
(1)	The owner or occupant cuts, removes or destroys such trash or weeds in accordance with the notice; or 
(2)	The owner of the property gives his written consent authorizing the city to remove the trash or mow the weeds or grass, thereby waiving his right to a hearing. 
(Code 1983, § 8-104; Ord. No. 269-A, 10-13-1988)
 
Sec. 26-174. Summary abatement procedure.
(a)	If the city council causes property within the city limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedures provided for in section 26-173(c), any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the property occurring within a six-month period may be declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner. 
(b)	At the time of each such summary abatement the municipality shall notify the property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days after the date of mailing the notice. 
(c)	The notice and hearing shall be as provided for in section 26-173. 
(d)	Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as provided for in sections 26-176 and 26-177. This subsection shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred after notice was given pursuant to section 26-173. 
(Code 1983, § 8-104.1; Ord. No. 269-A, 10-13-1988)
 
Sec. 26-175. Work done by employees or contract.
The city manager shall order work to be performed under section 26-171. Such work may be done by the employees of this city under the supervision of the department head designated by the city manager, or the city manager shall prepare appropriate specifications and advertise for bids in the manner prescribed by law and shall award a contract for one year to the lowest and best bidder to cut, mow or clean the property upon which the nuisance is located. The cost of abating such nuisance, in each and every instance when it is abated, shall be borne by the property owner and shall be assessed as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1983, § 8-105; Ord. No. 289-A, 4-17-1990)
 
Sec. 26-176. Determination and assessments of costs.
When the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located has failed or refused to abate such nuisance, the city manager shall cause the nuisance to be abated by directing the successful bidder to cut, mow or clean the property. The actual and necessary cost required to be expended by the city manager, together with such administrative expense for mailing of notices, etc., such administrative expenses not to exceed $70.00, and the total of such costs, shall be certified to the office of the city clerk-treasurer, who shall be responsible for billing all of such costs to the property owner. The city clerk-treasurer shall forward a statement and demand payment of the total cost by certified mail with return receipt requested to the owner of the property at the address shown by the current tax rolls in the office of the treasurer of the county in which the property lies. 
(Code 1983, § 8-106; Ord. No. 289-A, 4-17-1990)
 
Sec. 26-177. Lien on the property, civil remedy.
If the costs of the work performed under this chapter are not paid within 30 days from the date of mailing the notice prescribed by section 26-174, the city clerk-treasurer shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer of the county in which the property upon which the work was done is located, in order that the amount be levied upon the property and be collected by the county treasurer in the manner prescribed by the law of this state. The lien is coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided in this section, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon. Upon receiving payment, if any, the city clerk-treasurer shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien. 
(Code 1983, § 8-107)
 
Sec. 26-178. Service of notice.
The service of all notices prescribed by this chapter shall be evidenced by the return of the officer making such service, certified in his official capacity, and filed in the office of the city clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 8-108)
 
Sec. 26-179. Unlawful to deposit rubbish.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any rubbish, trash, slop, garbage, filthy substance, grass, weeds, trees, brush or any other refuse or waste matter in any street, avenue, alley or in any ditch or watercourse, or upon the premises of another, or upon any public ground in this city. 
(b)	In the event the substances disposed of contain three or more items bearing a common address, it will identify the owner of the items. 
(c)	The provisions of this section may be enforced by the county health officer, by the code enforcement officers of the city, or by any commissioned member of the city police or fire department. 
(Code 1983, § 8-109; Ord. No. 289-A, 4-17-1990)
 
Sec. 26-180. Removal of dead animals.
The owner or any person having charge of any animal dying in this city, shall within 24 hours after the death of such animal, remove its carcass, and failure so to do shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 8-110)
 
Sec. 26-181. Unlawful to litter from automobiles.
It is unlawful for any person to throw from any automobile or motor vehicle being operated and driven upon and over the streets, alleys and roadways of the city any litter, trash, waste paper, tin cans or any other substance or refuse whatever. 
(Code 1983, § 8-112)
 
Sec. 26-182. Litter not to accumulate on property.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, occupying any real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow trash, waste paper, litter objects, bottles, tin cans or any other used or disposed of objects to accumulate upon such real property or premises being so occupied or rented to such an extent as to constitute a littering nuisance. 
(Code 1983, § 8-113)
 
Sec. 26-183. Weeds to be cut.
(a)	No person shall permit any lot, yard, parkway or sidewalk or the space abutting thereon to the center of the street or the center of the alley of the property, owned, occupied or controlled by him, or for which he is agent or who has charge thereof for the owner, to become covered, overgrown with weeds or other noxious or injurious growth or accumulation. Any lot, yard, sidewalk, parkway or space abutting thereon, which shall become covered or overgrown with such weeds or other accumulation so as to become noxious, detrimental to the general health, or offensive, or likely to cause or spread disease, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)	The owner, occupant, or any person having the care of any lot or tract of land within the city limits, shall cut down and remove, or cause to be cut down and removed, from such lot or tract of land, to the center of the street or alley, all offensive, unwholesome and noxious weeds, vines and grass thereon. Any person, firm or corporation refusing or neglecting to cut down and remove such offensive and unwholesome and noxious weeds, vines and grass and other accumulation, with or without notice, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 16-3.7; Code 1983, § 8-114)
 
Sec. 26-184. Premises to be free from rubbish.
No person having in his possession, supervision or control, whether as owner, occupant or tenant, any premises situated in the city, shall allow or permit any such premises to have thereon, any empty boxes, barrels, rubbish, trash, waste paper, excess tin cans, weeds, junk, old auto parts, ice boxes, refrigerators, refuse or trash of any description not properly cared for. No person shall place or dump any of the items above mentioned in any public street, thoroughfare, avenue or alley, or upon any vacant lot or premises within the city. 
(Prior Code, § 16-3.11; Code 1983, § 8-115)
 
Sec. 26-185. Condemnation of dilapidated buildings, notice, removal, lien.
(a)	As used in this section, the term "dilapidated building" means the neglect of necessary repairs to a building or allowing it to fall into a state of decay, or allowing it to fall into partial ruin to such an extent that the building is a hazard to the health or safety or welfare of the general public. 
(b)	After 15 days' notice by the city to the property owner by posting upon certain property within the city limits and by written notice to the owner thereof by certified mail with return receipt requested at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office, and by mailing notice to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk to the last-known address of the mortgagee, a hearing may be held by the city council to determine whether the property is dilapidated and has thereby become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property and upon a finding that the condition of the property requires such a conclusion, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions. At the hearing, the city council may cause the dilapidated buildings to be torn down and removed and shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work. For such purpose, the agents of the city are hereby granted the right of entry on such property for the performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the city if the work is not performed by the property owner within dates fixed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council shall determine the actual cost of such dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings, and such other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The city clerk-treasurer shall forward a statement of such actual cost and demand for payment thereof by certified mail with return receipt requested to the property owner, at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office, and shall mail notice to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk to the last-known address of the mortgagee. If dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings is done on a private contract basis, it shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. If dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings is done by the city, then cost to property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required for dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings. If payment is not made within six months from the date of such mailing, the city clerk-treasurer shall forward a certified statement of the amount of such cost to the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located and the same shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. Such cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer, coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against such property, and such liens shall continue until such cost shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1983, § 8-116; Ord. No. 115A, 9-13-1979)
 
Chapter 28 OFFENSES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 28-1. Attempts to commit an offense.
Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted offense itself. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-101)
 
Sec. 28-2. Aiding in an offense.
When no punishment for counseling or aiding in the commission of a particular offense is expressly prescribed by ordinance, every person who counsels or aids another in the commission of such is guilty of an offense, or misdemeanor, and punishable in the same manner as the principal offender. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-102)
 
Secs. 28-3—28-22. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
 
Sec. 28-23. Petit larceny prohibited.
Petit larceny is the taking of personal property of value not exceeding $500.00 accomplished by fraud or stealth and with intent to deprive another thereof, but it does not include the taking of such property from the person of another. Petit larceny is unlawful, and any person who commits larceny shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-201)
 
Sec. 28-24. Injuring automobiles and other vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person to start, otherwise meddle with, molest, enter, occupy, or loiter in any automobile or other vehicle belonging to another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-202)
 
Sec. 28-25. Destroying or injuring buildings and other property.
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear, or molest any structure, building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use; or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or any other person entitled to its use. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-203)
 
Sec. 28-26. Placing signs on property of another.
It is unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark, write or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement, bill placard, device or inscription upon any public or private building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other property of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-204)
 
Sec. 28-27. Throwing or shooting at persons or property.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone or other object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or shoot any stone or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, electric light or other property of another (whether public or private), except in case where such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or of property. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-205)
 
Sec. 28-28. Tampering with or damaging public utilities.
It is unlawful for any person to connect or attach any kind of pipe, wire or other contrivance to any pipe, line, wire or other conductor carrying gas, water or electricity and belonging to a public utility (whether publicly or privately owned), in such a manner as to enable him to consume or use the gas, water or electricity without it passing through the meter or any other way so as to evade payment therefor. It is also unlawful for any person to damage, molest, tamper with, or destroy any pipe, line, wire, meter, or other part of any public utility, including any telegraph or telephone system. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-206)
 
Sec. 28-29. Unlawful intrusion upon land.
It is unlawful for any person to intrude or squat upon any lot or piece of land within the city without a license or authority from the owner thereof, or to erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without such license or authority, or to place, erect or occupy within the bounds of any street, alley or avenue of the city, any hut, shanty, hovel, or other structure without authority of law or ordinance. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-207)
 
Sec. 28-30. Illegal entrance.
It is illegal for any person to enter upon the property of another or into an area or structure on such property (whether such property, area or structure is public or private), when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or otherwise or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when such entrance is in line of duty, or with the expressed, or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-208)
 
Sec. 28-31. Throwing advertising on street, prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, leave or deposit, or cause to be thrown, left or deposited, upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public area, any handbill, circular, or other advertising matter. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-209)
 
Sec. 28-32. Throwing injurious substances.
It is unlawful for any person to purposely or premeditatedly put or throw upon the person or property of another, or upon any animal, any acid, corrosive or other irritating or harmful substance, or human or animal waste or urine, with intent to injure or harass the person, property or animal. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-210)
 
Sec. 28-33. Injury to plants and trees.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully and without authority cut, pull, pluck or otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees growing in or around any park or public street within the city, or willfully or without authority to tear down, remove, cut or otherwise injure or destroy any gate or fence enclosing any such park or ground, or willfully injure or destroy any stand, bench, seat or other property situated upon such park or ground. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-211)
 
Sec. 28-34. Public streets and trees.
It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Willfully or wantonly cut, deface or in any way injure any tree or sapling standing or growing in any of the streets, alleys or public places within the city; 
(2)	Attach any guy wires, telephone, telegraph, or electric wire, or any wire to any live tree; 
(3)	Dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue or alley, or any other public premises or ground within, belonging to or under the supervision or control of the city; 
(4)	Take or remove any dirt, earth or any substance from any street, road, alley or other public place in the city; or to cut, break or otherwise injure any pavement, curb or gutter therein; or 
(5)	Connect any driveway to any street or other public place without first securing permission from the city inspector so to do. 
Any such digging, removing, or driveway connection shall be done under the supervision of the street superintendent or city engineer. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-212)
 
Sec. 28-35. Trespass prohibited.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public property means that property which is dedicated to public use and over which the federal, state or municipal government or any subdivision thereof exercises control; 
Private property means any property other than public property. 
Trespass means each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. The term "trespass" shall also mean remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person in lawful possession of the premises. The term "trespass" shall also be defined as the act of remaining on private property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer; provided that the provisions of this sentence shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this sentence apply unless hours of business operations are posted upon such premises. The term "trespass" shall also be defined as the act of returning to private property before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this subsection. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to trespass on private property. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-213)
 
Sec. 28-36. Parking on property of another.
It is unlawful for any person to park an automobile or other vehicle, or to place any structure or object on the driveway, yard, or property of another without the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge thereof, or when necessary in the performance of a duty, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-214)
 
Sec. 28-37. Interference with fire hydrants.
It is unlawful for any person except one duly authorized by the city utility superintendent or a member of the fire department to open, turn on or off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to, or connect anything with, any fire hydrant or stop cock belonging to the city. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct access to any fire hydrant by placing around or thereon brick, lumber, dirt or other thing, or in any other manner obstructing access to a fire hydrant. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-215)
 
Secs. 28-38—28-62. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC
 
Sec. 28-63. Disturbing the peace.
(a)	It is unlawful to disturb or alarm the peace of another or others by doing any of the acts set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	The term "disturbing the peace" means the doing of any of the following in such a manner as would foreseeably alarm or disturb the peace of another or others: 
(1)	Using obscene, offensive, abusive, profane, vulgar, threatening, violent or insulting language or conduct; 
(2)	Appearing in an intoxicated condition; 
(3)	Engaging in a fistic encounter; 
(4)	Lewdly exposing one's person, or private parts thereof in any public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; 
(5)	Pointing any pistol or any other deadly weapon whether loaded or not at any other person either in anger or otherwise; 
(6)	Holding an unlawful assembly of two or more persons, including being assembled together and acting in concert, to do any unlawful act against the peace or to the terror of others or preparing for or moving toward such acts, or otherwise assembling unlawfully or riotously; 
(7)	Interrupting any lawful assembly of people by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of assembly or within hearing distance thereof; 
(8)	Making unnecessarily loud, offensive noises; 
(9)	Disturbing any congregation or assembly of persons meeting for religious worship by making noise, by rude, indecent or improper behavior, by profane, improper or loud language, or in any other manner, either within the place of worship or within hearing distance thereof; or 
(10)	Committing any other act in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or alarm the public. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-301)
 
Sec. 28-64. Insulting signs, literature or language.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person within the city to display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device, which in its common acceptance is insulting, profane, or abusive to the citizens of the city, and which is calculated, or of which the natural consequence is, to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to willfully use, utter, publish, circulate or distribute any profane, violent, abusive, or insulting language or literature where: 
(1)	A natural consequence of the language or literature is to cause a breach of the peace or an assault; or 
(2)	The language or literature, in its common acceptance, is calculated to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-302)
 
Sec. 28-65. Literature or language ridiculing religion.
It is unlawful for any person to utter, publish, distribute or circulate any literature or language within the corporate limits of the city that casts profane ridicule on any deity, or any religion, which in its common acceptance is calculated or where the natural consequence is to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-303)
 
Sec. 28-66. Fireworks use regulated.
(a)	No fireworks shall be discharged within 500 feet of where fireworks are stored, sold or offered for sale. 
(b)	Fireworks shall be discharged on July 3, 4, or 5, only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. No discharge shall be permitted on any other date or any other time. 
(c)	No fireworks shall be discharged within 500 feet of any church, hospital, asylum, public school or flammable agricultural crop, or within 100 feet of other buildings or residences, except in those instances where the fire chief has issued a permit upon written request. 
(d)	No person shall ignite or discharge any fireworks within a motor vehicle or throw the same from a motor vehicle; nor shall any person place or throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at such a motor vehicle or at or near any person or group of persons. 
(e)	No persons shall discharge any fireworks from across or onto the road, street or public highway. 
(f)	No person shall discharge, ignite or assist in discharging or igniting fireworks of a type commonly known as "pop bottle rockets" or "stick rockets." 
(g)	Pyrotechnical displays shall be approved by the code enforcement officer and/or the fire chief. The time, place and manner of such displays also must be approved. 
(Code 1983, § 10-304; Ord. No. 437-02-04, 2-19-2004; Ord. No. 513-06-14, § 1, 6-19-2014)
 
Sec. 28-67. Storing or keeping explosives.
It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder, or any other highly explosive material or substance, except that gunpowder may be kept in quantities of not to exceed five pounds where the same is securely kept. 
(Code 1983, § 10-305)
 
Sec. 28-68. Carrying weapons; exceptions.
It is unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon or about his person any pistol, revolver, dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, switchblade knife, spring type knife, metal knuckle, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument except when doing so in the line of duty or as may be permitted by law. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-306)
 
Sec. 28-69. Reckless conduct.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in his possession any shotgun, rifle or pistol, such actions consisting of creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to another, and demonstrating a conscious disregard for the safety of another person. 
(Code 1983, § 10-307)
 
Sec. 28-70. Discharge of firearms.
(a)	For the purpose of this section, the term "shotgun" is hereby defined as any gun manufactured to be used for shooting shot shells only. Shot shells used may not be larger than number six. A lawful shotgun shall have barrels not less than 18 inches long and shall have no attached rifle barrel. The terms "pistol," "revolver" or "rifle," for the purpose of this section, are hereby defined as any gun manufactured to be used with gunpowder or compressed gases to propel a bullet, slug, ball, or pellet. 
(b)	It is unlawful to fire any pistol, revolver or rifle inside the city limits. 
(c)	It is unlawful to fire a lawful shotgun in the city. It is unlawful to fire any shotgun within 300 feet of any street, road, highway, house, building, storage tank or other installation. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-308)
 
Sec. 28-71. Political advertising on rights-of-way.
(a)	The term "political advertising sign" means any sign, poster or placard printed, painted, made, or designed for the purpose of furthering or advertising the candidacy of any person who is or intends to become or may be a candidate for election to any public office, whether such public office is in the local, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to erect or display any advertising sign or advertising of any other character upon any public utility easement within the city. 
(c)	No person shall place, tack, nail, staple or glue any advertising sign on any telephone, telegraph, electric or street lighting pole within this city. 
(d)	Any advertising sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions hereof shall be a public nuisance. No property right shall exist in such sign erected, placed or displayed in violation of the provisions hereof, and such sign may be removed and destroyed by any person. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-310)
 
Sec. 28-72. Sale of motor vehicles on Sunday prohibited.
No person, whether owner, proprietor, agent or employee, shall keep open, operate or assist in keeping open or operating any place or premises or residence whether open or closed, for the purpose of selling, bartering, or exchanging, or offering for sale, barter, or exchange, any motor vehicle whether new or used or second hand on Sunday. This section shall not apply to the opening of an establishment or place of business on the first day of the week for other purposes, such as the sale of petroleum products, tires, automobile accessories, or for the purpose of operating and conducting a motor vehicle repair shop, or for the purpose of supplying such services as towing or wrecking. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-311)
 
Sec. 28-73. Acts prohibited on or near school grounds.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any conduct or commit any of the acts hereinafter set forth around or near the grounds of any school, public or private, in the city, or in any street or alley adjacent to any such school: 
(1)	Any conduct that disturbs the orderly conduct of the school; 
(2)	Annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school; 
(3)	Lewd or wanton conduct; 
(4)	Moving or parking any vehicle in the vicinity of any street or alley adjacent thereto in such manner as to annoy or molest any student or employee of the school; 
(5)	Willfully, maliciously or carelessly enter the school grounds, including any playgrounds, parking lots, and any structures of the schools by persons not authorized, invited or privileged to do so during those periods of time: 
a.	Beginning one hour before the commencement of instruction or enrollment for the day, and continuing until one hour after all instruction, faculty meetings, and extracurricular activities have ceased; or 
b.	Beginning one hour before, and concluding one hour after the evening activities of the school, including, but not limited to, instruction, conferences, parent-teacher organizations or associations, open houses, parents' nights, programs, performances, plays, or tutoring. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-312; Ord. No. 282-A, 9-14-1989)
 
Secs. 28-74—28-104. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. OFFENSES AGAINST HEALTH, WELFARE AND MORALS
 
Sec. 28-105. Public intoxication and drinking prohibited.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to appear or be upon or in any street, alley, or other public place in the city in a state of intoxication. It is unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating liquor or low point beer upon or in any street, alley, or other public place within the city. It is unlawful to use, sell or furnish to another any illegal drug or narcotic in any place in the city except as legally prescribed by a physician. 
(b)	For the purposes of this section, the term "state of intoxication" means the condition in which a person is under the influence of any intoxicating, nonintoxicating, spirituous, vinous or malt liquors, or of any narcotic, to such extent as to deprive the person of his full physical or mental power. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-401)
 
Sec. 28-106. Intoxicating liquors.
It is unlawful for any person: 
(1)	To barter, sell, give away or otherwise furnish to another any intoxicating liquor or beverage of any kind except as permitted by law; 
(2)	To have in possession or under control any intoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law, or to transport or in any manner convey from place to place in the city any intoxicating liquor or beverage except as permitted by law; 
(3)	To loiter in a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished contrary to law; or 
(4)	To keep, maintain, aid or abet in keeping or maintaining a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished in violation of law. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-402)
 
Sec. 28-107. Marijuana prohibited.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person: 
(1)	To appear or be upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or other public place while under the influence of marijuana; 
(2)	To use, have, or possess marijuana upon or in any street, alley, place of business, or other public place within the city; 
(3)	To use marijuana in any place within the city except as legally prescribed by a physician licensed to practice in the state; or 
(4)	To loiter about a place where marijuana is sold or furnished illegally. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, the term "marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the rosin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or rosin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except rosin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-403)
 
Sec. 28-108. Prostitution.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Be a prostitute; 
(2)	Solicit, entice, or procure another to commit or engage in any act of prostitution; 
(3)	Engage in any act of prostitution; 
(4)	Knowingly let premises for purposes of prostitution; 
(5)	Conduct a business or premises for prostitution; 
(6)	Accept or receive the proceeds of any act; or 
(7)	Be a party to an act of prostitution or solicitation of prostitution in the limits of city. 
(b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Prostitution means the giving of the body for sexual intercourse or sodomy for hire or money. 
Soliciting for prostitutes means the soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing, or transporting of a person to any place with the intention of promoting prostitution. 
Letting premises for prostitution means the granting of the right of use or the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with that knowledge. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-404)
 
Sec. 28-109. Disorderly house defined.
The term "disorderly house" means any structure or vehicle by which the peace, comfort, health, welfare or decency of the public is disturbed by reason of the people therein committing or resorting to any of the following acts: 
(1)	The sale, distribution, possession or use of any controlled dangerous substance, the sale, distribution, possession or use of which is declared unlawful by state statute; 
(2)	The violation of any of the ordinances of this city or statutes of this state regulating the sale, distribution, possession or use of alcoholic beverages including beer containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume; 
(3)	The performance of any sexual act declared unlawful by state statute or city ordinance including, but not limited to, soliciting for purposes of prostitution; or 
(4)	The violation of any state statute or city ordinance prohibiting gambling. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-405)
 
Sec. 28-110. Maintaining or leasing a disorderly house.
(a)	No person shall keep or maintain, or aid, abet or assist in keeping and maintaining a disorderly house. 
(b)	No owner, lessee, lessor, or other person, partnership or corporation having control over any house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, manufactured home, or recreational vehicle shall knowingly use, lease, sublease or otherwise permit the use of same for the purpose of keeping therein any disorderly house, and knowing or ascertaining that such house, building, structure, tent, vehicle, manufactured home, or recreational vehicle is so occupied as a disorderly house, no persons shall continue to grant permission to so use such premises as a disorderly house. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-406)
 
Sec. 28-111. Residents and visitors to disorderly house.
No person shall knowingly reside in, enter into, or remain in a disorderly house. In any prosecution for violation of this section, the city shall have the burden to prove such knowledge by direct evidence only and not by circumstantial evidence. This section shall not apply to physicians or officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-407)
 
Sec. 28-112. Nudity, improper dress, indecent exposure.
It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Appear in any public place in the city in a state of nudity; 
(2)	Appear in any public place in the city in any offensive, indecent or lewd dress; or 
(3)	Make an indecent public exposure of his person. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-408)
 
Sec. 28-113. Obscenity.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Available to the public means the matter or performance may be purchased or attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement, or for a separate fee for each item or performance. 
Disseminate means to transfer possession of, with or without consideration. 
Knowingly means being aware of the character and the content of the material. 
Material means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment or machines. 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic area with less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Obscene means, to the average person applying contemporary community standards: 
(1)	The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to prurient interest (i.e., shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity, or excretion); 
(2)	The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct regulated by title 21 of the Oklahoma Statutes; and 
(3)	The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
Performance means any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or other exhibition performed before an audience. 
Promote means to cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist. 
Service to patrons means the provision of services to paying guests in establishments providing food and beverages; including, but not limited to, hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table setting and clearing, waiter and waitressing, and entertaining. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public any obscene material; 
(2)	Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or exhibition utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their prurient appeal; 
(3)	Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made available to the public; or 
(4)	Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public view: 
a.	His genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; 
b.	Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; 
c.	Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof; or 
d.	Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed unlawful acts. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, §§ 10-409, 10-410)
 
Sec. 28-114. Vagrancy.
It is unlawful to be a vagrant in the limits of the city. For the purposes of this section, the term "vagrant" means any person who loiters or remains in or wanders about, a public or private place for any of the following purposes: 
(1)	Gambling with cards, dice or other gambling paraphernalia; 
(2)	Engaging in prostitution or soliciting prostitution or soliciting for an act of lewdness; 
(3)	Engaging in theft, or breaking and entering any building, property or automobile of another; 
(4)	Injuring, destroying, molesting or defacing any property of another; 
(5)	Assaulting any person; 
(6)	Begging or soliciting alms, provided that this section shall not apply to persons soliciting alms for bona fide religious, charitable or eleemosynary organizations with the authorization of such organizations; or 
(7)	Selling, purchasing, trading or otherwise exchanging, procuring or making available illegal drugs or contraband. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-411)
 
Sec. 28-115. Gambling prohibited.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person, or agent or employee thereof, to do any of the following: 
(1)	To play, to open or cause to be opened, or to operate, carry on or conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette, craps, any banking, percentage or other game played with dice, cards, or any device, for money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value; 
(2)	To set up, operate or permit to be operated, any slot machine or other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other things of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or loss to the party playing; 
(3)	To gamble knowingly in any other manner; or 
(4)	To knowingly permit his premises, house, lot or other property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in this section. 
(b)	It is unlawful and an offense against the city for any person to play any roulette wheel or slot machine or any other device or machine wherein the element of chance is involved by losing or winning money, credits, checks or any other representatives of value. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-415)
 
Sec. 28-116. Loitering about place where gambling is going on.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter about in the immediate vicinity where a person is gambling, whether by playing games, operating a slot machine or other device, or otherwise. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-416)
 
Sec. 28-117. Harmful deception.
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to deceive another, whether by impersonation, misrepresentation, or otherwise, when such deception results in or contributes to the loss, damage, harm or injury of the person deceived or of a third party, or results in or contributes to the benefit of the deceiver. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-417)
 
Sec. 28-118. False or bogus checks.
It is unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat and defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain from any person, any money, property or valuable thing of the value of $500.00 or less by means of any false or bogus check or by any other written or printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin. The term "false or bogus check" shall include checks or orders given for money or property which are not honored on account of insufficient funds of the maker to pay same, as against the maker or drawer thereof. The making, drawing, issuing or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and the knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with, such bank or other depository. Such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee the amount due thereon, together with the protest fees, and the check or order shall be presented for payment within 180 days after same is delivered and accepted. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-418)
 
Secs. 28-119—28-149. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
 
Sec. 28-150. Assault and battery prohibited.
(a)	It is unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery within the city. 
(b)	For the purposes of this section, an assault is any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another. A battery is any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-501)
 
Secs. 28-151—28-168. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY
 
Sec. 28-169. Resisting an officer.
(a)	It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, or in any way interfere with the police chief or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the officer or person is discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties within the limits of the city. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or in front of an approaching officer. 
(c)	Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his official capacity. 
(d)	The term "obstruction of" shall, in addition to its common meaning, include: 
(1)	Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest; 
(2)	Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is under arrest; or 
(3)	Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting officer. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-601)
 
Sec. 28-170. Refusing or failing to assist an officer.
An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing or about to execute a warrant or other process, in accordance with the ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to suppress a riot, affray or unlawful assembly, may call upon persons to assist him in making such arrest, executing such process or suppressing such riot, affray or unlawful assembly. It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon thus to assist an officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-602)
 
Sec. 28-171. Assault or battery upon police or other law officer.
It is unlawful for any person, without justifiable or excusable cause, to knowingly commit any assault, battery or assault and battery upon the person of a police officer or other officer of the law while in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1983, § 10-603)
 
Sec. 28-172. Rescuing prisoners.
It is unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty, rescue or attempt to set at liberty, any prisoner, from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody either before or after conviction, including escape from a vehicle of confinement. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-604)
 
Sec. 28-173. Escape of prisoners.
It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places of the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail, prison or custody. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-605)
 
Sec. 28-174. Impersonating an officer or employee.
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-606)
 
Sec. 28-175. False alarms.
It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false alarm of any nature or in any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department or police department or any officer or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, accident or other emergency or knowingly to cause the fire department or police department or its officers or employees to make a useless run. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-607)
 
Sec. 28-176. False representation to an officer.
It is unlawful for any person, or any agent or employee thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer, employee or agency of the city government in any official application to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to commit perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-608)
 
Sec. 28-177. Removal of barricades.
It is unlawful for any person except by proper authority to remove any barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-609)
 
Sec. 28-178. Resisting public officials.
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to: 
(1)	Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties; 
(2)	Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or 
(3)	Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, use abusive or indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. 
(Code 1983, § 10-610)
 
Sec. 28-179. Eluding police officer.
It is unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual and audible signal, a red light and a siren from a police officer driving a motor vehicle showing the same to be an official police car, directing the operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, and who willfully increases his speed or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude such police officer, or who does elude such police officer. 
(Prior Code, title 26; Code 1983, § 10-611)
 
Sec. 28-180. Spray paint restrictions, minors.
(a)	As used in this section, the term "minor" means any individual under the age of 18. 
(b)	No person shall sell to any minor any aerosol container of paint (spray paint) capable of defacing property unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or a guardian. 
(c)	Any person selling or offering for sale any aerosol container of paint shall require bona fide evidence of majority and identity. Bona fide evidence of majority and identity shall be established only by a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal selective service act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. 
(d)	Proof that the defendant, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown and acted in reliance upon such bona fide evidence in any sale transaction forbidden hereby, shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution therefor. 
(e)	Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of business wherein aerosol containers of paint capable of defacing property are sold shall conspicuously post at the place of display of the containers for sale and at the place of sale (cash register) a sign in letters at least one-half inch in height: 
"Spray Paint Shall Not Be Sold To Minors." 
(f)	Any person who has reached the age of majority who shall give, trade, or otherwise provide to any minor any aerosol container of paint used in the actual application of graffiti or defacement of property shall be guilty of an offense and shall upon conviction be punished as prescribed. 
(Code 1983, § 8-417; Ord. No. 306-A-91, 3-14-1991)
 
Sec. 28-181. Mechanical or computer generated telephone calls.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Company means any individual person, association, partnership, corporation, or any other entity which generates or causes to be generated a mechanical or computer generated telephone call. 
Mechanical or computer generated telephone call means any call to a telephone number located within the city wherein the telephone call is initiated by a mechanical device or a computer program, and wherein the telephone call is accompanied by recorded or computer synthesized message. 
(b)	Each mechanical or computer generated telephone call made to a telephone located within the city limits shall, at the beginning of each presentation, state the following: 
(1)	Name of the company which generated the telephone call; 
(2)	Street mailing address of the company; 
(3)	Working telephone number of the company; 
(4)	Name of the chief executive officer of the company; 
(5)	If the company generating the call is representing a separate company, the information required by subsections (b)(1) through (b)(4) of this section shall also be included for the represented company; and 
(6)	Prior to any presentation, the purpose of the call, such as, but not limited to, sales presentation, request for donation, etc. 
(c)	Each such mechanical or computer generated telephone call generated to a telephone located within the city shall be so designed such that if the recipient of the telephone call should disconnect prior to the end of the message or computer program, the mechanical device or computer shall also disconnect, thereby clearing the telephone line for other incoming or outgoing telephone calls from the recipient's telephone. 
(d)	Each such mechanical or computer generated telephone call made to telephones located within the city which does not comply with the requirements contained within this section shall constitute an offense. 
(Code 1983, § 8-418; Ord. No. 307-A-91, 3-14-1991)
 
Secs. 28-182—28-200. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. OFFENSES BY OR RELATING TO MINORS
 
Sec. 28-201. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to curb the increasing problem of juvenile crime; to educate and reform juvenile offenders, to punish juvenile offenders, and to create an environment whereby adults and juveniles take responsibility for the actions of juveniles. It is further intended by this article to continue to hold neglectful or careless parents to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall not be a defense to the committing of any violation of any offense contained in this article that a parent, guardian or any other person whose responsibility it is to exercise control over a minor, was completely unaware or indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
(Code 1983, § 10-802; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Sec. 28-202. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means those hours during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. all days of the week, and beginning at 12:00 midnight on Sunday through Thursday and 1:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday night. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age. Furthermore, the term "minor" shall be synonymous with the term juvenile. 
Parent means any person having legal custody of a minor: 
(1)	As a natural or adoptive parent; 
(2)	As a legal guardian; 
(3)	As a person who stands in loco parentis; or 
(4)	As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of the above. 
Remain means to stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home. 
Street means a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal right-of-way, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. 
Time of night means based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether central standard time or central daylight-saving time generally observed at that hour by the public. 
Year of age continues from one birthday, such as the 17th to, but not including the day of, the next, such as the 18th birthday, making it clear that 17 or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase "under 18 years of age." 
(Code 1983, § 10-803; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Sec. 28-203. Original jurisdiction of municipal court in certain juvenile cases.
The municipal court of the city may elect to have and possess original jurisdiction to hear and determine any offenses committed by persons under 18 years of age and penalize juveniles found guilty as allowed by state law. 
(Code 1983, § 10-804; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Sec. 28-204. Curfew for minors.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person 17 or less years of age (under 18 years of age) to be or remain in or upon the streets within the city at night during the period ending 6:00 a.m. and beginning: 
(1)	At 11:00 p.m. for minors 14 years of age or younger; 
(2)	At 12:00 midnight for minors more than 14 years of age on Sunday through Thursday; and 
(3)	At 1:00 a.m. on Saturday morning and Sunday morning for minors more than 14 years of age. 
(b)	In the following exceptional cases a minor on a city street during the nocturnal hours for which subsection (c) of this section is intended to provide the maximum limits of regulation shall not, however, be considered in violation of the curfew ordinance: 
(1)	When accompanied by a parent of such minor; 
(2)	When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take the parent's place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area; 
(3)	When exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall provide evidence of the bona fides of such exercise by possessing a written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned, by a parent of such minor with their home address and telephone number, specifying when, and where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at night (during hours when the curfew ordinance is otherwise applicable to the minor) in the exercise of a first amendment right specified in such communication; 
(4)	In case of reasonable necessity, but only if the minor has in the minor's possession a written communication signed by the minor, countersigned by a parent of such minor evidencing their home address and telephone number, and establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a designated time for a described purpose including points of origin and destination; 
(5)	When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor not communicating an objection to the police officer; 
(6)	When returning home, by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes of the termination of) a school activity or activity of a religious or the voluntary association, provided the minor has a written communication in the minor's possession, countersigned by a parent indicating the home address and telephone number, the purpose for the event when, where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at night; 
(7)	When authorized, by regulation issued by the city council, in other similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adopted to necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on an individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the city council permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies such as the schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the streets permitted, the period of time involved not to extend more than 30 minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity, and the reason for finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the public interest and the purposes of this section; 
(8)	When the minor carries a certified card of employment, briefly identifying the minor, the addresses of his home and his place of employment or carries a valid proof of employment which may include the latest payroll receipt not over 30 days old; or 
(9)	When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This contemplates normal travel. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement through the city, particularly on normal routes. 
(c)	It is unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain upon any city street under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, the curfew ordinance. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly allow, permit or suffer the presence of minors in violation of the curfew established by this article. 
(e)	Upon finding or having attention called to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of the curfew ordinance, a police officer of the city shall normally take the minor to the city police station, or other place designated by the chief of police, where a parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor, whereupon they shall be interviewed. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to centralize responsibility in the personnel then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement, and recording, thus making available experienced supervisory personnel, the best facilities and access to information and records. In the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police officer on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment in determining age: 
(1)	Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may deliver to a parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances. For example, a minor of tender age near home whose identity may readily be ascertained or is known; 
(2)	In any event such police officer shall within 24 hours, file a written report with the chief of police. The report shall be treated for purposes of juvenile records in accordance with state statutes; 
(3)	When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the minor, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be released to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of a parent, assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or arrival of a parent; or 
(4)	In the case of first violation by a minor, the chief of police shall cause to be personally delivered or by certified mail, send to a parent written notice of violation with a warning that any subsequent violation shall result in full enforcement of the curfew ordinance, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties. 
(f)	If after the warning notice pursuant to subsection (e)(4) of this section of a first violation by a minor, a parent violates section 28-206 (in connection with a second violation by the minor), this shall be treated as an offense by the parent. 
(Code 1983, § 10-805; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Sec. 28-205. Allowing or encouraging a minor to commit offenses; penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully aid, abet, allow, and encourage or, by omission of a duty, encourage or assist a minor to commit any municipal, state or federal offense. 
(Code 1983, § 10-806; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Sec. 28-206. Parental responsibility; failure to control; penalty.
(a)	Failure to control. It shall be unlawful for any parent to fail to control a minor that is under the parent's supervision by, after notification of a prior offense committed by the minor, failing to prevent the minor from committing the same offense or more than one other offense within one year of the date the minor committed the first offense. 
(b)	Written promise to return child to court to answer charges. When a minor child taken into police custody for violation of a municipal ordinance is released to the personal custody of the child's parent, legal guardian, legal custodian or other responsible adult such person shall sign a written promise to return the child to the municipal court to answer the municipal charges on the date and at the time set by the municipal court and to assume responsibility for cost for damages by the child if the child causes damages while committing any acts in violation of municipal ordinance after being released. As provided in 10A O.S. § 2-2-102, the failure of the parent, legal guardian, legal custodian or other responsible adult to comply with the written promise shall constitute an offense and the penalty for violation of this subsection shall be as provided in section 1-8. 
(c)	Parent refusing responsibility shall constitute offense. As provided in 10A O.S. § 2-2-102, the refusal of the parent, legal guardian or legal custodian to assume custody of a minor child taken into police custody for violation of a municipal ordinance shall constitute an offense and the penalty for violation of this subsection shall be as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1983, § 10-807; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998; Ord. No. 493-01-07, 2-21-2008)
 
Sec. 28-207. Commission of a crime in the presence of minors; penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any municipal, state or federal offense in the presence of any person under 18 years of age. 
(Code 1983, § 10-808; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Sec. 28-208. Permitting crimes or disorderliness on premises; penalty.
No owner, operator, proprietor, manager or employee of any place shall permit minors who have congregated on the premises to commit any offense, or to carouse, make unnecessary noises, disturb, disrupt or annoy the people residing or carrying on business in the immediate neighborhood or so as to disturb the peace. Furthermore, no owner, operator, proprietor, manager or employee of any place shall permit any minor to loiter, litter or cause any disturbance on the property of a neighboring resident or business. 
(Code 1983, § 10-809; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Sec. 28-209. Truancy; penalty.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor who is over the age of six years and under the age of 18 years, to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such minor to attend and comply with the rules of a public, private or other school of the parent's choosing in which the minor is enrolled. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any minor who is over the age of six and who has not finished four years of high school work, to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school, or receive an education by other means for the full term the schools of the district in which the minor attends are in session; provided that this section shall not apply: 
(1)	If any such minor is prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical disability, as determined by the board of education of the district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing physician; 
(2)	If any such minor is excused from attendance at school, due to an emergency, by the principal of the school in which the minor is enrolled, at the request of the parent of the minor; 
(3)	If any such minor is excused from attending school by: 
a.	The administrator of the school or district where the minor attends school; and 
b.	The parent of the minor. 
Provided, further, that no minor be excused from attending school by such joint agreement between a school administrator and the parent of the minor unless and until it has been determined that such action is in the best interest of the minor and/or the community, and that said minor thereafter is under the supervision of the parent until the minor has reached the age of 18 years; and 
(4)	If any such minor is observing religious holy days if prior to the absence, the parent of the minor submits a written request for the absence. The school district shall excuse a student pursuant to this subsection for the days on which the religious holy days are observed and for the days on which the student must travel to and from the site where the student will observe the holy days. 
(c)	Any parent convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished as provided in the city fine schedule by a fine of not more than $200.00, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)	Any minor convicted of violating any provision in this section shall be punished as provided in the city fine schedule on the first offense by a fine of not more than $50.00, on the second offense by a fine of not more than $100.00, and on every subsequent offense by a fine of not more than $200.00, plus costs. Each separate day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 10-810; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Sec. 28-210. Furnishing tobacco products to minors; minors in possession of tobacco products; penalty.
Any person who shall furnish to any minor by gift, sale or otherwise any cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco or any other form of tobacco product shall be guilty of an offense. It shall be an offense for any minor to be in possession of any cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco or any other form of tobacco product. 
(Code 1983, § 10-811; Ord. No. 383-11-98, 11-12-1998)
 
Chapter 30 PARKS AND RECREATION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 30-1. Employment and duties of parks superintendent.
A parks superintendent shall be an employee of the city. The parks superintendent shall be appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term and removable by the city manager. The parks superintendent shall have supervision and control of all park equipment and facilities. The superintendent shall delegate all park related tasks as deemed necessary for the maintenance and the upkeep of facilities to appropriate staff. The superintendent and staff shall maintain, improve and operate the parks and other recreational facilities of the city and any recreational programs now or hereafter carried on by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 11-202; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Secs. 30-2—30-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PARKS ADVISORY BOARD
 
Sec. 30-21. Creation and duties.
(a)	The purpose of this article is to foster and promote the maintenance and operation of city parks and recreational facilities through the creation of parks policy and project oversight. 
(b)	There is hereby created a parks advisory board that shall be composed of seven members who are to be appointed by the city council. Members shall be appointed to a four-year term. 
(c)	In the event that a vacancy on the parks advisory board comes open before the four-year term is expired, another person shall be appointed by the city council to fill out that term. 
(d)	If the membership of the parks advisory board drops to less than three members, the parks advisory board shall cease to operate until such time that new members are appointed. During such time the city manager or his designee shall work with existing members to provide direction of parks programs, maintenance, and project oversight until the parks advisory board resumes operation. 
(e)	Any parks advisory board member may be removed at any time by a vote of the city council. Likewise, the parks advisory board by majority vote may request removal of a fellow parks board member with council approval. Parks board members may resign at any time by submitting written notice to the city council. 
(f)	All votes of the parks advisory board shall pass with a simple majority. 
(g)	The parks advisory board shall create a yearly project list for each public park. The list shall outline all projects to be completed for each public park, including, but not limited to, renovation, new construction, demolition, and monthly maintenance. 
(h)	The project list shall be submitted to the city council for approval at the first regular city council meeting in April. 
(i)	The city manager shall be responsible for seeing to the completion of the projects on the list. The city manager may delegate authority as necessary. 
(j)	The project list may be amended by the parks advisory board, pending approval by the city council at the next scheduled city council meeting. 
(k)	The city manager may alter the project list in the case of an emergency. 
(l)	The parks advisory board shall maintain a calendar of events for each park. 
(m)	The parks advisory board shall make recommendations to the city council concerning fees, security, and cleanup for the events. 
(n)	The parks advisory board shall seek volunteer assistance and grants to aid the city manager in the completion of the projects. 
(o)	The parks advisory board shall meet at least once a month with the city manager or the city manager's representative to discuss the project list and upcoming events. 
(Code 1983, § 11-201; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. 485-03-06, 8-17-2006)
 
Sec. 30-22. Organization and procedures.
The parks advisory board, upon the appointment of its members, shall organize by election of one of its members as chairman; another of its members as vice chairman to preside at meetings. The parks advisory board, with city council approval, shall make such rules or procedures, as it deems appropriate for the transaction of park related business. 
(Code 1983, § 11-203; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Sec. 30-23. Minutes.
The city clerk or his designee shall record and maintain the minutes of the proceedings of the parks advisory board and submit same to the city council after each meeting. The parks advisory board shall be subject to the provisions of the state open meetings and open records law. 
(Code 1983, § 11-204; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Sec. 30-24. Regular meetings.
The parks advisory board shall meet at least once each month, or such other time as the board may designate, or at such times as the city council may request. The parks advisory board shall be subject to the provisions of the Oklahoma Open Meetings and Open Records Act. 
(Code 1983, § 11-205; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Sec. 30-25. Absence from meetings.
The provisions of 11 O.S. § 8-108 shall govern absence of the parks advisory board members from regular and special meetings. 
(Code 1983, § 11-206; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Secs. 30-26—30-53. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PARK RULES
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 30-54. Hours of operation.
All city parks and recreational areas shall be opened from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. from April to September and from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. from October to March unless otherwise allowed through the purchase of a permit through the city. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to occupy the parks' facilities other than during these hours specified in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 11-101; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Sec. 30-55. Posting signs.
The city manager or his designee shall post signs indicating the hours of operation of each public park operating within the city. Signs shall be posted at the front entrance of each public park. No other signs or advertisements shall be posted within any public park facility unless otherwise permitted by subsection 30-86(a). 
(Code 1983, § 11-102; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Sec. 30-56. Acts prohibited in city parks.
(a)	The following acts are prohibited in city parks: 
(1)	Moving or displacing rock, soil, or gravel, or digging holes. 
(2)	Damaging, destroying, displacing or removing trees, shrubs, picnic tables or picnic seats, signs, fences, or any other public property, including fireplaces, water lines, or other public utilities. 
(3)	Dumping, depositing or leaving any bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash, except in proper receptacles. 
(4)	Taking part in activities involving throwing or otherwise propelling objects such as stones, arrows, javelins, and other dangerous games. No firearms may be discharged in the park areas. 
(b)	No private enterprise, corporate enterprise, other business of any nature, nor nonprofit or charitable organization including, but not limited to, garage sales, bake sales, displays or solicitations of any kind, may use any public park property for the purpose of conducting any business or enterprise, or conduct sales or other money generating activities without application to and approval of the city manager or his designated representative. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from permitting city operated or city sponsored programs and events or creating a lease with individuals for the use of city park property to operate, or cause to be operated, concessions, services, or events as allowed under the terms and requirements as set out in the lease. Such leases shall be considered by the city council, upon the recommendation of the city parks advisory board. 
(Code 1983, § 11-103; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Secs. 30-57—30-85. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PERMITS
 
Sec. 30-86. Required.
(a)	A permit is required for any group using any public park facility. The facility use price list is set forth in the city fee schedule. Permits for the use of any public park facility shall be issued by the city on printed forms, which have been signed and approved by the city or its officials. 
(b)	The rodeo arena at Kringlen Park can be reserved for individual or instructional uses by contacting the parks advisory board. 
(c)	With the exception of individual and/or instructional uses, no verbal agreement for the use of any public park facility shall be binding upon the city. 
(d)	All advertisements or signs attached to the rodeo arena, ball field, or pavilion shall be charged an advertisement fee as provided in the city fee schedule to be renewed annually and paid to the city. 
(e)	Camping will be allowed in set-aside areas with deposits and per-day charges as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(f)	The permittee shall accept the permit issued by the city for any use of any public park facility, and such permit, when so accepted, shall constitute the contract between the city and the permittee, which permit shall be subject to approval of the city and as to the form thereof shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(g)	The city may cancel the contract of any person or organization as to the use of any public park facility when such person or organization, in the opinion of the city manager or city council, is not acting for the best public interest. 
(h)	By acceptance of a permit as hereinabove provided, the permittee shall covenant and agree to relieve and discharge the city and the officers and employees of the city from any and all liability for loss and injury and damages to any person or property that may be sustained by reason of the occupancy and use of any public park facility, and to save them free and harmless therefrom. Every permittee shall further agree to pay for any and all damages to any public park facility and damages to or loss of any public property and equipment of the city resulting either directly or indirectly from such occupancy and use of a public park facility, by or through the negligence or other acts of the permittee, his agents and employees or any person participating in or attending the performance, attraction or affair in connection with or during the use and occupancy; provided, however, that the city may, whenever in its opinion the circumstances may warrant the same, require that such permittee shall secure and indemnify the city, and such other persons as the city shall designate, against any and all such liability, loss, injury and damage by procuring, paying for and keeping in force a policy of liability or indemnity insurance or a surety bond, for such purpose, which policy of insurance or bond shall be written and issued by a reputable and solvent insurance or surety company, as the case may be, authorized to do business in the state, and such policy or bond shall be subject to approval as to form thereof by the city attorney. 
(i)	The payment of all federal, state, county and city taxes in connection with any attraction shall always be the responsibility of the permittee. 
(j)	Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the use of a public park or any part of facility thereof for municipal purposes, subject to the approval of the city; except, however, that when an admission fee is charged or revenues from such municipal usage or other privileges of any character operated by or under the authority of representatives of the city, the city shall collect out of the gross receipts or any other revenues therefrom and pay over and deposit with the treasurer of the city not less than an amount equal to the actual operating and gross overhead expense incidental to such usage as computed by the city, nor more than the maximum rental rates and other charges as prescribed by this chapter. 
(k)	The rental of a public park at the rates herein provided shall not entitle the permittee to any personnel service in connection with the staging of the event or attraction for which the permit is issued; provided, however, that the city may, at its discretion, furnish at no extra cost to the permittee the services of those employees of the city who are regularly employed. Such services shall not include extra services as set forth in the schedule of rentals. The permittee shall hire and pay the salaries of all other employees, including workers' compensation, required in connection with the event or attraction. 
(l)	All lessees, permittees, licensees, concessionaires and their agents and employees shall at all times conform to all rules and regulations for the use and occupancy of, and operations in a public park facility as adopted, issued and ordained from time to time by the city council of the city. Any violation of such rules and regulations by any of the foregoing persons mentioned in this section shall, at the discretion of the city, subject such violator to immediate expulsion from a public park and the forfeiture of all rents, percentages or other fees required to be paid under such permit for the full term thereof. 
(m)	Each lessee, permittee, licensee, concessionaire and/or his employees shall at all times strictly comply with and abide by all federal, state or municipal laws and ordinances pertaining to or affecting the use or occupancy of any public park located within the corporate boundaries of the city. Inspections shall be conducted by the city code enforcement and fire department to ensure safety in regards to electrical hookups, extension cords, and other types of fire hazards. 
(n)	Concessionaires selling perishable items at a public park within the corporate boundaries of the city will obtain appropriate inspections and permits from the city-county health department for the safety and the health of the public. Proof of inspection by the city-county health department must be displayed no less than two hours prior to the event and kept on display through the duration of the event. 
(o)	All vendors conducting business for profit at a public park facility shall comply with the fee schedule included in subsection (a) of this section. Vendors must make application to the city and place approved permit on display during the course of the respective event for public view and city inspection. Violators will become subject to a fine in the amount provided in the city fine schedule. 
(p)	Unless otherwise permitted, lessees, permittees, licensees, or concessionaires setup for events will be allowed no more than four hours prior to the event. Lessees, permittees, licensees, concessionaires will be required to remove all trash, equipment, etc., no less than four hours after the conclusion of the event. 
(q)	Every lessee, permittee, licensee, or concessionaire shall furnish such police protection as may be required by the city during his occupancy. If any lessee, permittee, licensee, and/or concessionaire fails or refuses to furnish police protection satisfactory to the city, the city may furnish the same and charge the cost thereof to the same, or cancel the event. 
(r)	Property or equipment left over 30 days at a public park facility shall become the property of the city. 
(s)	Any repairs requested by the renter shall be submitted no less than 15 days prior to the event. 
(t)	Any unapproved repairs performed by the renter shall be done at the renter's expense. 
(u)	Deposit fees must be paid 30 days in advance of the event. 
(Code 1983, § 11-301; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. 525-08-09, § 1, 8-20-2009)
 
Sec. 30-87. Permits and fees waived.
Events sponsored by charitable organizations or events involving youth related functions may request, in writing with justification, a fee waiver for permits and fees from the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 11-302; Ord. No. 433-09-03, 9-18-2003)
 
Chapter 32 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
 
Sec. 32-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and also includes the painting of wall signs. 
Facing or surface means any surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign. 
Illuminated sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper. 
Incombustible material means any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
Non-illuminated sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines which is not illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper. 
Other advertising structure means any marquee, canopy, awning or street clock as further defined herein. 
Sign means and includes every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign, illuminated sign, non-illuminated sign, projecting sign, temporary sign, marquee, awning, canopy and street clock, and includes any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when it is placed out of doors in view of the general public. 
Sign contractor means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, altering, servicing or removing signs as hereinabove defined. 
Structural trim means the molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing, and platforms which are attached to the sign structure. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.2; Code 1983, § 5-1401)
 
Sec. 32-2. Sign contractor's license.
(a)	No person, firm or corporation, except a licensed sign contractor, is to engage in the business of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, altering, servicing or removing signs. A sign contractor's license may be obtained from the city clerk and a fee as provided in the city fee schedule for illuminated sign contractor or for a non-illuminated sign contractor is to be paid to the city clerk therefor. Such license expires one year from date of issuance. Employees of duly licensed sign contractors are not required to obtain such license or pay a fee in order to engage in the work of manufacturing, installing, erecting, repairing, altering, servicing or removing signs in the regular course of employment. 
(b)	Duly licensed electrical contractors are not required to obtain a license hereunder where the contractors are only installing wiring to electrical signs in the course of their business as electrical contractors. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.3; Code 1983, § 5-1402)
 
Sec. 32-3. Sign contractor's bond.
No sign contractor's license shall be issued until the applicant therefor has deposited with the city clerk a surety bond in the sum of $5,000.00 to be known as "sign contractor's bond." Such bond shall be executed by the sign contractor and the surety thereon shall be a corporate surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be in favor of the city and conditioned that the licensee will faithfully and properly conduct his business in compliance with all of the ordinances of the city relating to signs and sign contractors and for the payment of all fines and penalties imposed for the violation of such laws and for the protection and indemnification of the city against all damages resulting directly or indirectly from any injury to persons or property on account of the negligence or unskilled work of the licensee. Such bond shall be renewed annually and no person, firm or corporation engages in the business of a sign contractor unless a bond, as herein provided, is on file with the city clerk and in full force. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.4; Code 1983, § 5-1403)
 
Sec. 32-4. Permits required.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to erect, alter or re-locate within the city any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this chapter without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk and making payment of the fee required by this chapter. All illuminated signs are, in addition, subject to the provisions of the electrical code, and where the electrical code does not cover, the Underwriter's Laboratories Inc. standard for electric signs shall cover, and the permit fees required thereunder. No person, other than a duly authorized sign contractor, shall be issued such permit. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-8.5, 3-1-77; Code 1983, § 5-1404)
 
Sec. 32-5. Application for erection permit.
Application for erection permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the city clerk and contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)	Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected; 
(3)	Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures; 
(4)	Two blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground, when required by the building inspector; 
(5)	Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the city, when required by the building inspector; 
(6)	Name of person or association erecting structure; and 
(7)	Such other information as the building inspector requires to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.6; Code 1983, § 5-1405)
 
Sec. 32-6. Illuminated signs; approval by electrical inspector.
The application for a permit for erection of a sign or other advertising structure in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the electrical inspector if required by the building inspector. The electrical inspector shall examine the plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine if it complies with the electrical code of the city or Underwriters Laboratories standard for electrical signs. The building inspector shall approve the permit if the plans and specifications comply with the code, or disapprove the application if noncompliance with the code is found. This action of the electrical inspector shall take place prior to submission of the application to the engineering department for final approval or disapproval of the erection permit. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.7; Code 1983, § 5-1406)
 
Sec. 32-7. Permit issued if application in order.
It is the duty of the building inspector upon the filing of an application for an erection permit to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure, and if it appears that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city, he then issues the erection permit. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed within one year after date of issuance, the permit becomes null and void. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.8; Code 1983, § 5-1407)
 
Sec. 32-8. Permit fees.
(a)	Fee for permits under this chapter shall be in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)	For the purpose of computing the square foot area of any sign, the total opposite overall dimensions in the two widest parts is used. This area is considered solid with no openings deducted. 
(c)	It is unlawful and an offense to commence the erection of any sign or advertising structure without obtaining a permit therefor and the amounts of any and all fees above established shall be tripled if the erection of any sign or other advertising structure is commenced prior to the issuance of a permit therefor. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-8.9, 3-1-9; Code 1983, § 5-1408)
 
Sec. 32-9. Inspection.
The building inspector shall inspect at such times as he deems necessary each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is secure or insecure, and whether it is in need of removal or repair. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.10; Code 1983, § 5-1409)
 
Sec. 32-10. Unsafe and unlawful signs.
If the building inspector finds that any sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he gives written notice to the permittee or owner thereof. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten days after such notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to comply by the building inspector at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The city clerk, upon recommendations of the building inspector, shall refuse to issue further permits to any permittee or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed. The building inspector may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.11; Code 1983, § 5-1410)
 
Sec. 32-11. Duty to remove unsafe and unlawful signs.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to maintain a sign which is dangerous to the safety, health or peace of the public. It is the duty of the owner or lessee of such sign and the owner of the property upon which such sign may be located to immediately remove, alter or repair such sign upon receipt of written notification from the building inspector. It is the duty of any person who has erected or who is maintaining any sign or structure in violation of the provisions of this or any ordinance of the city to forthwith remove the same upon receiving notice to do so by the building inspector. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.12; Code 1983, § 5-1411)
 
Sec. 32-12. Number, date, name, and voltage to be on sign.
Every sign or other advertising structure hereafter erected must have painted in a conspicuous place thereon the date of erection, the name of the person, firm or corporation that erected it, and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection therewith. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.13; Code 1983, § 5-1412)
 
Sec. 32-13. Wind pressure and dead load requirements.
All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per square foot of area and be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the building code or other ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.14; Code 1983, § 5-1413)
 
Sec. 32-14. Removal of certain signs.
Any sign now or hereafter existing which for a period of more than a year no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a product sold, will be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such sign may be found within ten days after written notification from the building inspector. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order, the building inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure to which such sign is attached. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.15; Code 1983, § 5-1414)
 
Sec. 32-15. Exemptions.
The provisions and regulations of this chapter do not apply to the following signs; provided, however, the signs are subject to city building and zoning regulations: 
(1)	Real estate signs not exceeding eight square feet in area which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which the signs are located only; 
(2)	Professional name plates not exceeding two square feet in area; 
(3)	Bulletin boards not over eight square feet in area for public, charitable or religious institutions when they are located on the premises of the institutions; 
(4)	Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor when placed upon work under construction, and not exceeding 16 square feet in area; 
(5)	Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling house, and not exceeding two square feet in area; 
(6)	Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials; and 
(7)	Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger, and such temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs as may be approved by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.16; Code 1983, § 5-1415)
 
Sec. 32-16. Obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes.
No sign shall be erected, re-located or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a stand-pipe or fire escape. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.17; Code 1983, § 5-1416)
 
Sec. 32-17. Signs not to constitute traffic hazard.
No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this chapter shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or devise; or which makes use of the words "STOP," "LOOK," "DRIVE-IN," "DANGER" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. The provisions of this section includes air traffic. No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this chapter or the city's airport zoning code shall be erected in such a manner that would: 
(1)	Create electrical interference with radio or other electronic communications between the airport and aircraft; 
(2)	Make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or 
(3)	Otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.18; Code 1983, § 5-1417)
 
Sec. 32-18. Handbills posted on telephone and light poles.
Posting of any bills, cards, notices, signs, or advertising of any kind whatsoever, upon any telegraph, telephone, electric light pole or post, or official street sign within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1-1; Code 1983, § 5-1418)
 
Sec. 32-19. Sign boards in right-of-way prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, establish, maintain or permit to exist any sign board, bill board, bulletin board or any other device for advertising purposes in, upon, or over any street, right-of-way, avenue, alley, sidewalk or any part thereof, within the city except as provided in this Code. The provisions of this section do not apply to any official sign authorized by law or ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1-3; Code 1983, § 5-1419)
 
Sec. 32-20. Sign boards prohibited in residential area; exceptions.
(a)	No sign board, bill board, bulletin board shall be erected, constructed, established, maintained or permitted to exist in a residential area, except that a "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign, or a sign of similar import may be installed on residential property, not exceeding ten square feet in size. One non-illuminated name plate of not more than two square feet in area may be attached to a main or accessory building. 
(b)	In areas properly zoned for multiple family dwellings or manufactured homes, in addition thereto, one nameplate and sign relating only to the use of the property and structure located thereon may be erected; such sign or plate shall not exceed 40 square feet in size (only one side of double face sign shall be used in computing the area of the sign) and shall be harmonious with other designed features of the dwelling unit. The height of the sign is not to exceed 12 feet or the height of the nearest building, whichever is smaller. Such sign is not to be located within 15 feet of any property line, nor be on or over a street right-of-way. If the sign is to be provided with outdoor lighting, such lighting shall have an arrangement of reflectors, and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere with adjacent land use, or the use of adjacent streets, and is not to be of the flashing or intermittent type. No part of this section shall be construed to allow construction of a sign not in accordance with any other city ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1-4; Code 1983, § 5-1420)
 
Sec. 32-21. Sign boards in business districts.
All signs, billboards, bulletin boards, sign boards, and other advertising devices shall be maintained only in the business district, except as may be provided by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1-5; Code 1983, § 5-1421)
 
Sec. 32-22. Sign board dimension.
No sign, sign board, bulletin board, billboard or other advertising device shall be erected, established, maintained or permitted to exist within the city in excess of 200 square feet in size. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1-6; Code 1983, § 5-1422)
 
Sec. 32-23. Electric and neon signs.
(a)	All electric signs or neon signs must conform to the electric code, and in addition to the fee for erection of the sign as provided in this chapter, the fee for electric inspection shall be paid as provided by the city fee schedule. 
(b)	The mere holding of an electrical contractor's license or a journeyman wireman's license does not authorize the holders of such to erect or install signs. Before any sign is erected or installed by such license holders, they shall be required to comply with the advertising and sign ordinances of the city. 
(c)	There shall be provided a sign circuit fused separately from all inside and display window lighting and stubbed out in conduit on the face of the building and provided with weatherproof service head, in rooms designed for use as retail stores or display rooms. Each sign circuit also shall be provided with a switch of not less than 20-ampere capacity, so designed as to open each undergrounded conductor. This switch shall be installed as a part of the rough-in wiring, or shall be considered as a part of the finish if it is to be a time switch and is so reported to the electrical inspector. In the latter case, the opening for the time switch shall be installed with the original wiring. 
(d)	All wiring for neon signs shall be run in conduit, and all such conduit shall be grounded regardless of its length. The size of the conduit wiring and protection shall be adequate to carry, without voltage drop in excess of three percent, the total wattage indicated by the sum of the name-plate rating of the transformers connected to each such circuit. When transformers are rated in milliamperes and output voltage, the input load in watts, for determining wiring capacities necessary under this rule, shall be fixed by the following formula: 
milliamperes × output voltage watts = 1,000. 
(e)	When luminous-tube signs are installed on branch circuits carrying other loads in addition to the signs, such as outside decorative, border, outline, or marquee illumination, separate fuses, independent of the branch-circuit fuses, shall be installed in the sign conduit. 
(Prior Code, §§ 9-3.38, 3-1-8; Code 1983, § 5-1423)
 
Sec. 32-24. Signs, accessory.
There shall be allowed or permitted to any lawful authorized business in the city one accessory sign erected on the premises of the business, upon the obtaining of the permit, and the paying of the fees as provided in this chapter. The sign shall not exceed 200 square feet in size, and the major portion thereof is built of noncombustible material, and provided that the sign complies with the building set-back line, required for the main building. An accessory sign may be permitted to extend over the sidewalk, not more than eight feet if it does not exceed beyond the sidewalk, and is not more than two feet in width, and not less than eight feet above the sidewalk, and such signs are securely fastened to secure their stability. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1-11; Code 1983, § 5-1424)
 
Sec. 32-25. Obstruction of view.
Anything contained in this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, it is unlawful and an offense, and it is a nuisance for any person to erect, construct or permit to exist any sign board, bill board, bulletin board, or other advertising device so as to obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1-12; Code 1983, § 5-1425)
 
Sec. 32-26. Signs in residential developments.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the erection of a sign of a temporary nature in a newly developed residential area while houses are under construction, and being sold. All such signs must comply with the setback line. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1-14; Code 1983, § 5-1426)
 
Sec. 32-27. Face of sign shall be smooth.
All signs or other advertising structures which are constructed on street lines, or within five feet thereof, shall have a smooth surface and no nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted to protrude therefrom, except electrical reflectors and devices which may extend over the top and extend in front of the advertising structures. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.19; Code 1983, § 5-1427)
 
Sec. 32-28. Goose neck lights.
Goose neck lights shall be permitted on ground signs, roof signs, and wall signs; provided, however, the lights shall be placed so as to concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.20; Code 1983, § 5-1428)
 
Sec. 32-29. Illumination.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to maintain any sign which extends over public property which is wholly or partially illuminated by more than 30 footcandles per square foot. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.21; Code 1983, § 5-1429)
 
Sec. 32-30. Obscene matter prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.22; Code 1983, § 5-1430)
 
Sec. 32-31. Swinging signs.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to install any type of swinging sign. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.23; Code 1983, § 5-1431)
 
Sec. 32-32. Ground signs.
(a)	Ground sign, as regulated by this chapter, includes any sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon the ground and not attached to any building. 
(b)	Construction requirements are as follows: 
(1)	All ground signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall have a surface or facing of incombustible material; provided, however, that combustible structural trim may be used thereon; and 
(2)	All letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure and shall comply with all city building and zoning regulations. 
(c)	Location requirements are as follows: 
(1)	It is unlawful and an offense to erect any ground sign whose total height is greater than 30 feet above the level of the street upon which the sign faces, or above the adjoining ground level, if such ground level is above the street level; 
(2)	Ground signs have an open space of not less than two feet between the base line of the sign and the ground level. This open space may be filled in with a platform or decorative lattice work which does not close off more than one-half of any square foot of such open space. No ground sign shall be nearer than two feet to any other sign, building or structure, provided that this does not apply to double faced signs; 
(3)	No ground sign shall be nearer the street than the property line established by law; and 
(4)	All ground signs shall conform to all city building and zoning regulations. 
(d)	Erection requirements are as follows: 
(1)	All ground signs shall be securely built, constructed and erected upon posts and standards sunk at least three feet below the natural surface of the ground, and if supported and braced by timbers, or metal rods in the rear thereof, they must extend from the top thereof to a point in the ground at least a distance equal to one-half the height of such sign, measured along the ground, from the posts or standards upon which the same is erected; 
(2)	All posts, anchors and bracing of wood shall be treated to protect them from moisture by creosoting or other approved methods when they rest or enter into the ground; and 
(3)	All ground signs shall conform to all city building and zoning regulations. 
(e)	All ground signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.24; Code 1983, § 5-1432)
 
Sec. 32-33. Wall signs.
(a)	Wall signs, as regulated by this chapter, include all flat signs of solid face construction which are placed against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear, or side wall of any building or other structure. 
(b)	All wall signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall have a surface or facing of incombustible material; provided, however, that combustible structural trim may be used therein. 
(c)	Location requirements are as follows: 
(1)	No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached, and any one wall sign shall not exceed an area of 750 square feet; 
(2)	No wall sign shall be permitted to extend more than 15 inches beyond the building line, and shall not be attached to a wall at a height of less than ten feet above the sidewalk or ground; and 
(3)	No wall sign shall be erected, re-located or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
(d)	Erection requirements are as follows: 
(1)	All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than three-eighths inch in diameter embedded in the wall at least five inches; provided, however, that such signs may rest in, or be bolted onto strong, heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six feet apart, each of which is securely fixed to the wall as hereinbefore provided. In no case shall any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails; and 
(2)	All wall signs shall conform to all city building and zoning regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.25; Code 1983, § 5-1433)
 
Sec. 32-34. Roof signs.
(a)	A roof sign, as regulated by this chapter, means any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal supports on the roof structure. 
(b)	Every roof sign, including the uprights supports and braces thereof, shall be constructed entirely of incombustible materials, provided, however, that combustible structural trim may be used thereon. 
(c)	Location requirements are as follows: 
(1)	No roof sign shall have a surface area exceeding 750 square feet, nor have its highest point extended more than 20 feet above the roof level, or fire wall; 
(2)	No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with the face thereof nearer than five feet to the outside wall toward which the sign faces; 
(3)	All roof signs shall have a space at least five feet in height between the base of the sign and the roof level, and have at least five feet clearance between the vertical supports thereof; and 
(4)	No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building or structure in such manner as to prevent free passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof or interfere with openings in the roof and will comply with all city building and zoning regulations. 
(d)	Erection requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods, or braces. When erected upon buildings which are not constructed entirely of fireproof material, the bearing plates of the sign shall bear directly upon masonry walls and intermediate steel columns in the building. No roof sign will be supported or anchored to the wooden framework of a building; and 
(2)	All roof signs shall conform to all city building and zoning regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.26; Code 1983, § 5-1434)
 
Sec. 32-35. Projecting signs.
(a)	A projecting sign, as regulated by this chapter, includes any sign which is attached to a building or other structure and extends beyond the line of the building or structure or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached. The term "horizontal projecting sign" means any sign which is greater in width than in height. The term "vertical projecting sign" means any sign which is greater in height than in width. 
(b)	Construction requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Every projecting sign, including the frames, braces and supports thereof, will be designed by a structural engineer or manufacturer and be approved by the building inspector as in compliance with the building code of the city and by the electrical inspector as in compliance with the electrical code of the city and where the electrical code does not cover, the Underwriters' Laboratories standard for electric signs shall cover, and shall be constructed of incombustible materials; 
(2)	The lights shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign and prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property; 
(3)	The lettering or advertising designs to be illuminated may be composed of glass or other transparent or semitransparent incombustible material. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate glass at least one-half inch thick and in case any single piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three square feet, be wired glass. One section, not exceeding three square feet in area, constructed of wire glass or safety glass shall be permitted on each side of a sign; 
(4)	Any moveable part of a projecting sign such as the cover of a service opening shall be securely fastened by chains or hinges; and 
(5)	Except by special permission of the city council, projecting signs shall be limited in area as follows: 
a.	Horizontal projecting signs 50 square feet each side; and 
b.	Vertical projecting signs 100 square feet each side. 
(6)	The distance measured between the principal faces of any projecting sign shall not exceed 18 inches. 
(c)	Location requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Every projecting sign shall be placed at least ten feet above the sidewalk over which it is erected and a distance not greater than two feet from the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the point on the sign nearest thereto, nor any sign or part thereof extend over the property line; 
(2)	Every projecting sign shall be erected in full compliance with all city building and zoning regulations. 
(d)	Erection requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Projecting signs exceeding ten square feet in area or 50 pounds in weight shall not be attached to nor supported by frame buildings nor the wooden framework of a building. The signs shall be attached to masonry walls with galvanized expansion bolts at least three-eighths inch in diameter, shall be fixed in the wall by means of bolts extending through the wall, shall contain proper size metal washer or plate on the inside of the wall and shall comply with all city building and zoning regulations. 
(2)	No projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails, nor any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign. 
(e)	V-shaped signs, consisting of two single face signs erected without a roof or ceiling, are not permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.27; Code 1983, § 5-1435)
 
Sec. 32-36. Temporary signs.
(a)	Temporary signs as regulated by this chapter shall include any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board or other light materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period of time only. 
(b)	Construction requirements are as follows: 
(1)	No temporary sign of combustible material shall exceed four feet in one of its dimensions or 100 square feet in area, and provided such signs in excess of 60 square feet shall be made of rigid materials, that is, of wall board or other light materials with frames; and 
(2)	Every temporary sign weighing in excess of 50 pounds must be approved by the building inspector as conforming to the safety requirements of the building code of the city. 
(c)	Location requirements are as follows: 
(1)	No temporary sign shall extend over or into any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare and not be placed or projected over any wall opening; and 
(2)	No temporary sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape, nor shall such sign be attached to any stand pipe or fire escape. 
(d)	Every temporary sign shall be attached to the wall with wire or steel cables and no strings, ropes or wood slats for anchorage or support purposes shall be permitted. 
(e)	Permits for temporary signs authorizes the erection of the signs and their maintenance for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(f)	The advertisement contained on any temporary sign pertains only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained. This provision shall not apply to signs of a civic, political or religious nature. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.28; Code 1983, § 5-1436)
 
Sec. 32-37. Marquees.
(a)	A "marquee," as regulated by this chapter, shall include any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a thoroughfare. 
(b)	Construction requirements are as follows: 
(1)	All marquees, including the anchors, bolts, supports, rods and braces thereof shall be constructed of incombustible materials and shall be designed by a structural engineer and approved by the building inspector as in compliance with the building code of the city and by the electrical code of the city and where the electrical code does not cover, the Underwriters' Laboratories standard for electric signs shall cover, and shall be illuminated; 
(2)	The roofs of all marquees shall be properly guttered and connected by down spouts to a sewer so that the water therefrom will not drip or flow onto public property; and 
(3)	The roofs of all marquees shall be used for no other purpose than to form and constitute a roof, and at least 25 percent of the area of the roof of every marquee shall be of glass or other incombustible transparent substance. 
(c)	Location requirements are as follows: 
(1)	No portion of a marquee shall be less than ten feet above the level of the sidewalk or other public thoroughfare; 
(2)	No marquee shall be permitted to extend beyond a point two feet inside the curb line; and 
(3)	No marquee shall be wider than the entrance of the building, plus five feet on each side thereof, provided, however, that where the entrances to a building are not more than 20 feet apart, a marquee may be made a continuous single structure between the entrances. 
(d)	Erection requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Marquees shall be supported solely by the building to which they are attached, and no columns or posts shall be permitted as support therefor; 
(2)	The roof of any marquee except glass area required shall be designed and constructed to support a live load of not less than 100 pounds per square foot. The wind pressure requirements shall be as stated in city building and zoning regulations; and 
(3)	No marquee shall be erected on any building of wood frame construction unless attached to the masonry, concrete or steel supports of the building. 
(e)	Signs attached to or hung from a marquee shall be completely within the borderline of the marquee outer edge, and in no instance be lower than ten feet above the sidewalk or public thoroughfare. No sign or advertising material shall exceed five feet in height exclusive of the name of the establishment exhibiting such marquee. No advertising material shall be placed upon the roof of any marquee. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.29; Code 1983, § 5-1437)
 
Sec. 32-38. Awnings and canopies.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auto canopy or awning includes any structure designed for the purpose of sheltering an automobile and carried by a frame supported by the ground. 
Awning includes any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a building and projecting over a thoroughfare, when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in use. 
Canopy includes any structure other than an awning made of cloth or metal with metal frame attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare, and carried by a frame supported by ground or sidewalk. 
(b)	Construction requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Awnings may be constructed of cloth or metal provided, however, all frames and supports shall be of metal; and 
(2)	Canopies may be constructed of cloth or metal hood; provided, however, all frames and supports shall be of metal. 
(c)	Location requirements are as follows: 
(1)	All awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion thereof shall be not less than ten feet above the level of the sidewalk or public thoroughfare; 
(2)	All canopies shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion thereof shall be not less than ten feet above the level of the sidewalk or public thoroughfare; 
(3)	No awnings or canopy shall be permitted to extend beyond a point two feet inside the curb line; 
(4)	No limitation on width of awnings provided, however, full compliance with all city building and zoning regulations; and 
(5)	No auto awning or canopy shall be permitted to extend beyond the property line or interfere with the site triangle at an intersection which shall be for a distance of 25 feet along each intersecting property line. 
(d)	Erection requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Every awning shall be securely attached to and supported by the building. Posts or columns beyond the building line shall not be permitted for awnings. No awning shall be attached to the wood jambs, frames or other wood members of a building (frame buildings excepted) when such building is less than ten feet from public property; and 
(2)	The framework of all canopies shall be designed by a structural engineer and approved by the building inspector as in compliance with the building code of the city. All frames and supports shall be of metal and designed to withstand a wind pressure as provided in section 32-13. 
(e)	No advertising shall be placed on any awning or canopy except that the name of the owner and the business, industry or pursuit conducted within the premises may be painted or otherwise permanently placed in a space not exceeding eight inches in height on the front and side portions thereof. 
(f)	Permits for awnings and canopies shall be required as provided in section 32-4. 
(g)	Every awning shall be rolled or folded against the building wall except when service as a protection from sun, rain, snow or other inclement weather. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.30; Code 1983, § 5-1438)
 
Sec. 32-39. Street clocks.
(a)	A street clock as regulated by this chapter means any timepiece erected upon a standard upon the sidewalk, or on the exterior of any building or structure for the convenience of the public and placed and maintained by some person for the purpose of advertising their place of business. 
(b)	Construction requirements are as follows: 
(1)	All street clocks as herein defined shall be constructed of incombustible material, including the frames, braces and supports thereof; 
(2)	The dial of such clocks shall be not less than 30 inches in diameter; 
(3)	Any glass forming a part of a clock or the sign thereon shall be safety glass or plate glass at least one-fourth-inch thick and in case any single piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three square feet, it shall be constructed of wired glass, securely held in place; and 
(4)	Any moveable part of a street clock, that is, cover or service opening shall be securely fastened by metal hinges. 
(c)	Location requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Clocks supported on the corner of any building or structure at the intersection of two streets shall not be less than 15 feet or more than 20 feet above the sidewalk and shall not project from the face or wall of the building or structure in any direction more than five feet; and 
(2)	Every clock erected on the sidewalk shall be supported upon a post of ornamental design, the total height of which shall be not less than 15 feet, shall be not more than 20 inches from the outer edge of the curb, and shall be at least 20 feet from the point of intersection of the lines of any street, measured parallel with the street. 
(d)	Erection requirements are as follows: 
(1)	All clocks erected on the exterior of any building or structure shall comply with the requirements set forth in section 32-33 of this Code regulating wall signs, or section 32-35 regulating projecting signs in all respects concerning erection, whichever applies; and 
(2)	All street clocks, whether erected on exterior walls or on the sidewalk, shall comply with the requirements of section 32-13. 
(e)	Any person erecting a street clock on any public sidewalk shall obtain the special written permission of the city council in addition to all other permits required hereunder. 
(f)	No person shall be permitted to erect more than one street clock as herein defined for any place of business at any one location. 
(g)	Only the name of the owner, proprietor or manager of the place of business erecting and maintaining such clock shall be permitted as advertising matter on the clock. 
(h)	Such clock shall keep accurate time, and if this condition is not complied with, the clock shall be promptly repaired or removed. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.31; Code 1983, § 5-1439)
 
Sec. 32-40. Non-conforming signs.
The use of any sign or other advertising structure in existence on adoption of this chapter which violates or does not conform to the provisions hereof may be continued so long as such sign or structure is safe and secure; provided that such sign or structure is not existing on street right-of-way or extending over street right-of-way, and they may not be enlarged, altered, or replaced except so as to conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.32; Code 1983, § 5-1440)
 
Sec. 32-41. Public property.
It is unlawful to erect or maintain any sign on, over or across any street, alley or public property in the city except as herein specifically authorized. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.33; Code 1983, § 5-1441)
 
Sec. 32-42. Revocation of permit for projecting sign.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter for the erection, installation or maintenance of a sign which projects over any public street, highway, alley, parkway or sidewalk constitutes a mere license and may be revoked by the building inspector or by the city council if it should be determined that such sign should be removed in the interest of public safety and welfare or if the improvement of the public way over which such sign projects should make such removal necessary. A written notice of such revocation shall be delivered to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such sign is located and if such owner or occupant cannot be found, such notice shall be posted on the premises. Either the owner of the premises or the person, firm or corporation having control over such sign shall within ten days from the date of delivery or posting of such notice, as the case may be, remove such sign insofar as it may project over or across such public way. In case of failure to cause the removal of such sign as herein provided, the building inspector is authorized to cause such removal forthwith and the owner or person, firm or corporation having control over such sign shall be liable for the expense of such removal. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.34; Code 1983, § 5-1442)
 
Sec. 32-43. Revocation of permits.
The building inspector and the city clerk are hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by them upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provision of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.35; Code 1983, § 5-1443)
 
Sec. 32-44. Nuisance.
Any sign which has heretofore been erected prior to the initial effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which has been constructed or maintained in such a manner as to endanger public health and safety, or any sign which may hereinafter be erected which is constructed or maintained in such a manner as to endanger public health and safety, in addition to all the other remedies hereinbefore provided, the council, by resolution, may declare the sign to be a nuisance and have it abated. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.36; Code 1983, § 5-1444)
 
Sec. 32-45. Penalty.
In addition to all other applicable penalties and other remedies available to the city, the building inspector may institute any proper action in the district court in the name of the city to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violations of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 9-8.38; Code 1983, § 5-1445)
 
Chapter 33 MEDICAL MARIJUANA
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 33-1. Legislative intent and purpose.
(a)	The intent of this chapter is to ensure the health and safety of all Oklahomans and provide reasonable and orderly regulation of medical marijuana as authorized by the lawful passage of State Question 788. This chapter will be subjected to changes enacted by the State of Oklahoma as it pertains to the governance of medical marijuana. Those changes will be take precedence over any part of this chapter, whether this chapter has been modified or in the process of being modified. (Only the powers enumerated under this chapter shall be proper. Any power not specifically enumerated is prohibited.) 
(1)	Any person, persons, or entity violating any provisions of this article, either by doing anything which is prohibited or by failing to do anything which is commanded, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00, plus court costs. Each separate violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Where a lesser fine is mandated by state law then the lesser amount of fine shall be applicable. 
(2)	The regulations are intended to apply to all medical marijuana for personal use or any medical marijuana business permitted under the State Question 788. The Code is intended to provide regulations to limit the impact that medical marijuana cultivation and production will have on health, safety, and community resources. 
(3)	Use, distribution, cultivation, production, possession, and transportation of medical marijuana remains illegal under federal law and marijuana remains classified as a "controlled substance" by federal law. 
(4)	The regulations for medical marijuana uses are not adequate at the state level to address the impacts of medical marijuana on the city, making it appropriate for local regulation of the impacts of medical marijuana uses. 
(5)	Nothing in this chapter is intended to promote or condone the production, distribution, or possession of marijuana in violation of any applicable law. 
(6)	This chapter is to be construed to protect the public over medical marijuana business interests. Operation of a medical marijuana business is a revocable privilege and not a right in the city. There is no property right for an individual or business to have medical marijuana in the city. 
(7)	Medical marijuana is a heavily regulated industry in the city and all licensees are assumed to be fully aware of the law. The city shall not therefore be required to issue warnings before issuing citations for violations of this chapter. 
(b)	The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and patients of the city by prescribing the manner in which medical marijuana businesses can be conducted in the city. Further, the purpose of this chapter is to: 
(1)	Provide for a means of cultivation, production, and distribution of marijuana to patients who qualify to obtain, possess, and use marijuana for medical purposes under the State Question 788. 
(2)	Protect public health and safety through reasonable limitations on business operations as they relate to noise, air and water quality, food safety, neighborhood and patient safety, security for the business and its personnel, and other health and safety concerns. 
(3)	Impose fees to cover the cost to the city of permitting medical marijuana businesses in an amount sufficient for the city to recover its costs of the permitting program. 
(4)	Adopt a mechanism for monitoring compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)	Create regulations that address the particular needs of the patients and residents of the city and coordinate with laws that may be enacted by the state regarding the issue. 
(6)	Facilitate the implementation of State Question 788 without going beyond the authority granted by it. 
(7)	Issue medical marijuana business permits only to individuals and entities that have demonstrated an intent and ability to comply with this chapter without monitoring by city officials. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-2. Oklahoma State Department of Health Regulations, Title 310, Chapter 681, Medical Marijuana Control Program adopted by reference.
(a)	Oklahoma State Department of Health Regulations, Title 310, Chapter 681, Medical Marijuana Control Program as it may from time to time be amended is adopted by reference and is made a part of the ordinances of the city, as if fully set forth in this Code. The provisions of these regulations shall take effect and be controlling with the city limits so that a violation of the provisions of the regulations will be a violation of this Code. Nothing in this section shall grant to the city the power or jurisdiction to prosecute offenses that a city is not authorized to prosecute. Copies of the rules are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)	Any crimes specified in the rules or other laws as felonies are specifically excluded from inclusion in this chapter. 
(c)	The penalty for a misdemeanor violation of the rules as adopted by this chapter shall be the maximum penalty allowed by state law but not exceeding the jurisdictional limits of the Spencer municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-3. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Applicant means the natural person in whose name a license would be issued. 
Complete application means a document prepared in accordance with the rules and the forms and instructions provided by the City of Spencer, including any supporting documentation required as well as the application fee. 
Dispensary means an entity that has been licensed by the Oklahoma State Health Department pursuant to Title 63 O.S. § 421A and permitted by the City of Spencer pursuant to this chapter, which allows the entity to purchase medical marijuana from a processer licensee or grower licensee and sell medical marijuana only to qualified patients and caregivers. 
Dispense means the selling of medical marijuana or a medical marijuana product to a qualified patient or the patient's designated caregiver that is packaged in a suitable container appropriately labeled for subsequent administration to or use by a qualified patient. 
Domicile means a person's true, fixed, primary permanent home and place of habitation and the tax parcel on which it is located. It is the place where the person intends to remain and to which the person expects to return when the person leaves without intending to establish a new domicile elsewhere. 
Entity means an individual, general partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability company, a trust, an estate, an association, a corporation or any other legal or commercial entity. 
Grower or commercial grower means an entity that has been licensed by the Oklahoma State Department of Health and permitted by the City of Spencer, which allows the entity to grow, harvest, and package medical marijuana to a dispensary, processor or researcher. 
Licensee means any natural born person or entity that holds a marijuana license provided for in this chapter. 
Manufacture means the process of converting harvested plant material into medical marijuana concentrate by physical or chemical means for use as an ingredient in a medical marijuana product. 
Marijuana means all parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of a plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin. "Marijuana" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, or any other compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination. 
Mature plant means harvestable female marijuana plant that is flowering. Mature plants are not authorized under this section prior to 60 days after the enactment of Title 63 O.S. § 420A et. seq. 
Medical marijuana means marijuana that is grown, processed, dispensed, tested, possessed, or used for a medical purpose. 
Medical marijuana business means any business licensed by the Oklahoma State Health Department and permitted by the City of Spencer to dispense, grow, research or process medical marijuana. 
Medical marijuana concentrate ("concentrate") means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from any part of the marijuana plant by physical or chemical means, so as to deliver a product with a cannabinoid concentration greater than the raw plant material from which it is derived, intended to be refined for use as an ingredient in a medical marijuana product and not for administration to a qualified patient. 
Medical marijuana product means a product that contains cannabinoids that have been extracted from plant material or the resin there from by physical or chemical means and is intended for administration to a qualified patient, including but not limited to oils, tinctures, edibles, pills, topical forms, gels, creams, forms medically appropriate for administration by vaporization or nebulizer, patches, tinctures, and liquids excluding live plant forms. 
Medical marijuana waste means unused, surplus, returned or out-of-date marijuana; recalled marijuana; unused marijuana; plant debris of the plant of the genus cannabis, including dead plants and all unused plant parts and roots; and any wastewater generated during growing and processing. 
Private school means an elementary, middle, or high school maintained by private individuals, religious organizations, or corporations, funded at least in part, by fees or tuition, and open only to pupils selected and admitted based on religious affiliations or other particular qualifications. 
Processor means an entity that has been licensed by Oklahoma State Department of Health and permitted by the City of Spencer, which allows the entity to: Purchase marijuana from a commercial grower; prepare, manufacture, package, sell to and deliver medical marijuana products to a dispensary licensee or other processor licensee; and may process marijuana received from a qualified patient into a medical marijuana concentrate, for a fee. 
Public school means an elementary, middle, or high school established under state law, regulated by the local state authorities in the various political subdivisions, funded and maintained by public taxation, and open and free to all children of the particular district where the school is located. 
Resident means an individual who is an income tax payer in the state of Oklahoma and can provide proof of residency as required by 63 O.S. § 420A et seq. and OAC 310:681-1-6. 
Retailer, as used in Title 63 O.S. § 421A et seq., means a dispensary. 
Revocation means the City of Spencer's final decision that any license issued pursuant to this chapter is rescinded because the individual or entity does not comply with the applicable requirements in this chapter. 
School means either public or private nurseries, kindergartens, elementary, which may include either K-6 or K-8, secondary schools and technology center schools, not to exceed two years of junior college work, night schools, adult and other special classes, vocational and technical instruction and such other school classes and instruction as may be authorized by laws which are now in effect or which may hereafter be enacted. 
Seedling means an immature marijuana plant that has no flowers. 
State Question means Oklahoma State Question No. 788 and Initiative Petition Number 412. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Secs. 33-4—33-11. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS PERMIT
 
Sec. 33-12. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or other business entity to operate as a commercial medical marijuana dispensary, commercial medical marijuana grower, commercial medical marijuana manufacturer, commercial medical marijuana processor within the corporate limits of the City of Spencer without first having obtained a license therefor as provided herein. The fee for each license is $5,000.00 each year. The license must be renewed annually. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020; Ord. No. 2020-10-15 , § 1, 10-15-2020)
 
Sec. 33-13. Additional licenses and permits may be required.
The license requirement set for in this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any other federal, state, or local law, including, by way of example, any applicable building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-14. License does not provide any exception, defense, or immunity from other laws.
The issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter does not create an exception, defense, or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the production, distribution, or possession of marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-15. Separate license required for each location.
A separate license shall be required for each premise from which a commercial medical marijuana business is operated. Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no two or more different commercial medical marijuana businesses may be treated as one premise. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-16. Licensee nontransferable.
A license that has been issued by the code enforcement for medical marijuana is nontransferable. A commercial medical marijuana business license will not be transferable or assignable, including, without limitation, not transferable or assignable to a different premise, to a different type of business, or to a different owner or license holder. A commercial medical marijuana business license is valid only for the owner named thereon, the type of business disclosed on the application for the permit, and the location for which the license is issued. The licensees of a commercial medical marijuana business license are only those persons disclosed in the application or subsequently disclosed to the city in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-17. Bonds.
Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Secs. 33-18—33-24. Reserved.
 
Sec. 33-25. Ventilation, fire, and life safety requirements.
In addition to state and local building and fire codes, the following requirements shall be enforced: 
(1)	Ventilation. A plan for ventilation of all medical marijuana facilities that describes the ventilation systems that will be used to prevent any odor of marijuana off the premises of the establishment must be submitted to the city. For retail and cultivation facilities, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to control the environment for the plants and describe how such systems operate with the systems preventing any odor leaving the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Secs. 33-26—33-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 33-31. Defense to criminal prosecutions.
Compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall not provide an exception, immunity, or defense to criminal prosecution under any applicable law, except in the Spencer municipal court, for a violation of this chapter as specifically provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-32. Inspections.
Every medical marijuana dispensary, commercial grower, and processor shall license the local permitting authority, and any agent of the local permitting authority, or anyone authorized to inspect the premises of the business pursuant to the city Code, or State Question 788, and any of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-33. Costs of inspection and clean-up.
In the event the city incurs costs in the inspection, clean-up, surrender of plants, or any other requirements to remove medical marijuana of any medical marijuana business, or any person cultivating, producing, distributing, or possessing marijuana, the business and responsible person shall reimburse the city all actual costs incurred by the city for such inspection or clean-up. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-34. Reserved.
 
Sec. 33-35. Forfeiture of license.
In the event that a commercial medical marijuana business does not commence operations within 30 days of issuance of a license from the city, the license shall be deemed forfeited and the business may not commence operations. This requirement will go in effect beginning January 1, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-36. Landlord duty.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a building to lease space or allow the use of any portion of the building by a commercial medical marijuana business unless the tenant has a valid commercial medical marijuana business license or has applied for and not been denied a commercial medical marijuana business license or no marijuana is located on the premises until a license has been issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-37. Locations of medical marijuana businesses.
(a)	Fixed location required.
(1)	Mobile medical marijuana sales of all types are prohibited within the City of Spencer. This includes but is not limited to trailers, recreational vehicles, and trucks. 
(2)	It shall be unlawful to operate a medical marijuana business including growing operation outside of an enclosed, fixed building. All medical marijuana business permits shall be issued for a specific fixed location within an enclosed building. 
(b)	Permitted use in zoning district. A commercial medical marijuana business license may be issued only if the business qualifies as a use permitted as a matter of right in the zoning district where it is proposed to be located. Conditional use permits shall not be applicable for medical marijuana businesses. Commercial medical marijuana business permits are permitted by right: 
(1)	As "retail sales" for a medical marijuana dispensary; 
(2)	As "agriculture" for a medical marijuana grower; 
(3)	As "manufacturing and production" for a medical marijuana manufacturer, storage, or processor. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020; Ord. No. 2020-10-15 , § 2, 10-15-2020)
 
Sec. 33-38. Commercial medical marijuana businesses prohibited.
(a)	No commercial medical marijuana business in buildings with residences or residential zoning districts. It shall be unlawful to operate a commercial medical marijuana business in a building which contains a residence, or within a dwelling unit within any zoning district, or within a residential zoning district, or within a mixed-use development that includes a residence. 
(b)	No retail sales in cultivation facilities or manufacturing. It shall be unlawful for any person to license retail sales within a medical marijuana business that is cultivation facility or processes medical marijuana. 
(c)	Separation from uses. No commercial medical marijuana license shall be issued for a location within 1,000 feet of any private or public school. 
(1)	Distances shall be measured from any entrance of the school to the nearest property line point of the medical marijuana business. 
(d)	No commercial medical marijuana grower or commercial manufacture and production or processing can be located in a residential, commercial or industrial zoning district. 
(e)	Commercial medical marijuana dispensaries shall only be located in a commercial district. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020; Ord. No. 2020-10-15 , §§ 3, 4, 10-15-2020)
 
Sec. 33-39. Application requirements.
An application for a commercial medical marijuana license shall be made to the city on forms provided by the code enforcement for that purpose. The applicant shall use the application to demonstrate its compliance with this chapter and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. The application shall include the following information: 
(a)	The Oklahoma medical marijuana authority business license number. 
(b)	Name and address of the owner or owners of the medical marijuana business in whose name the license is proposed to be issued. 
(1)	If an owner is a corporation, the name and address of any officer or director of the corporation and of any person holding issued and outstanding capital stock of the corporation. 
(2)	If an owner is a partnership, association, or company, the name and address of any person holding an interest therein and the managing members. If a managing member is an entity rather than an individual, the same disclosure shall be required for each entity with an ownership interest until a managing member that is a natural person is identified. 
(3)	If an owner is not a natural person, the organizational documents for all entities identified in the application, identification of the natural person that is authorized to speak for the entity, and contact information for that person. 
(c)	An operating plan for the proposed medical marijuana business, including the following information: 
(1)	A description of the products and services to be provided by the medical marijuana business. 
(2)	A dimensioned floor plan, clearly labeled, showing: 
a.	The layout of the structure and the floor plan in which the medical marijuana business is to be located; 
b.	The principal uses of the floor area depicted on the floor plan, including, but not limited to, the areas where nonpatients will be permitted, private consulting areas, storage areas, retail areas, and restricted areas where medical marijuana will be located; 
c.	Areas where any services other than the distribution of medical marijuana are proposed to occur in the premises; and 
d.	The separation of the areas that is open to persons who are not patients from those areas open to patients. 
(3)	For cultivation facilities, a plan that specifies the methods to be used to prevent the growth of harmful mold, humidity, and other related problems. 
(d)	A lighting plan showing the lighting outside of the medical marijuana business for security purposes and compliance with applicable city requirements. 
(e)	A fire separation plan showing a minimum of a two-hour fire separation between a medical dispensary and any adjacent business, or a fire suppression plan for all buildings containing cultivation, production, and manufacturing. 
(f)	A plan for disposal of any medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused product that is not sold to a patient or primary caregiver in a manner that protects any portion thereof from being possessed or ingested by any person or animal. 
(g)	A plan for ventilation of the medical marijuana business that describes the ventilation systems that will be used to prevent any odor of medical marijuana off the premises of the business. For medical marijuana businesses that grow medical marijuana plants, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to control the environment for the plants and describe how such systems operate with the systems preventing any odor leaving the premises. For medical marijuana businesses that produce medical marijuana-infused products, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to mitigate noxious gases or other fumes used or created as part of the production process. 
(h)	A description of all toxic, flammable, or other materials regulated by a federal, state, or local government that would have authority over the business if it was not a marijuana business, that will be used or kept at the medical marijuana business, the location of such materials, and how such materials will be stored. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-40. Modifications to approved commercial medical marijuana business license.
Prior to making a modification of a commercial medical marijuana business that would require a building license or change items required by subsections (d), (e), or (g) of the above section, the licensee shall submit to the city and have approved a completed application for modification of premises on a form provided by the city. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable modification application fee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-41. Fees required.
Any application for a commercial marijuana license shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount established by the city council of the City of Spencer. After the application review period, if the code enforcement deems the application to be complete, a nonrefundable license fee in the amount of $5,000.00 will be due prior to the issuance of the commercial marijuana license. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020; Ord. No. 2020-10-15 , § 5, 10-15-2020)
 
Sec. 33-42. Inspection.
An inspection of the proposed medical marijuana business by the code enforcement officer or the code enforcement officer's designee shall be required prior to issuance of a permit. Such inspection shall occur after the premises are ready for operation, but prior to the stocking of the business with any medical marijuana, and prior to the opening of the business to any patients or the public. The inspection is to verify that the business facilities are constructed and can be operated in accordance with the application submitted and the applicable requirements of the code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-43. Application processing.
The processing of the application by the code enforcement is not complete until the department has: 
(1)	Determined the application is complete; 
(2)	Determined the medical marijuana business is prepared and able to operate in compliance with all applicable laws; 
(3)	Conducted an inspection of the business; 
(4)	Obtained all other information the department determines necessary to make a decision whether to approve or deny the license application, or approve it with conditions; and 
(5)	Prepared the documentation necessary to support the decision made by the department on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-44. Approval requirements.
The code enforcement may: 
(a)	Issue a commercial medical marijuana business license if: 
(1)	The inspection, and all other information available to the city verify that the applicant has submitted a full and complete application; and 
(2)	Improvements have been made to the business location consistent with the application; and 
(3)	The applicant is prepared to operate the business with other owners and managers as set forth in the application; and 
(4)	The applicant and the business location are in compliance with this Code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
(b)	Deny any application that does not meet the requirements of this chapter or any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, or that contains any false or incomplete information. The conditions of an approval of a medical marijuana business license shall include, at a minimum, operation of the business in compliance with all of the plans and information made part of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-45. Persons prohibited as licensees.
It shall be unlawful for any of the following persons to have an ownership or a financial interest in a medical marijuana business, and no license provided by this chapter shall be issued to or held by, and no medical marijuana business shall be managed by: 
(1)	Any person until the annual fee for the license has been paid; 
(2)	Any natural person who is under 18 years of age; 
(3)	Any person who operates or manages a medical marijuana business contrary to the provisions of this chapter, any other applicable law, rule, or regulation or conditions imposed on land use or license approvals, or contrary to the terms of the plans submitted with the license application, as such plans may be amended as provided in this chapter, or has operated a business in violation of any law; 
(4)	A sheriff, deputy, police officer, or prosecuting officer, or an officer or employee of the state licensing authority or a local permitting authority; 
(5)	A person whose authority to be a primary caregiver has been revoked by the state health agency. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
ARTICLE IV. REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO THE OPERATION OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
 
Sec. 33-46. Onsite use prohibited.
No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten, or otherwise consumed or ingested within the medical marijuana business. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-47. Restriction on access to restricted area.
(a)	No person, other than a patient, licensee, employee, or a caregiver, shall be in the restricted area. No patient shall be allowed entry into the restricted area without showing a valid Oklahoma medical marijuana patient license and a valid picture ID. 
(b)	No person, other than an employee or caregiver of the business shall be permitted in the restricted area of the business. No access to the restricted area may be permitted by non-Oklahoma residents or for compensation. A log shall be maintained on the business premises and available for inspection upon request by the code enforcement officer and city manager or city manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-48. Display of license required.
A valid city issued commercial medical marijuana business license shall be conspicuously posted in the business. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-49. Business conducted within building.
Any and all cultivation, production, distribution, possession, storage, display, sales, or other distribution of marijuana shall occur only within the restricted area of a commercial medical marijuana business and shall not be visible from the exterior of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-50. Use of pesticides.
No pesticides or insecticides which are prohibited by applicable law for fertilization or production of edible produce shall be used on any marijuana cultivated, produced, or distributed by a medical marijuana business. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-51. Ventilation required.
A commercial medical marijuana business shall be ventilated so that the odor of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana business or at any adjoining use or property. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-52. Use of metals, butane, propane or other flammable products.
(a)	No medical marijuana business may use metals, butane, propane, or other flammable product, or produce flammable vapors, to process marijuana unless the process used and the premises are verified as safe and in compliance with all applicable codes by a qualified industrial hygienist. 
(b)	The city may require the business to obtain verification from a qualified industrial hygienist that the manner in which the business is producing medical marijuana complies with all applicable laws and does not produce noxious or dangerous gases or odors or otherwise create a danger to any person or entity in or near the businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-53. Disposal of medical marijuana and marijuana byproducts.
All medical marijuana and any product containing a usable form of marijuana must be made unusable and unrecognizable prior to removal from the business in compliance with all applicable laws. This provision shall not apply to licensed law enforcement, including, without limitation, the City of Spencer police department and the City of Spencer fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-54. Delivery between medical marijuana businesses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport medical marijuana, except as specifically allowed by applicable law, unless the medical marijuana being transported meets the following requirements: 
(1)	All medical marijuana is transported in a locked container, shielded from public view and labeled "Medical Marijuana or Derivative." 
(2)	Unless otherwise specifically allowed by applicable law, medical marijuana may be transported only between medical marijuana businesses. 
(3)	The medical marijuana must be accompanied by the manifest in accordance with state requirements for transport of marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-55. Advertisement.
A commercial medical marijuana business may not advertise in a manner that is inconsistent with the medicinal use of medical marijuana. A medical marijuana business may not advertise in a manner that is misleading, deceptive, false, or designed to appeal to minors. Advertisement that promotes medical marijuana for recreational or any use other than for medicinal purposes shall be a violation of this Code. The following conditions shall apply: 
(a)	Any person permitted as a medical marijuana business shall include in any advertisement for medical marijuana or any medical marijuana-infused product the following language: "For registered Oklahoma medical marijuana patients only." Provided, however, this language shall not be required to be displayed upon any sign identifying a medical marijuana business, as permitted by subparagraph (b)(2) of this section. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, it shall be unlawful for any person permitted under this chapter or any other person to advertise any medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused product anywhere in the city where the advertisement is in plain view of or in a place open to the general public, including advertising utilizing any of the following media: Any billboard or other outdoor general advertising device as defined by the zoning code; any sign mounted on a vehicle; any handheld or other portable sign; or any handbill, leaflet, or flier directly handed to any person in a public place, left upon a motor vehicle, or posted upon any public or private property. The prohibition set forth in this paragraph shall not apply to: 
(1)	Any sign located on the same zoned lot as a medical marijuana business which exists solely for the purpose of identifying the location of the medical marijuana business and which otherwise complies with this Code and any other applicable city laws and regulations; 
(2)	Any advertisement contained within a newspaper, magazine, or other periodical of general circulation within the city or on the internet, which may include coupons; 
(3)	Any products marked with the name or logo of a marijuana business, including wearable or non-consumable merchandise, packaging in which marijuana is sold, or on medical marijuana accessories sold; 
(4)	Advertising which is purely incidental to sponsorship of a charitable event by a medical marijuana business; 
(5)	A booth at a job fair or educational seminar where the only items distributed are company or educational materials, and no other items are distributed, shown or sold; 
(6)	A booth at an adult event where the only items distributed are company or educational materials, and no other items are distributed, shown or sold. 
(c)	It is an affirmative defense if a medical marijuana business employee provided another individual, upon request, a business card for the purpose of providing that person's name and business affiliation, including, without restriction, title, mailing address, email address, and telephone number. 
(d)	No medical marijuana business shall distribute or allow the distribution of any marijuana or products marked with its name or logo without charge within a marijuana business or any place open to the public for the purpose of promotion or advertising except as permitted in subsections (b)(5) and (6) of this section. 
(e)	No medical marijuana business shall distribute or allow the distribution of any coupon or similar writing, electronically or on paper, which purports to allow the bearer to exchange the same for any marijuana product, either free or at a discount except as permitted in subsections (b)(5) and (6) of this section. 
(f)	No medical marijuana business shall sell, distribute, or provide, or allow the sale, distribution, or provision of, products marked with its name or logo, in child sizes, designed for the use of minors, or which is misleading, deceptive, false, or appealing to minors. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-56. Organization of cultivation facilities.
All cultivation facilities shall be organized in orderly rows with aisles at least three feet wide, and no more than eight feet between an aisle and the next aisle or an aisle and a wall, and with clear access to all exits, unless the code enforcement determines that the business has provided a dimensioned floor plan that provides equivalent access and separation between plants and to exits. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-57. Consent to inspection.
Application for a commercial medical marijuana business license or operation of a commercial medical marijuana business, or leasing property to a commercial medical marijuana business, constitutes consent by the applicant, and all owners, managers, and employees of the business, and the owner of the property to license the code enforcement officer and city manager or city manager's designee to conduct routine inspections of the medical marijuana business to ensure compliance with this chapter or any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. The owner or manager on duty shall retrieve and provide the records of the business pertaining to the inspection. Application for a commercial medical marijuana business license constitutes consent to inspection of the business as public premises without a search warrant, and consent to seizure of any surveillance records, camera recordings, reports, or other materials required as a condition of a medical marijuana license without a search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-58. Reporting of source, quantity, and sales.
The records to be maintained by each medical marijuana business shall include the source and quantity of any marijuana distributed, produced, or possessed within the premises. Such reports shall include, without limitation, for both acquisitions from wholesalers and transactions to patients or caregivers, the following: 
(1)	Name and address of seller or purchaser; and 
(2)	Date, weight, type of marijuana, and dollar amount or other consideration of transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-59. Requirements for public health and labeling.
(a)	The production of any medical marijuana-infused product shall be at a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer that meets all requirements of a retail food establishment as set forth in 63 O.S. § 1-1101 et seq., 63 O.S. § 1-1401 et seq., OAC 310:257, and OAC 310:240. The production of any product containing medical marijuana shall comply with all health and safety standards thereof. The licensee shall comply with all applicable state and local health regulations related to the production, preparation, labeling, and sale of prepared food items as if the medical marijuana-infused products were food items. 
(b)	All medical marijuana sold or otherwise distributed by the licensee shall be packaged and labeled in a manner that advises the purchaser that it contains marijuana and specifies the amount of marijuana in the product, that the marijuana is intended for medical use solely by the patient to whom it is sold, and that any resale or redistribution of the medical marijuana to a third person is prohibited. In addition, the label shall comply with all applicable requirements of the State of Oklahoma and any other applicable law. 
(c)	The product shall be packaged in a sealed container that cannot be opened without obvious damage to the packaging. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-60. Compliance with other applicable law.
Except as may be provided otherwise in this chapter, or rules adopted pursuant to this chapter or interpretations by the city, any law or regulation adopted by the state governing the cultivation, production, possession, or distribution of marijuana for medical use shall also apply to medical marijuana businesses in the city. Provided however, if a state law or regulation permits what this chapter prohibits, this chapter shall prevail. Compliance with any applicable state law or regulation that does not license what this chapter prohibits shall be deemed an additional requirement for issuance or denial of any license under this chapter, and noncompliance with any applicable state law or regulation is unlawful and shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license issued under this chapter. No medical marijuana business shall continue operations in violation of an additional state law or regulation, which does not license what this chapter prohibits, applicable within the city after the effective date of the state law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-61. Revocation of license upon denial or revocation of state license or applicable federal prohibition.
If the state prohibits the cultivation, production, possession, or other distribution of marijuana through medical marijuana businesses, or if a medical marijuana business is denied a commercial medical marijuana business license or has such license revoked, or if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the federal government's prohibition of the cultivation, production, possession, or other distribution of marijuana through medical marijuana businesses supersedes state law, any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to be immediately revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or other redress on behalf of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-62. Revocable privilege.
A commercial medical marijuana business license is a revocable privilege, and no applicant there for or holder thereof shall be deemed to have acquired any property interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-63. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts unless such act is permitted under the provisions of State Question 788 or the Oklahoma Health Department regulations: 
(1)	Cultivate, distribute, or produce marijuana in plain view of or in a place open to the general public. 
(2)	Smoke, use, or ingest any marijuana on the premises of the commercial medical marijuana business. 
(3)	Operate or be in physical control of any commercial medical marijuana business, liquor establishment, vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat while under the influence of alcohol, medical marijuana, or other intoxicant. 
(4)	Possess medical marijuana that is not in a sealed package in a location where the possessor is not authorized to possess or consume medical marijuana. 
(5)	Possess more than six mature and six seedling marijuana plants without a commercial medical marijuana business license for a cultivation facility. 
(6)	Possess any marijuana without a medical marijuana license or a marijuana business permit; further a holder of a medical marijuana license shall not possess more than three ounces of marijuana on their person. 
(7)	Possess more than one ounce of concentrated marijuana without a commercial medical marijuana license for a business or a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer. 
(8)	Possess more than 72 ounces of edible marijuana without a commercial medical marijuana license for a business or a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer. 
(9)	Possess more than eight ounces of marijuana in their residence. 
(10)	Obtain marijuana from a person who is not permitted as a commercial medical marijuana business. 
(11)	Possess or operate a commercial medical marijuana business in violation of this chapter. 
(12)	Produce, distribute, or possess more medical marijuana than allowed in this chapter than disclosed in the application to the state for a medical marijuana business license or other applicable law. 
(13)	Distribute medical marijuana without a commercial medical marijuana business license or outside of the restricted area of the medical marijuana business. 
(14)	Possess medical marijuana, own or manage a medical marijuana business, or own or manage a building with a medical marijuana business, where there is possession of medical marijuana by a person who is not a patient, caregiver, or a licensee of a medical marijuana business. 
(15)	Possess or operate a medical marijuana business in a location or in a manner for which a medical marijuana business license is prohibited by the terms of this chapter. 
(16)	Operate a medical marijuana business without a commercial medical marijuana business license from the city. 
(17)	Operate a medical marijuana business in a manner that is not consistent with the items disclosed in the application for the medical marijuana business, or is in violation of any plan made part of the license application. 
(18)	Distribute, or own or manage a medical marijuana business where distribution occurs, from a medical marijuana business, a medical marijuana-infused product that was produced in a manner that is not in compliance with this chapter. 
(19)	Cultivate, manufacture, distribute, or possess any medical marijuana at a location without a commercial medical marijuana business license prior to passing the inspection required by this chapter. 
(20)	Make any changes, or for the licensee to allow any changes, to the items included in the plans submitted with the license application and approved by the office of code enforcement, or the individuals identified in the application, without prior approval of the office of code enforcement. 
(21)	Attempt to use or display a medical marijuana business license at a different location or for a different business entity than the location and business entity disclosed on the application for the issued permit. 
(22)	Cultivate, produce, distribute, or possess medical marijuana, or own or manage a medical marijuana business in which another cultivates, produces, distributes, or possesses medical marijuana, in violation of this chapter or any other applicable law. 
(23)	Own, manage, or possess a medical marijuana business where medical marijuana is outside of the restricted area portion of such business. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if the medical marijuana outside of the restricted area was: 
a.	In the custody and control of a patient or caregiver; 
b.	Purchased by that patient or caregiver from the business and the patient or caregiver has not left the business since purchase; and 
c.	The amount of medical marijuana in the custody and control of the patient or caregiver does not exceed the amount the patient or caregiver may possess lawfully. 
(24)	Dispose of medical marijuana or any by-product of medical marijuana containing marijuana in a manner contrary to this chapter. 
(25)	Deliver or transport medical marijuana between medical marijuana businesses except in strict compliance with this chapter. 
(26)	Advertise or publish materials, honor coupons, sell or give away products, or display signs that are in violation of this Code; 
(27)	Violate any provision of this Code or any condition of an approval granted pursuant to this Code or any law, rule, or regulation applicable to the use of medical marijuana or the operation of a medical marijuana business. 
(28)	License any other person to violate any provision of this Code or any condition of an approval granted pursuant to this Code, or any law, rule, or regulation applicable to the use of medical marijuana or the operation of a medical marijuana business. 
(29)	Lease any property to a medical marijuana business that has marijuana on the property without a medical marijuana business license that has been issued by the office of code enforcement. 
(30)	Label or distribute a marijuana-infused product that is not labeled as required by this Code or other applicable law. 
(31)	Distribute or deliver marijuana from a medical marijuana cultivation facility to any location other than a medical marijuana business. 
(32)	Printing or allowing the printing of a coupon that is not a newspaper, magazine, or other periodical of general circulation within the city or on the internet. 
(33)	Fail to provide a copy or record of a coupon authorized under this chapter upon request of an authorized code enforcement employee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-64. Suspension or revocation of permit; imposition of fines.
(a)	A medical marijuana business license may be suspended or revoked for any of the following violations: 
(1)	Conviction of the business, a licensee, or any owner, or primary caregiver of any violation of this chapter or any other law, rule, or regulation applicable to the use of medical marijuana or operation of a medical marijuana business. 
(2)	Misrepresentation or omission of any material fact, or false or misleading information, on the application or any amendment thereto, or any other information provided to the city related to the medical marijuana business. 
(3)	Violation of any law by which, if occurring prior to submittal of the application, could have been cause for denial of the license application. 
(4)	Distribution of medical marijuana, including, without limitation, transporting marijuana, in violation of this chapter or any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
(b)	In the event a business or licensee is charged with violation of any law, upon which a final judgment would be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit, the city may suspend the license pending the resolution of the alleged violation. 
(c)	Fines for violations of this chapter may be imposed by the city against the person or any licensee up to $2000.00 per person and any licensee per occurrence. Any person or licensee subjected to fines, revocation or suspension of its license shall be entitled to a hearing by the Spencer municipal court to contest such penalties. 
(d)	If the city revokes or suspends a permit, the business may not move any marijuana from the premises except under the supervision of the City of Spencer police department. 
(e)	In the event of the suspension of a marijuana business permit, during the period of suspension, the business: 
(1)	Shall post two notices provided by the City of Spencer's office of code enforcement, in conspicuous places, one on the exterior and one on the interior of its premises for the duration of the suspension; and 
(2)	Shall not distribute or produce or test or transport marijuana, nor allow any customers into the permitted premises. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-65. Term of permit; renewals; expiration of permit.
(a)	Term of permit. A commercial medical marijuana business license shall be valid for one year. The license shall expire on the last day of the month in which the license is issued of the year following issuance or renewal of the permit. 
(b)	Renewal of permit. The licensee shall apply for renewal of the commercial medical marijuana business license at least 45 days before the expiration of the permit. The licensee shall apply for renewal using forms provided by the office of code enforcement. If the applicant fails to apply for renewal at least 45 days before the expiration of the license but does apply for renewal prior to expiration of the permit, the code enforcement may process the renewal application if the applicant submits a late filing fee of $500.00 at the time of submittal of the renewal application. 
(1)	The renewal application fee, and late fee if applicable, shall accompany the renewal application. Once the application is deemed approved by the office of code enforcement, the license fee will be due prior to license issuance. Such fees are nonrefundable. 
(2)	In the event there has been a change to any of the plans identified in the license application which were submitted to and approved by the office of code enforcement with the application or an earlier renewal, the renewal application shall include specifics of the changes or proposed changes in any of such plans. 
(3)	In the event any person who has an interest as described in the disclosures made to the city pursuant to this chapter, or any agent as defined herein, or employee has been charged with or accused of violations of any law since such disclosure, the renewal application shall include the name of the violator, the date of the violation, the court and case number where the violation was filed, and the disposition of the violation with the renewal application. 
(4)	In the event the business license has been suspended or revoked or a licensee has received any notice of violation of any law that would impact renewal, the renewal application shall include a copy of the notice, suspension, or revocation. 
(5)	The renewal application shall include verification that the business has a valid state license and the state license is in good standing. 
(6)	The renewal application shall include a summary report for the previous 12 months showing the amount of marijuana purchased, the amount of marijuana sold, the forms in which marijuana was sold, the number of patients and the number of primary caregivers who received marijuana, the police report numbers or case numbers of all police calls to the medical marijuana business and, for calls resulting in a charge of a violation of any law, the charge, case number, and disposition of any of the charges. 
(7)	The code enforcement shall not accept renewal applications after the expiration of the permit, but instead shall require the applicant to file a new license application. 
(8)	In the event there have been allegations of violations of this Code by any of the licensees or the business submitting a renewal application, the city may hold a hearing prior to approving the renewal application. The hearing shall be to determine whether the application and proposed licensees comply with this chapter and whether the operation of the business has been in compliance with this Code. If the city does not hold a hearing and the application and the licensees do not meet the requirements of this chapter, or the business has been operated in the past in violation of this Code, the renewal application may be denied or issued with conditions, and the decision shall be final subject the city manager and hearing officer's review. 
(c)	Expiration of permit. Expiration of a commercial medical marijuana business license for any reason shall be considered an inactive local permit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Secs. 33-66—33-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITIES FOR
PERSONAL MEDICAL USE
 
Sec. 33-81. License required.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a person to grow marijuana for personal medical use within the corporate limits of the City of Spencer, Oklahoma without first obtaining a license from the City of Spencer's office of code enforcement. 
(b)	A residential medical marijuana grow license will only be granted to a caregiver if: 
(1)	The caregiver is licensed as a caregiver by the State of Oklahoma; and 
(2)	The medical marijuana grown is for use by their custodial, minor child. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-82. License does not provide any exception, defense, or immunity from other laws.
The issuance of any license pursuant to this chapter does not create an exception, defense, or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the production, distribution, or possession of marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-83. License nontransferable.
A license that has been issued by the code enforcement to grow medical marijuana for personal use is nontransferable. 
(1)	A personal use residential medical marijuana license will not be transferable or assignable, including, without limitation, not transferable or assignable to a different licensee. A personal use residential medical marijuana license is valid only for the owner named thereon the license and the location for which the license is issued. The licensee of a personal use residential medical marijuana license is only that person disclosed in the application or subsequently disclosed to the city in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-84. Location and security.
All marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use shall be subject to security provisions as stated herein prior to the granting of a permit. Failing to comply with security provisions as stated herein will result in revocation of the city license for one calendar year. 
(a)	All homegrown medical marijuana plants must be grown so that the marijuana is not accessible to a member of the general public and is only accessible to the patient or caregiver. If grown outdoors, it must be grown behind a sight-proof fence that is at least six feet in height. The marijuana plants must be completely enclosed by the fence and the fence must be secured with a commercial quality lock and key. 
(b)	Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
(c)	The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical components used shall comply with municipal building and fire codes. The growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold or other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed 1,000 watts per light. The use of gas products (C0 2 , butane, etc.) or C0 2 and ozone generators in the growing area is prohibited. 
(d)	Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property. 
(e)	The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is grown for personal use shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, eating, sleeping, sanitation/bathing facilities, working water and electric services, with proper ingress and egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation will impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping or sanitation/bathing. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-85. Application requirements.
An application for personal medical marijuana grow license shall be made to the city on forms provided by the code enforcement for that purpose. The applicant shall use the application to demonstrate its compliance with this chapter and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)	The Oklahoma medical marijuana authority patient license number. 
(2)	Name and address of the owner in whose name the license is proposed to be issued. 
(3)	Proof of ownership or legal possession of the premise for the term of the proposed permit. 
a.	The applicant shall provide a copy of the property deed showing proof of ownership; or 
b.	If the applicant for the residential medical marijuana grow license is not the owner of the premises, the applicant shall provide the city a copy of the premises lease for the period of time that the license will be valid. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-86. Fees required.
After the application review period, if the code enforcement deems the application to be complete, a nonrefundable license fee will be due prior to the issuance of the personal medical marijuana grow permit. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-87. Application processing.
The processing of the application by the code enforcement is not complete until the department has: 
(1)	Determined the application is complete; 
(2)	Determined the licensee is prepared and able to grow personal use medical marijuana in compliance with all applicable laws; 
(3)	Obtained all other information the department determines necessary to make a decision whether to approve or deny the license application, or approve it with conditions; and 
(4)	Prepared the documentation necessary to support the decision made by the department on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-88. Approval requirements.
The code enforcement may: 
(1)	Issue commercial medical marijuana grow license if: 
a.	The applicant is licensed by the State of Oklahoma under Title 63 O.S. § 421A; and 
b.	All other information available to the city verify that the applicant has submitted a full and complete application; and 
c.	The applicant and the location of the business are in compliance with this Code and any other applicable law, rule, or regulation. 
(2)	Deny any application that does not meet the requirements of this chapter or any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, or that contains any false or incomplete information. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Sec. 33-89. Penalty.
Except as otherwise provided by state law, whenever in this chapter an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful the violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,500.00, plus costs. Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2020-01-16 , § I, 1-16-2020)
 
Chapter 34 SOLID WASTE
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 34-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business, commercial establishment or institution means includes any building or structure or premises not defined as a residence. 
Collection of solid waste means all solid waste including, but not limited to, garbage or trash except uncollectible or hazardous waste. 
Garbage means all putrescible waste from any place where meats, fish, fowl, fruits, or vegetables are prepared for food for consumption and shall include all household waste including organic matter that has been prepared for or was intended to be used as food or has resulted from the preparation of food. 
Hazardous waste means materials or substances which by reason of their characteristics are: 
(1)	Hazardous waste as defined in the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 691 et seq., or regulations thereunder, the Oklahoma Hazardous Waste Management Act, 27A O.S. § 2-7-101 et seq., or the regulations thereunder, or in any similar or substituted legislation or regulation or amendments to the foregoing; 
(2)	Any other material which any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time are harmful, toxic or dangerous. 
Multi-family dwelling units means apartments, condominiums, rooming houses, boarding houses or any other dwelling unit intended for occupancy by more than one family. 
Municipal solid waste means collectible solid waste. 
Noncollectible waste means and includes pathological and hospital waste, poisons, acids, caustics, explosives, body waste, automobile frames, crankcases, transmissions, large truck and any vehicle tires, large bulky objects such as stoves, refrigerators, furniture, trees and materials that may cause damage to collection equipment or personal injury to municipal solid waste collectors, dirt, rocks, or debris resulting from construction, reconstruction or repairs of buildings, animal excreta, or any article of substance soiled by human or animal excreta that has not been wrapped and tightly sealed in moisture proof paper prior to placement for collection, and refuse which has been combined or mixed with any of the above mentioned items, sewage, liquid waste and other highly diluted water carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form, special nuclear material or byproducts and materials, as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, or hazardous waste. 
Occupant of premises means the occupant of any premises within the city. 
Over-accumulation means the accumulation of garbage, rubbish or trash in amounts exceeding the capacity of the waste receptacle at the pick-up point or at the point of disposal. 
Owner means the owner of all premises where more than one family resides on a lot, a parcel of land, or adjoining lots or parcels of land belonging to the same person, unless the premises occupied by each family, including the yards, are clearly defined and under the exclusive control of the occupant. 
Premises means land, buildings, or other structures or parts thereof, in which refuse is stored or accumulated. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste including garbage, rubbish and trash. 
Residence means any building or structure used solely as a family domicile including single-family or multi-family dwelling unit, duplexes, triplexes, and trailer courts, but shall not include hotels, tourist courts, motels, motor courts, motor hotels, or apartments. 
Rubbish means a normal accumulation by resident families or commercial establishments of worthless or offensive matter, the accumulation of which may create a nuisance or be deleterious to public health or offensive to sight or smell. 
Trash means nonputrescible solid waste, including excessive accumulations of household rubbish, but shall not include municipal solid waste matter that is not in a proper container or is not specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 17-403; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Sec. 34-2. Violations.
The owner, occupant, or person having control of any premises in the city who fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or who attempts to remove any refuse, except as provided in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each successive 24-hour period such person fails to comply with provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense subject to penalties as provided in the city fine schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 17-406; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Secs. 34-3—34-22. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
 
Sec. 34-23. Collection of garbage and other refuse.
(a)	The city may collect and dispose of garbage or other refuse or may contract with private persons to do so and may contract for collection of all or some portion of the city. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person or entity not authorized by contract with the city, or by permit from the city, to collect, transport or dispose of garbage or other refuse for hire within the city limits. 
(Code 1983, § 17-401; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Sec. 34-24. Containers not to be a nuisance.
All garbage and other refuse on all premises within the city shall be cared for in a manner which shall prevent it from becoming a nuisance. It is unlawful to dump trash or other refuse on any nonstate or city permitted property in the city. 
(Code 1983, § 17-402; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Sec. 34-25. Duty of occupant and owner to request services.
(a)	Every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any premises located on a regularly established refuse route shall notify the city of the beginning of such occupancy and request refuse pick up service. Failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of such premises to make a request shall not prevent nor in any way impair or impede the city from: 
(1)	Adding the address of the premises to the proper refuse collection route records; 
(2)	Providing such service; 
(3)	Enforcing the appropriate action provisions of this chapter and causing the collection fee or charge to be paid. 
(b)	Any place or abode or residence or any place of business occupied and/or in operation shall by prima facie evidence that garbage, rubbish, and/or trash is being produced and accumulated on the premises. 
(c)	It is mandatory that every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any premises located on a regularly established refuse route within the city use the refuse collection contractors approved by the city for removal of refuse and to pay the rates approved by the city for such service. 
Code 1983, § 17-404; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Sec. 34-26. Noncollectible waste.
Noncollectible waste shall not be placed with refuse for collection but shall be disposed of directly and promptly by the person owning, occupying, renting or leasing the premises wherein such material is accumulated. 
Code 1983, § 17-405; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Sec. 34-27. Private removal.
(a)	No person shall remove from premises situated in the city, or transport through the streets, alleys, or public places in the city any garbage, any refuse, carcasses of dead animals or other offensive or unwholesome matter unless authorized by the city manager. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to deposit for collection on any street, parking lot or on any private property in the city, any garbage, refuse or rubbish without placing the same in the enclosed containers provided. 
(Code 1983, § 17-407; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Sec. 34-28. Container required; duty to use.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this article all residential customers shall place their garbage and refuse in the containers or carts provided by the city or its designee. 
(b)	The city shall provide one cart per residence. The resident shall place normal household "garbage" and "refuse" as defined in this chapter in the cart for collection. The resident shall be responsible for the safekeeping of the cart until such time as an inspection is made by the city and services terminated. Should any person change residence, they shall promptly notify the city. If the cart is lost or stolen the resident shall promptly notify the police department and obtain a case number. Lost or stolen carts will not be replaced without a case number from the police department. The city or its designee will empty carts so long as the cart contains not more than 90 pounds of garbage and refuse and not more than five plastic bags, which shall be securely tied or fastened to prevent spillage and shall not weigh more than 25 pounds. Brush and trimmings no greater than three inches in diameter will be cut in lengths no longer than four feet, tied together with approved rope or twine in bundles of no more than 25 pounds and placed at the curb so that the same may be collected during any given pick up day. If a cart is damaged beyond normal wear and tear the cost of replacement shall be charged to the resident at the current replacement cost. All carts shall remain the property of the city even though the resident has paid for a replacement cart. All carts are to remain at the residence to which they are assigned. It shall be unlawful and an offense for a person to be in possession of a cart without the permission of the resident to which it is assigned. 
(c)	All carts to be emptied shall be placed at the city curb line unless specific permission to do otherwise has been granted by the city manager due to special circumstances. Carts are not to be obstructed from view, i.e., behind parked cars, behind hedges, etc. The carts shall be placed for collection no earlier than 7:00 p.m. the day before collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. the day of collection. The resident must return the cart to its storage place by 7:00 p.m. the day of collection. 
(d)	No other carts or containers for the collection of garbage shall be utilized by any resident without the written approval of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 17-408; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Sec. 34-29. Unlawful removal of containers.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation in the business of hauling trash not under contract with the city to remove or cause to be removed any garbage, refuse or rubbish of any kind from any garbage can or other container used for the deposit of same. 
(Code 1983, § 17-409; Ord. No. 447-10-04, 10-21-2004)
 
Sec. 34-30. Commercial rates for dumpsters.
The commercial rates shall be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 17-410; Ord. No. 440-06-04, 6-17-2004)
 
Chapter 36 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 36-1—36-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. STREET DEPARTMENT
 
Sec. 36-19. Creation of department.
A street department for the city is hereby established and shall consist of a street superintendent and such employees as shall be designated by the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 37-1.1; Code 1983, § 14-101)
 
Sec. 36-20. Superintendent.
The street superintendent is selected and appointed by the city manager to serve during his pleasure. The superintendent, subject to approval of city manager, shall select and employ all workmen of the street department. The street superintendent and all employees in the department are at all times under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 37-1.2; Code 1983, § 14-102)
 
Sec. 36-21. Custody of road equipment.
The street superintendent is to have custody of the road equipment and is accountable to the city manager for its care and safe keeping. He shall inventory the equipment, giving its estimated value, and revise the same from time to time, which is furnished to the city manager, a copy thereof to be filed with the city clerk, for use of the council. 
(Prior Code, § 37-1.3; Code 1983, § 14-103)
 
Sec. 36-22. Purchase of supplies.
The street superintendent may make recommendations to the city manager for the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment for the department. 
(Prior Code, § 37-1.4; Code 1983, § 14-104)
 
Sec. 36-23. Statement for needs for fiscal year.
The street superintendent is to prepare an itemized statement showing by item the needs of his department for the ensuing fiscal year, which statement is furnished to the city manager by June 1 of each year, for his use in the preparation of the city budget. 
(Prior Code, § 37-1.5; Code 1983, § 14-105)
 
Secs. 36-24—36-49. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. USE RESTRICTIONS
 
Sec. 36-50. Trees and shrubbery to be trimmed.
(a)	The owner of any premises abutting on any street of this city shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the area between the sidewalks and the roadway, of any such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks, and alleys. When such premises are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinafter required of the owner. Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not be lower than ten feet above the roadway of a street or alley, nor lower than eight feet above the sidewalk. 
(b)	Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim trees and shrubbery as provided in this section, after receiving five days' notice from the head of the department in charge of streets to do so, is guilty of an offense against the city. Every day that the owner or occupant shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim the trees or shrubbery, after the expiration of the five days' notice, is a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, §§ 37-3.4, 37-3.6; Code 1983, § 14-201)
 
Sec. 36-51. Unlawful to injure trees and shrubbery.
It is unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or alley in the city; provided that this shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery. 
(Code 1983, § 14-202)
 
Sec. 36-52. Unlawful to obstruct sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys with merchandise.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place upon or permit to be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys of the city any goods, wares, articles of merchandise or any other obstruction, and leave same thereon; or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or trade. 
(b)	If is unlawful to sell, offer to sell, store or display any goods, wares or merchandise on any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way in the city, or to perform any service or solicit any sale or service thereon. Nothing in this section shall prevent the towing or removing of a distressed vehicle or authorized acts of the city or its employees. 
(Prior Code, § 37-3.2; Code 1983, § 14-203)
 
Sec. 36-53. Unlawful to obstruct unduly sidewalks and streets.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or obstruct the sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon. 
(b)	The city shall have the right to regulate the installation of culverts, driveways or mailboxes that may be constructed or maintained on the right-of-way of any street or highway in the city, and the city shall have the authority to remove any such culvert, driveway or mailbox without notice where such culvert, driveway or mailbox is considered to be dangerous to the traveling public, or interferes with the proper drainage or maintenance of the street or highway. 
(Code 1983, § 14-204; Ord. No. 226-A, 4-11-1985)
 
Sec. 36-54. Unlawful to deposit trash upon streets or sidewalks.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, throw or sweep into or upon the streets, alleys, parking or sidewalks of the city any paper, rubbish, grass, weeds, tree trimmings, dirt, trash, crates, boxes or other refuse of any kind. It is unlawful to place, leave or throw on or across any streets or sidewalks, including, but not limited to, rocks, sand, gravel, cement, bottles, lumber, nails, wire, wood, limbs, leaves, trash or debris. 
(Prior Code, § 37-3.7; Code 1983, § 14-205)
 
Sec. 36-55. Vehicles not to be washed on street.
The washing of an automobile or other vehicle in any street of the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1983, § 14-206)
 
Sec. 36-56. Water, mud from vehicle not to drain into street.
No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city where the water, dirt, mud or other substances removed therefrom by or during the washing thereof shall drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 14-207)
 
Sec. 36-57. Water from filling stations and other businesses.
It is unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking lot, street, alley or other public way. 
(Code 1983, § 14-208)
 
Sec. 36-58. Owner or occupant not to permit sidewalk or sidewalk area to become a hazard.
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk, or sidewalk area. 
(Code 1983, § 14-209)
 
Sec. 36-59. Signs prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to cut, carve, paint, mark, engrave, paste or inscribe upon any sidewalk, curbing, pavement or other public part of any street or sidewalk, curbing, pavement or other public part of any street, any sign, mark, advertisement or effigy, other than to show sidewalk contractor's nameplate. 
(Prior Code, § 27-3.1; Code 1983, § 14-210)
 
Sec. 36-60. Signs and other projections over sidewalks; permit.
No sign, awning or other projection over any sidewalk within the city is maintained at a height of less than eight feet above the level of such sidewalk. No such sign, awning or projection over any sidewalk of this city is hereafter erected without a permit being first obtained from the building inspector of the city, whose duty it is to see that such sign, awning or projection complies with all regulations of the building codes, fire limit codes and the zoning ordinances of the city. It is the duty of the city clerk to issue such permit upon the payment of a fee as provided in the city fee schedule, such permit fee being for the purpose of defraying the expense of inspection and issuance of such permit, upon the recommendation of the building inspector, and not otherwise. 
(Prior Code, § 37-3.3; Code 1983, § 14-211)
 
Sec. 36-61. Obstruction to view city streets.
For the purposes of visibility along and around city streets, it shall be unlawful for any owner or person otherwise in possession or control of any lot, tract or parcel of land to allow grass, rank weeds, thickets, shrubbery, hedges, trees or noxious plants to grow or stand upon such premises, or along the sidewalk, street, or unpaved alley adjacent to such premises, and it shall be the duty of such owner or person otherwise in possession or control of any lot, tract or parcel of land to cut, trim, remove or destroy any and all such grass, rank weeds, thickets, shrubbery, hedges, trees or noxious plants on such premises. 
(Code 1983, § 14-212; Ord. No. 445-08-04, 8-19-2004)
 
Sec. 36-62. Removal of debris from streets.
Any person, firm or corporation that causes or permits any material of any kind to be placed upon any of the city streets or sidewalks of the city, except as by law provided shall forthwith immediately remove same therefrom, or shall pay the expense of causing same to be removed, and failure to do so, shall constitute an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 37-3.9; Code 1983, § 14-213)
 
Secs. 36-63—36-82. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. STREET LIGHTS
 
Sec. 36-83. Manager to provide for street lights.
The manager shall provide for and designate the places for street lights within the city from time to time. 
(Prior Code, § 37-4.1; Code 1983, § 14-301)
 
Sec. 36-84. Manager may contract for electric current.
The manager may from time to time enter into contract, not exceeding one year, with electric companies for the furnishing of electric power and current for the use of the city for power and lights. 
(Prior Code, § 37-4.2; Code 1983, § 14-302)
 
Sec. 36-85. Council to act on special orders.
The city council shall direct the city manager from time to time on any changes on white-way street lighting, or changes in general design or major change of street lighting in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 37-4.3; Code 1983, § 14-303)
 
Chapter 38 TAXATION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 38-1—38-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. SALES TAX
 
Sec. 38-19. Definitions.
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S § 1350 et seq., and in 37 O.S. §§ 576 and 593 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.2; Code 1983, § 7-202)
 
Sec. 38-20. Tax collector defined.
The term "tax collector," as used in this article, means the department of the city or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract, and authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.3; Code 1983, § 7-203)
 
Sec. 38-21. Classification of taxpayers.
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state sales tax code. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.4; Code 1983, § 7-204)
 
Sec. 38-22. Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the state sales tax code are, for the purpose of this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.5; Code 1983, § 7-205)
 
Sec. 38-23. Effective date.
This article became effective after approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city voting on the ordinance in the manner prescribed by 11 O.S. § 16-112. 
(Code 1983, § 7-206)
Editor's note(s)—As to the second cent tax, this chapter became effective on November 1, 1975. As to the third cent tax, this chapter became effective on November 1, 1988. 
 
Sec. 38-24. Purpose of revenues.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of the levy of the sales taxes herein to provide revenues for the support of the functions of municipal government of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.6; Code 1983, § 7-207; Ord. No. 266-A, 8-25-1988)
 
Sec. 38-25. Tax rate, sales subject to tax.
There is hereby levied an excise tax of four percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the state sales tax code including, but not exclusive of, the following: 
(1)	Tangible personal property; 
(2)	Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam, or any other utility or public service except water and those specifically exempt by this article; 
(3)	Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab companies, Pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of transportation for hire; 
(4)	Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users, including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This shall include all services and rental charges having any connection with transmission of any message; 
(5)	Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds, and characters and the service of printing or over-printing, including the copying of information by mimeograph or multigraph or by otherwise duplicating written or printed matter in any manner, or the production of microfiche containing information on magnetic tapes furnished by customers; 
(6)	Service of furnishing rooms by hotel, apartment hotel, public rooming house, motel, public lodging house or tourist camps; 
(7)	Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and parking lots; 
(8)	Selling, renting or otherwise furnishing computer hardware or software or coding sheets, cards or magnetic tapes on which pre-written programs have been coded, punched or otherwise recorded; 
(9)	Food, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels, restaurants, or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption elsewhere; 
(10)	Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and all devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising devices, except those specifically exempt by this article; 
(11)	Dues or fees to clubs including free or complimentary dues or fees which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise been made, including any fees paid for the use of facilities or services rendered at a health spa or club or any similar facility or business; 
(12)	Sales of tickets, fees or other charges made for admission to or voluntary contributions made to places of amusement, sports entertainment, exhibition, display or other recreational events or activities, including free or complimentary admissions which shall have the value equivalent to the charge that would have otherwise been made; 
(13)	Charges made for the privilege of entering or engaging in any kind of activity, when no admission is charged to spectators, such as tennis, racket ball or hand ball courts; 
(14)	Charges made for the privilege of using items for amusement, sports, entertainment or recreational activity such as trampolines or golf carts; 
(15)	The rental of equipment for amusement, sports, entertainment or other recreational activities, such as bowling shoes, skates, golf carts, or other sports and athletic equipment; 
(16)	The gross receipts from sales through any vending machine, without any deduction for rental to locate the vending machine on the premises of a person who is not the owner or any other deductions therefrom; 
(17)	Gross receipts or gross proceeds from the rental or lease of tangible personal property, including rental or lease of personal property when the rental or lease agreement requires the vendor to launder, clean, repair or otherwise service the rented or leased property on a regular basis, without any deduction for the cost of the service rendered. Provided if the rental or lease charge is based on the retail value of the property at the time of making the rental or lease agreement and the expected life of the property, and the rental or lease charge is separately stated from the service cost in the statement, bill or invoice delivered to the consumer, the cost of services rendered shall be deducted from the gross receipts or gross proceeds; 
(18)	Any licensing agreement, rental, lease or other device or instrument whereby rights to possess or exhibit motion pictures or filmed performances or rights to receive images, pictures or performances for telecast by any method are transferred; provided persons regularly engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures for which the sale of tickets or admissions is taxed under this article shall not be deemed to be consumers or users in respect to the licensing or exhibiting of copyrighted motion picture features, shorts, cartoons and scenes from copyrighted features and the sale or licensing of such films shall not be considered a sale within the purview of this article; 
(19)	Flowers, plants, shrubs, trees and other floral items, whether or not same was produced by the vendor, sold by persons engaged in florist or nursery business in this state, including all orders taken by an Oklahoma business for delivery in another state; provided all orders taken outside this state for delivery within this state shall not be subject to the tax levied by this article; 
(20)	Tangible personal property sold to persons, peddlers, solicitors or other salesmen, for resale where there is likelihood that this state will lose tax revenue due to the difficulty of enforcing this article because of: 
a.	The operation of the business; 
b.	The nature of the business; 
c.	The turnover of independent contractors; 
d.	The lack of place of business in which to display a permit or keep records; 
e.	The lack of adequate records; 
f.	The persons are minors or transients; 
g.	The persons are engaged in service businesses; or 
h.	Any other reasonable reason; 
(21)	Any taxable services and tangible personal property including materials, supplies and equipment sold to contractors for the purpose of developing and improving real estate even though such real estate is intended for resale as real property are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable; and 
(22)	Any taxable services and tangible personal property sold to persons who are primarily engaged in selling their services, such as repairmen, are hereby declared to be sales to consumers or users and taxable. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.7; Code 1983, § 7-208; Ord. No. 76A, 9-11-1975; Ord. No. 265-A, 8-25-1988; Ord. No. 266-A, 8-25-1988; Ord. No. 325-6-94, 6-16-1994)
 
Sec. 38-26. Exemptions; sales subject to other tax.
There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the state sales tax code inclusive, but not exclusive of, and derived from the: 
(1)	Sale of low point beer on which the tax levied by state law has been paid; 
(2)	Sale of cigarettes and such tobacco products on which the tax levied by state law has been paid; 
(3)	Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline excise tax or special fuels tax levied by state law has been paid; 
(4)	Sale of motor vehicles or any optional equipment or accessories attached to motor vehicles on which the state motor vehicle excise tax levied by state law has been paid; and 
(5)	Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other products subject to gross production tax under state law. This exemption shall not apply when such products are sold to consumer or user for consumption or use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This section shall not operate to increase or repeal the gross production tax levied by the laws of this state. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.8; Code 1983, § 7-209)
 
Sec. 38-27. Exemptions; governmental and nonprofit entities.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article: 
(1)	Sale of tangible personal property or services to the United States government or to the state, any political subdivision of this state or any agency of a political subdivision of the state; provided, all sales to contractors in connection with the performance of any contract with the United States government, the state or any of its political subdivisions shall not be exempted from the tax levied by this chapter, except as hereinafter provided; 
(2)	Sales of property to agents appointed or contracted with by agencies or instrumentalities of the United States government if ownership and possession of such property transfers immediately to the United States government; 
(3)	Sales made directly by county, district or state fair authorities of this state, upon the premises of the fair authority, for the sole benefit of the fair authority; 
(4)	Sale of food in cafeterias or lunch rooms of elementary schools, high schools, colleges or universities which are operated primarily for teachers and pupils and are not operated primarily for the public or for profit; 
(5)	Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided, such societies or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for a profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members thereof to the exclusion of other members; 
(6)	Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches, except sales made in the course of business for profit or savings, competing with other persons engaged in the same or similar business; 
(7)	The amount of proceeds received from the sale of admission tickets which is separately stated on the ticket of admission for the repayment of money borrowed by any accredited state-supported college or university for the purpose of constructing or enlarging any facility to be used for the staging of an athletic event, a theatrical production, or any other form of entertainment, edification or cultural cultivation to which entry is gained with a paid admission ticket. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, athletic fields, athletic stadiums, field houses, amphitheaters and theaters. To be eligible for this sales tax exemption, the amount separately stated on the admission ticket shall be a surcharge which is imposed, collected and used for the sole purpose of servicing or aiding in the servicing of debt incurred by the college or university to affect the capital improvements hereinbefore described; 
(8)	Sales of tangible personal property or services to the council organizations or similar state supervisory organizations of the Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts of U.S.A. and the Campfire Girls shall be exempt from sales tax; 
(9)	Sale of tangible personal property or services to any county, municipality, public school district, the institutions of the state system of higher education and the Grand River Dam Authority, or to any person with whom any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state has duly entered into a public contract pursuant to law, necessary for carrying out such public contract or to any subcontractor to such a public contract. Any person making purchases on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the purchases are made for and on behalf of such subdivision or agency of this state and set out the name of such public subdivision or agency. Any person who wrongfully or erroneously certifies that purchases are for any of the above named subdivisions or agencies of this state or who otherwise violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount equal to double the amount of the sales tax involved or incarcerated for not more than 60 days or both; 
(10)	Sales of tangible personal property or services to private institutions of higher education and private institutions of higher education and private elementary and secondary institutions of education accredited by the state department of education or registered by the state board of education for purposes of participating in federal programs or accredited as defined by the state regents for higher education which are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, including materials, supplies, and equipment used in the construction and improvement of buildings and other structures owned by the institutions and operated for education purposes. Any person, firm, agency or entity making purchases on behalf of any institution, agency or subdivision in this state, shall certify in writing, on the copy of the invoice of sales ticket, the nature of the purchases; and violation of this act shall be a misdemeanor as set forth in subsection (9) of this section; 
(11)	Tuition and education fees paid to private institutions of higher education and private elementary and secondary institutions of education accredited by the state department of education or registered by the state board of education for purposes of participating in federal programs or accredited as defined by the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education which are exempt from taxation pursuant to the provisions of the section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and 
(12)	Sales of tangible personal property made by public or private school for grade levels kindergarten through 12th grade, a public school district, public school board, public school student group or organization or public school district personnel for purposes of raising funds for the benefit of such school, school district, school board, student group or organization. For purposes of this subsection, the term "public or private school" shall mean any public or private institution of education accredited by the state department of education or registered by the state board of education for purposes of participating in federal programs. Sale of tangible personal property in this subsection shall not include sale of admission tickets or concessions at athletic events. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.8; Code 1983, § 7-210)
 
Sec. 38-28. Exemptions; general.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article: 
(1)	Transportation of school pupils to and from elementary schools or high schools in motor or other vehicles; 
(2)	Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not exceed $1.00, or local transportation of persons within the corporate limits of a municipality except by taxicab; 
(3)	Carrier sales of newspapers and periodicals made directly to consumers. Other sales of newspapers and periodicals where any individual transaction does not exceed $0.75. A carrier is a person who regularly delivers newspapers or periodicals to subscribers on an assigned route; 
(4)	Sales for resale to persons engaged in the business of reselling the articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided that such sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits have been issued as provided in this chapter. This exemption shall not apply to the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons purchase items for their use and which they are not regularly engaged in the business of reselling; neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen who do not have an established place of business and a sales tax permit; 
(5)	Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and billboard advertising service, and any advertising through the electronic media, including radio, television and cable television; 
(6)	Eggs, feed, supplies, machinery and equipment purchased by persons regularly engaged in the business of raising worms, fish, any insect or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic animal life and used for the purpose of raising same for marketing. This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser when the items are to be used and in fact are used in the raising of animal life as set out above. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the invoice or sales ticket retained by the vendor that he is regularly engaged in the business of raising such animal life and that the items purchased will be used only in such business. The vendor shall certify to the state tax commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor; 
(7)	Sales of medicine or drugs prescribed for the treatment of human beings by a person licensed to prescribe the medicine or drugs. This exemption shall not apply to proprietary or patent medicines as defined by 59 O.S. § 353.1; 
(8)	Transfers of title or possession of empty, partially filled, or filled returnable oil drums to any person who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise transferring empty, partially filled, or filled returnable oil drums; 
(9)	Sales of food or food products for home consumption which are purchased in whole or in part with coupons issued pursuant to the federal food stamp program as authorized by 7 USC 2011 through 2029, as to that portion purchased with such coupons. The exemption provided for such sales shall be inapplicable to such sales upon the effective date of any federal law that removes the requirement of the exemption as a condition for participation by the state in the Federal Food Stamp Program; and 
Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting or prohibiting the city from levying and collecting taxes on the sale of natural or artificial gas and electricity, whether sold for residential or commercial purposes. Any sales tax levied by the city on natural or artificial gas and electricity shall be in effect regardless of ordinance or contractual provisions referring to previously imposed state sales tax on such items. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.8; Code 1983, § 7-211)
 
Sec. 38-29. Exemptions; agriculture.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article: 
(1)	Sales of agricultural products produced in this state by the producer thereof directly to the consumer or user when such articles are sold at or from a farm and not from some other place of business, as follows: 
a.	Farm, orchard or garden products; 
b.	Dairy products sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all the cows from which the dairy products offered for sale are produced; 
c.	Livestock sold by the producer at a special livestock sale; or 
d.	The provisions of this section shall not be construed as exempting sales by florists, nurserymen or chicken hatcheries, or sales of dairy products by any other business except as set out herein; 
(2)	Livestock, including cattle, horses, mules, or other domestic or draft animals, sold by the producer by private treaty or at a special livestock sale; 
(3)	Sale of baby chicks, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the purchaser certifies, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the pullets will be used primarily for egg production; 
(4)	Sale of salt, grains, tankage, oyster shells, mineral supplements, limestone and other generally recognized animal feeds for the following purposes and subject to the following limitations: 
a.	Feed which is fed to poultry and livestock, including breeding stock and wool-bearing stock, for the purpose of producing eggs, poultry, milk or meat for human consumption; 
b.	Feed purchased in the state for the purpose of being fed to and which is fed by the purchaser to horses, mules or other domestic or draft animals used directly in the producing and marketing of agricultural products; 
c.	Any stock tonics, water purifying products, stock sprays, disinfectants or other such agricultural supplies; 
d.	Poultry shall not be construed to include any fowl other than domestic fowl kept and raised for the market or production of eggs; 
e.	Livestock shall not be construed to include any pet animals such as dogs, cats, birds or such other fur-bearing animals; and 
f.	This exemption shall only be granted and extended where the purchaser of feed that is to be used and in fact is used for a purpose that would bring about an exemption hereunder executes an invoice or sales ticket in duplicate on a form to be prescribed by the tax commission. The purchaser may demand and receive a copy of the invoice or sales ticket and the vendor shall retain a copy; 
(5)	Sales of items to be and in fact used in the production of agricultural products. Sale of the following items shall be subject to the following limitations: 
a.	Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is so engaged in farming or ranching and that the material purchased will be used only in such business; 
b.	Sales of agricultural fertilizer to any person engaged in the business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis to land owned or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. Each such purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is engaged in the business of applying such materials to lands owned or leased and operated by persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching, and shall show in the certificate the name of such owner or lessee and operator, the location of the lands on which the materials are to be applied to each such land, and he shall further certify that his contract price has been reduced so as to give the farmer or rancher the full benefit of this exemption; 
c.	Sales of agricultural fertilizer, pharmaceuticals and biologicals to persons engaged in the business of applying such materials on a contract or custom basis shall not be considered to be sales to contractors under this chapter, and the sales shall not be considered to be taxable sales within the meaning of the state sales tax code. As used in this section, the terms "agricultural fertilizer," "pharmaceuticals" and "biologicals" mean any substance sold and used for soil enrichment or soil corrective purposes or for promoting the growth and productivity of plants or animals; 
d.	Sales of agricultural seed or plants to any person regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. This section shall not be construed as exempting from sales tax, seed which is packaged and sold for use in noncommercial flower and vegetable gardens; 
e.	Sales of agricultural chemical pesticides to any person regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming or ranching. For the purposes of this section, agricultural chemical pesticides shall include any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any insect, snail, slug, rodent, bird, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus, bacteria or other microorganism, except viruses, bacterial or other microorganisms on or in living man, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant; and 
f.	This exemption shall only be granted and extended to the purchaser where the items are to be used and in fact are used in the production of agricultural products. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the material purchased will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify to the state tax commission that the contract price of the items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense, the state tax commission shall revoke the vendor's sales tax permit. 
(6)	Sale of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel, oil, lubricants and other substances used for operation and maintenance of the farm machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production, cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation or irrigation of any livestock, poultry, agricultural or dairy products produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor, that he is engaged in farming or ranching and that the farm machinery, repair parts thereto or fuel will be used only in farming or ranching. The exemption provided for herein shall not apply to motor vehicles. Each purchaser shall certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the vendor that the material purchased will only be used in his farming occupation. The vendor shall certify to the state tax commission that the price of the items has been reduced to grant the full benefit of the exemption. Violation hereof by the purchaser or vendor shall be a misdemeanor and, upon violation and conviction for a second offense, the state tax commission shall revoke the vendor's sales tax permit. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.8; Code 1983, § 7-212)
 
Sec. 38-30. Exemptions; manufacturers.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article: 
(1)	Goods, wares, merchandise and property purchased for the purpose of being used or consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing for sale a finished article and such goods, wares, merchandise or property become integral parts of the manufactured, compounded, processed, assembled or prepared products or are consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing products for resale. The term "manufacturing plants" means those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such; 
(2)	Ethyl alcohol when sold and used for the purpose of blending same with motor fuel on which motor fuel tax is levied by state law; 
(3)	Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing plants in Oklahoma, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the state. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under this chapter; 
(4)	Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the business of reselling empty or filled containers or when purchased for the purpose of packaging raw products of farm, garden or orchard for resale to the consumer or processor. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of any containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable containers, except returnable soft drink bottles. Each and every transfer of title or possession of such returnable containers in this state to any person who is not regularly engaged in the business of selling, reselling or otherwise transferring empty or filled containers shall be taxable under this Code. This exemption shall not apply to the sale of labels or other materials delivered along with items sold but which are not necessary or absolutely essential to the sale of the sold merchandise; 
(5)	Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in the state when sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for immediate and exclusive use in some other state; and 
(6)	Machinery, equipment, fuels and chemicals incorporated into and directly used or consumed in the process of treatment to substantially reduce the volume or harmful properties of controlled industrial waste at treatment facilities specifically permitted pursuant to the Controlled Industrial Waste Disposal Act and operated at the place of waste generation, or facilities approved by the state department of health for the cleanup of a site of contamination. The term "controlled industrial waste" may include low-level radioactive waste for the purpose of this subsection. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.8; Code 1983, § 7-213)
 
Sec. 38-31. Exemptions; corporations and partnerships.
There are hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied in this article: 
(1)	The transfer of tangible personal property, as follows: 
a.	From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a reorganization. As used in this subsection, the term "reorganization" means a statutory merger or consolidation or the acquisition by a corporation of substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation; 
b.	In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of a corporation only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of the property of such corporation; 
c.	To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the transfer; 
d.	To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer, members of such partnership and the interest in the partnership, received by each, is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the transfer; or 
e.	From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in the dissolution of such partnership. 
(2)	Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on such tangible personal property. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.9; Code 1983, § 7-214)
 
Sec. 38-32. Tax due when; returns; records.
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state sales tax code. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.10; Code 1983, § 7-215)
 
Sec. 38-33. Payment of tax; brackets.
(a)	The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax. 
(b)	The bracket system for the collection of the sales tax by the tax collector shall be the same as is hereafter adopted by the agreement of the city and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and the state sales tax. 
(Prior Code, 38-1.11; Code 1983, § 7-216)
 
Sec. 38-34. Tax constitutes debt.
The taxes, penalty and interest due under this article shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.12; Code 1983, § 7-217)
 
Sec. 38-35. Vendor's duty to collect tax; penalties.
(a)	The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor. It is the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this article, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent thereof. 
(b)	Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(c)	A vendor, as defined hereunder, who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to a fine in the amount provided in the city fine schedule. 
(d)	Any sum collected or required to be collected in accordance with this chapter shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city. Any person, firm, corporation, joint venture or association that willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the sums required to be collected or paid shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a fine in the amount provided in the city fine schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.13; Code 1983, § 7-218)
 
Sec. 38-36. Returns and remittances; discounts.
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances of tax collected hereunder and shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the state sales tax code for collection of state sales taxes. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.14; Code 1983, § 7-219)
 
Sec. 38-37. Interest and penalties; delinquency.
The provisions of 68 O.S. § 217 are hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if the delinquency continues for a period of five days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this article. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.15; Code 1983, § 7-220)
 
Sec. 38-38. Waiver of interest and penalties.
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220. To accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.16; Code 1983, § 7-221)
 
Sec. 38-39. Erroneous payments; claim for refund.
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making the erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. To accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.17; Code 1983, § 7-222)
 
Sec. 38-40. Fraudulent returns.
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter shall be an offense punishable by a fine in the amount provided in the city fine schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.18; Code 1983, § 7-223)
 
Sec. 38-41. Records confidential.
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 225, and each subsection thereof, are hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if here set forth in full. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.19; Code 1983, § 7-224)
 
Sec. 38-42. Amendments.
The people of the city, by their approval of the sales tax ordinance hereby authorize the mayor and city council, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administering and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness. Neither the rate of the tax herein provided nor the use to which the revenue is put shall be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.20; Code 1983, § 7-225)
 
Sec. 38-43. Provisions cumulative.
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any or all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 38-1.21; Code 1983, § 7-226)
 
Secs. 38-44—38-74. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. UTILITIES TAX
 
Sec. 38-75. Tax levied.
There is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax upon all persons, firms, associations and corporations engaged in the business of furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or water, in the city, in an amount equal to two percent of the gross receipts from residential and commercial sales. This tax shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city. The tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax, levied by the city. 
(Prior Code, § 38-2.1; Code 1983, § 7-301; Ord. No. 99A, 6-15-1978)
State law reference(s)—Authority to levy tax on utilities, 68 O.S. § 2601 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-76. Tax to be quarterly.
The utility tax levied in section 38-75 on gross receipts from sales of commercial or residential gas shall be paid monthly to the city clerk. The utility tax levied on the gross receipts from sales of power, heat, light, electricity, or water shall be paid quarterly to the city clerk. All utility taxes levied shall be placed in the general fund of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 38-2.2; Code 1983, § 7-302; Ord. No. 99A, 6-15-1978)
 
Sec. 38-77. Failure to pay tax.
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax shall be regarded as a trespasser, and may be ousted from the city. In addition, thereto, an action will be commenced and maintained against such person, firm or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting same, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Prior Code, § 38-2.4; Code 1983, § 7-303; Ord. No. 99A, 6-15-1978)
 
Sec. 38-78. Tax to constitute a prior lien.
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all of the assets located within the city, of any such person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity, or water. 
(Prior Code, § 38-2.3; Code 1983, § 7-304; Ord. No. 99A, 6-15-1978)
 
Secs. 38-79—38-99. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. TELEPHONE EXCHANGE TAX
 
Sec. 38-100. Inspection fee and service charge.
There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each and every person, firm and corporation operating a telephone exchange in the city in an amount equal to two percent of the gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city to compensate the city for the expenses incurred and services rendered incident to the exercise of its police power, supervision. police regulation and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of the telephone company in the city. The inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the city on or before May 1 of each year and shall be paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 38-2.5; Code 1983, § 7-401)
 
Sec. 38-101. Fee in lieu of certain other charges.
During the continued substantial compliance with the terms of this chapter by the owner of any telephone exchange, the charge levied hereby shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, license, privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments except ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct space or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm or police call systems of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 38-2.6; Code 1983, § 7-402)
 
Secs. 38-102—38-130. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. USE TAX 
 
Sec. 38-131. Definitions.
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq., are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tax collector means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state, duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax herein levied; and 
Transaction means sale. 
(Code 1983, § 7-502; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-132. Excise tax on storage, use or other consumption of intangible, personal property levied.
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal property purchased or brought into this city, an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming within the city of such property at the rate of four percent of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside the state; provided that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the city, but which is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city or which is temporarily retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein, may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. 
(Code 1983, § 7-503; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988; Ord. No. 271-A, 11-10-1988; Ord. No. 328-9-94, 6-16-1994)
 
Sec. 38-133. Purpose of revenues.
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body of the city for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. 
(Code 1983, § 7-504; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-134. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply: 
(1)	To the use of an article of tangible, personal property brought into the city by a nonresident individual visiting in this city for his personal use or enjoyment while within the city; 
(2)	To the use of tangible, personal property purchased for resale before being used; 
(3)	To the use of any article of tangible, personal property on which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the state use tax code and this article has been paid by the person using such tangible, personal property in the city, whether such tax was levied under the laws of the state or some other state or municipality of the United States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected to a tax by the state or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the state use tax code and city use tax, the provision of this chapter shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the state use tax code and this article and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed; provided that no credit shall be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in this state the city; 
(4)	To the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the city; provided this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the sales tax code of the city. The term "manufacturing plants" means those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such; 
(5)	To the use of tangible, personal property now specifically exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the city; 
(6)	To the use of any article of tangible, personal property brought into the city by an individual with intent to become a resident of this city where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or enjoyment; 
(7)	To the use of any article of tangible, personal property used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads; or 
(8)	To livestock purchased outside the state and brought into this city for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold. 
(Code 1983, § 7-505; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-135. Time when due, returns, payment.
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the use tax code of the state. 
(Code 1983, § 7-506; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-136. Tax constitutes debt.
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1983, § 7-507; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-137. Collection of tax by retailer or vendor maintaining place of business within or without the state.
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of business outside this state for use in this city shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this article from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefore in the manner and form prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name and address of all his agents operating in this city and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in the city. 
(Code 1983, § 7-508; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-138. Collection of tax by retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within state or both within and without state, permits.
The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible, personal property for use in this city and by the out-of-state place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without this state and making sales of tangible, personal property such out-of-state place of business for use in this city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the tax commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his knowledge for use within this city. Such authority and permit may be cancelled when at any time the tax commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in this city; provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within this city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable city sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. 
(Code 1983, § 7-509; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-139. Revoking permits.
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter of the state use tax code or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in 68 O.S. § 1408, by order revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and hearing above provided, cancel the corporation's license to do business in this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the obligations under this chapter, the state use tax code, or any orders, rules or regulations of the tax commission. 
(Code 1983, § 7-510; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-140. Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states.
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state use tax code and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by the code for the collection of state use taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 7-511; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-141. Interest and penalties, delinquency.
The provisions of 68 O.S. § 217 are hereby adopted and made a part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as herein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article; provided that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7-512; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-142. Waiver of interest and penalties.
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7-513; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-143. Erroneous payments, claim for refund.
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7-514; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-144. Fraudulent returns.
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be an offense punishable by a fine in the amount provided in the city fine schedule. Each day of noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 7-515; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-145. Records confidential.
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, of the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city use tax as is herein set forth in full. 
(Code 1983, § 7-516; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-146. Classification of taxpayers.
For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state use tax code. 
(Code 1983, § 7-517; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-147. Subsisting state permits.
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission pursuant to the state use tax code are for the purpose of this chapter hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 7-518; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 38-148. Provisions cumulative.
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the city ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 7-519; Ord. No. 257-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Secs. 38-149—38-179. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. HOTEL TAX 
 
Sec. 38-180. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel means any buildings, structures, trailers, or other facilities in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which two or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests whether such rooms are in one or several structures. The term "hotel" includes hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by "permanent residents", and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term "hotel" shall not include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room in a motel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means a person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to the use or possession of any room in a motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement. 
Operator means any person operating a motel in this city, including, but not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such motel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room in a motel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Room means any room of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a place of assembly. As used herein, the term "place of assembly" means a room or space which is capable of being occupied by 75 or more persons and which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall include dancehalls; cabarets; nightclubs; restaurants; any room or space for public or private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings; lodge and meeting halls or rooms; skating rinks; gymnasiums; swimming pools, billiard, bowling and table tennis rooms; halls or rooms used for public or private catering purposes; funeral parlors; markets; recreational rooms; concert halls; broadcasting studios, and all other places of similar type of occupancy. 
Tax means the tax levied pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7-602; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-181. Tax levied; amount.
There is hereby levied an excise tax of three percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent for every occupancy of a room in a hotel in this city. 
(Code 1983, § 7-603; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-182. Exemptions; certificate required.
(a)	Exceptions. The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this article: 
(1)	Permanent residents; 
(2)	The United States government or any agency or division thereof; 
(3)	The state or any political subdivision thereof; 
(4)	Any organization, corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, philanthropic or educational purposes provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a trade or business for profit. 
(b)	Certificate required. Anyone claiming to be exempt from the tax must obtain a certification from the director that the organization, association or corporation with which he is affiliated is exempt from the tax. Prior to issuing such a certificate, the treasurer/comptroller shall require a certification from the said organization, association or corporation that the occupant is its agent, representative or employee and that his occupancy of the room is required in connection with the affairs of said organization, association or corporation. 
(Code 1983, § 7-604; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-183. Tax to be separately designated on bills.
The operator shall separately designate, charge and show the tax on all bills, statements, receipts or any other evidence of charges or payment of rent of occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. 
(Code 1983, § 7-605; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-184. Operator responsible for collection.
The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax. 
(Code 1983, § 7-606; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-185. Certificates of registration.
Every operator shall file with the treasurer/comptroller a certificate of registration on a form prescribed by said treasurer/comptroller within three days after such commencement of business or opening the motel. The treasurer/comptroller shall, within five days after such registration, issue without charge, to each operator a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional motel. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the motel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the treasurer/comptroller upon the cessation of business at the motel named, or upon its sale or transfer. 
(Code 1983, § 7-607; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-186. Records required.
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid, charged, or due thereon and the tax payable thereon in such form as the treasurer/comptroller may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the treasurer/comptroller, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city, and shall be preserved for a period of three years except that the treasurer/comptroller may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer. 
(Code 1983, § 7-608; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-187. Returns.
(a)	Every operator shall file with the treasurer/comptroller a return of occupancy and of rents and the taxes payable thereon for the periods ending June 30, September 30, December 31 and March 31 of each year. 
(b)	The treasurer/comptroller may permit or require terms to be made by shorter or longer periods and upon such dates as he may specify. The form of return shall be prescribed by the treasurer/comptroller and shall contain such information as he may deem necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. The treasurer/comptroller may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice. 
(Code 1983, § 7-609; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-188. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to the treasurer/comptroller the taxes imposed by this article upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this article. All the taxes for the period for which a return is required to be filed shall be due from the operator and payable to the treasurer/comptroller on or before the date fixed for the filing of the return for such period without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon. 
(Code 1983, § 7-610; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-189. Delinquent taxes.
The tax levied by this article shall be due and payable at the time filing of the returns provided for in this article is required. All taxes not paid within five days from the time they become due, shall be delinquent. 
(Code 1983, § 7-611; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-190. Interest on unpaid taxes.
If any tax levied by this article becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of two percent per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency. 
(Code 1983, § 7-612; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-191. Bond required.
Where the treasurer/comptroller believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason he deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under this chapter, he may require such operator to file with the city a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state in such amount as the treasurer/comptroller may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. In the event that the treasurer/comptroller determines that an operator is to file such bond, he shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond required. The operator shall file such bond within five days after the giving of such notice unless within such five days the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the city council at which the necessary propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the city council. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with within 15 days hereafter. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the treasurer/comptroller, or cash in such amount as he may prescribe, may be deposited with the treasurer/comptroller, who may at any time after five days' notice to the depositor, apply them to any tax and/or penalties due and for that purpose the securities may be sold at private or public sale. 
(Code 1983, § 7-613; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-192. Assessment and determination of tax.
If a return required by this article is not filed, or if a return, when filed, is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the treasurer/comptroller from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such assessments shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Thirty days after the tax is delinquent, the treasurer/comptroller shall send such person a letter outlining the legal action to be taken at the end of 60 days. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, within 60 days after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing to the city council for a hearing or unless the treasurer/comptroller on his own motion shall reassess the same. After such hearing, the city council shall give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final. 
(Code 1983, § 7-614; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-193. Refunds.
(a)	The treasurer/comptroller shall refund or credit any tax erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected if written application to the treasurer/comptroller for such refund shall be made within two years from the date of payment thereof. For like causes, and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the initiative and the order of the treasurer/comptroller. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. Such application may be made by the person upon whom such tax was imposed and who has actually paid the tax. Such application may also be made by the person who has collected and paid such tax to the treasurer/comptroller providing that the application is made within two years of the payment by the occupant to the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made. The treasurer/comptroller, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit therefor on payments due from the applicant. 
(b)	Upon application for a refund, the treasurer/comptroller may receive evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he deems necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the treasurer/comptroller shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within 90 days after such notice shall apply in writing to the city council for a hearing. After such hearing, the city council shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. 
(Code 1983, § 7-615; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-194. Notices.
Notices provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States mail to the last known address of the operator. 
(Code 1983, § 7-616; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-195. Remedies exclusive.
The remedies provided in this article shall be exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 7-617; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-196. Fraudulent returns.
The willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances therein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00, including costs. 
(Code 1983, § 7-618; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-197. Operator's discount for keeping records.
In order to remunerate an operator for keeping tax records, filing reports, and remitting the tax when due, a three percent discount shall be allowed upon all taxes paid prior to the time they become delinquent. 
(Code 1983, § 7-619; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-198. Records confidential.
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the hotel tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, 1981, and each subsection thereof is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the tax as if herein set forth. 
(Code 1983, § 7-620; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-199. Use of funds.
All proceeds derived from the hotel tax to be levied as an excise tax of three percent as provided herein shall be used for economic and retail development, beautification and recreation purposes. 
(Code 1983, § 7-621; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-200. General powers of treasurer/comptroller.
(a)	In addition to all other powers granted to the treasurer/comptroller, he is hereby authorized and empowered: 
(1)	To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the carrying out of this article for the purposes thereof; 
(2)	To extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a period not exceeding 60 days and for cause shown to waive, remit, or reduce penalties or interest; 
(3)	To delegate his functions hereunder to an assistant or other employee of the city; 
(4)	To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed by this chapter; 
(5)	To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents. 
(Code 1983, § 7-622; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-201. Administration of oaths and compelling testimony.
The treasurer/comptroller, or his designated representative, shall have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of their powers and duties under this article. The treasurer/comptroller shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of his duties hereunder and of the enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 7-623; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-202. Amendments.
The people of the city by their approval of this article at an election authorized by the city council by ordinances duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 7-624; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Sec. 38-203. Provisions cumulative.
The provisions hereof be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 7-625; Ord. No. 386-03-99, 4-6-1999)
 
Secs. 38-204—38-229. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. BUSINESS INCENTIVES
 
Sec. 38-230. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business incentives means reimbursement offered to qualifying businesses planning location within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
Corporate city limits means the corporate city limits shall be defined as follows: 
Commencing at a point where NE 50th Street intersects the St. Louis and San Francisco Railroad right-of-way for the point beginning, thence east along the center of NE 50th Street to Douglas Boulevard, thence south along the center of Douglas Boulevard to NE 46th Street, thence east along the center of 46th Street to Shadynook Way, thence south to NE 36th Street thence west along the center of NE 36th Street to Douglas Boulevard, thence south 800 feet, thence west to the east side of Midwest Boulevard, thence north to the north side of NE 36th Street, thence west to Spencer city limits, thence north to the St. Louis and San Francisco Railway right-of-way, thence northeasterly along the St. Louis and San Francisco right-of-way to NE 50th Street to the point beginning. Commencing at a point on NE 36th Street and the west city limits of Spencer for a point beginning, thence south along the west line of the city to the south line city limits, thence east 900 feet along the south line of Spencer City limits, thence south to the north side of NE 23rd Street, thence east along NE 23rd Street to Douglas Boulevard, thence north 4,500 feet, thence west to Midwest Boulevard, thence north 800 to NE 36th Street thence west to the west city limits at the point beginning. Commencing at a point on NE 36th Street and Douglas Boulevard, thence east along the center line of NE 36th Street to Shadynook Way thence north to NE 46th Street, thence east along the center of NE 46th Street to Post Road, thence south to NE 32nd Street, thence east to east Spencer city limits, to Outpost Drive, thence north to the north side of NE 30th Street, thence west along north side of NE 30th Street to Douglas Boulevard thence north along the center of Douglas Boulevard to NE 36th Street to the point of beginning; and beginning at a point where NE 36th Street intersects Douglas Boulevard, thence east along the center of NE 46th Street to Post Road, thence north along the west side of Post Road to the north Spencer city limit boundary, thence west along the north Spencer city limits to the St. Louis and San Francisco Railroad right-of-way, thence southwesterly along the St. Louis and San Francisco right-of-way to NE 50th Street, thence east along the center line of NE 50th Street to Douglas Boulevard, thence south along the center line of Douglas Boulevard to NE 46th Street to the point of beginning. 
Net tax means monies collected by the city from the state tax commission which have been paid as city sales tax by a qualifying business less monies retained by state tax commission as collection fees. 
New means, for the purposes of this incentive program, a business with no previous business presence in the city. 
Qualifying businesses means new and must generate sales tax within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
Reimbursement means the amount of monies rebated to the participating business based on terms recommended by the economic development commission and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 7-701; Ord. No. 484-03-06, 8-17-2006)
 
Sec. 38-231. Calculation of incentives.
Incentives or reimbursements will be calculated according to the following formula: 
Years in Program 	Benefit Available 
(% of Sales Tax Generated) 
Year 1 	50% 
Year 2 	40% 
Year 3 	30% 
Year 4 	20% 
Year 5 	10% 
After year 5 	None 

(Code 1983, § 7-702; Ord. No. 484-03-06, 8-17-2006)
 
Sec. 38-232. Application procedures and criteria for obtaining business incentives.
(a)	All applications must be received ten days prior to the next scheduled economic development commission meeting. 
(b)	All applications must be submitted with all requested information. 
(c)	Sales tax reimbursements or incentives may not last beyond year five per applicant from the date of first application. 
(d)	Sales tax reimbursement or incentives may not extend beyond 50 percent per applicant. 
(e)	All businesses seeking reimbursements or incentives must be located within the corporate boundaries of the city as defined by section 38-230. 
(f)	The city economic development commission reserves the right to recommend modification of grant criteria to the city council at any time. 
(g)	Incentives shall be granted in accordance with the city's fiscal year from July 1 to June 30 of each year. 
(h)	Incentives must be applied for each year by application to the city clerk. Applications must be submitted to the city clerk before May 1 of each year. 
(i)	Requests for modification of incentives by the applicants must be submitted to the city economic development commission in writing. 
(j)	Businesses that are abandoned or are closed for more than 30 days shall relinquish their incentives as granted by the city economic development commission. 
(k)	Businesses that resume after 30 days may reapply for incentives in the next fiscal year. 
(l)	Exceptions may be made by the city economic development commission for natural disasters and circumstances beyond the control of the business. 
(m)	Any abuse of the provisions in this section shall result in immediate revocation of program benefits. The business shall be notified of the termination of benefits by the city manager. 
(n)	The city clerk shall maintain records of all benefits paid as per this incentive program. All records will be kept at city hall and shall be available to the public upon an open records request as per city policy. A fund titled "reimbursement fund" shall be created and maintained separate and apart from the city's pooled accounts to support the issuance of reimbursements. 
(Code 1983, § 7-703; Ord. No. 484-03-06, 8-17-2006)
 
Chapter 40 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 40-1. Applicability.
(a)	Except as specifically provided by law as set forth in this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling and apply to the use of city streets, alleys, thoroughfares, parks, parkways, public parking lots, school driveways, streets, parking lots, or any other public right-of-way or municipally owned land, including streets and other ways that form the boundary line of the city, by pedestrians and by vehicles of every kind whether self-propelled or otherwise and whether moving or at rest. 
(b)	Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to enforce traffic regulations on 23rd Street which forms the southern boundary of the city. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-102; Ord. No. 312-A-91, 8-8-1991)
 
Sec. 40-2. Adoption of state traffic code.
The provisions of the state motor vehicle code, 47 O.S. § 1-101 et seq., including the rules of the road, 47 O.S. § 11-101 et seq., are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and are enforceable by the city within the city limits as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1983, § 15-104)
 
Sec. 40-3. Obedience to traffic code.
(a)	It is an offense against the city for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this chapter. 
(b)	It is an offense against the city for the parent of any child or for the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly to permit any vehicle registered in his name to be driven or to stand or to be parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1401)
 
Sec. 40-4. Penalties, specific and general.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter containing the traffic laws of the city, or who performs any unlawful act as defined in this chapter, or who fails to perform any act required by this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine in the amount provided in the city fine schedule. 
(Code 1983, § 15-1402)
 
Sec. 40-5. Enforcement; establishment of traffic control division.
It is the duty of the officers of the police department or any officers that are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. Officers of the department shall make arrests for traffic violations, investigate accidents, and cooperate with other officers in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department by this part and any other traffic ordinances of this city. Officers may issue written notice to appear to any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident when, based on personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed an offense under the provisions of this chapter in connection with the accident. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-201)
 
Sec. 40-6. Direction of traffic by hand or voice.
(a)	Officers of the police department or any officers designated by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws and ordinances. In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and ordinances. 
(b)	Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, or other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-202)
 
Sec. 40-7. Direction of traffic by unauthorized persons.
No unauthorized person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic, except in case of emergency where no officer is present. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-203)
 
Sec. 40-8. Obedience to police and fire officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-204)
 
Sec. 40-9. Emergency and experimental regulations.
(a)	The city's manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is empowered to adopt regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)	The city's manager may have traffic-control devices tested under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-205)
 
Sec. 40-10. Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing, such person shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinances of this city. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-207)
 
Sec. 40-11. Public officers and employees to obey traffic regulations.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, any state, county, city, or governmental unit or agency, as well as to other vehicles. It is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this section, except as otherwise permitted in this section by state statute. This section shall not apply to the military forces of the United States and organizations of the National Guard when performing any military duty. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-208)
 
Sec. 40-12. Maintenance and construction zones.
(a)	City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing, improving, or repairing lines or other utility facilities in the streets, are hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the city clerk, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance, or construction. In exercising this authority, the appropriate personnel, contractor or utility company shall erect or cause to be erected proper control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to traffic. 
(b)	When any street has been closed to traffic under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and traffic-control devices or barricades have been erected, it is unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over, or around such traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons entering the closed area or zone for the protection of lives or property. Persons having their places of residence or places of business within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their own risk. 
(c)	Whenever construction, repair, or maintenance of any street or utility line or facility is being performed under traffic, the city personnel, contractor, or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic control devices to warn and guide the public. Every person using the street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagpersons, or other traffic control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance area. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-210)
 
Sec. 40-13. Issuance of citation tags.
(a)	Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or state law, police officers are hereby authorized to give notice to persons violating provisions of this chapter by delivering citation tags to violators or, in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation of this chapter, by affixing such tags to the vehicles by means of which the violation occurred. Such citation tags, among other things, shall bear briefly the charge, shall bear the registration number of the vehicle, and shall direct the violator to present the tag at the police station or other designated place within the time as may be specified thereon. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the power of a police officer to arrest any violator and take him into custody. 
(c)	The city manager may require that the police officers use citation tags furnished by the city clerk and that such tags are serially numbered, and may regulate the use and handling of the citation tags. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-220)
 
Sec. 40-14. Procedure for police officers.
A police officer who holds a person for such violation other than for the purpose of giving him a warning or warning notice and does not take a person into custody under arrest, shall take the name, address, and operator's license number of such person, license number of the motor vehicle involved and such other pertinent information as may be necessary and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the city clerk, a traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against him before the municipal judge of the city at a time certain to be shown on the citation. The officer upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in such violation shall release such person from custody, but the officer, if in his discretion he does not believe such person shall answer the citation within the time specified, or if the officer believes such person will flee the jurisdiction of the municipal court, he shall take the person into custody, who shall have the privilege of posting bond as provided herein. Otherwise he shall be committed to the city jail. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-221)
 
Sec. 40-15. Disposition and records of traffic citations and complaints.
(a)	Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision of this traffic ordinance, shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the citation to an immediate superior officer who shall cause the original to be delivered to the municipal court of the city and the duplicate copy to the central records section of police department. The second duplicate copy of the citation shall be retained in the traffic citation book and shall be delivered by such superior officer to the city clerk together with such book when all traffic citations therein have been issued. 
(b)	Upon the filing of such original citation in the municipal court of this city, the citation may be disposed of only by trial in the court or by other official action by a judge of the court, including the settlement of bail or the payment of a fine, or may be dismissed by the judge, if in his opinion, the actions complained of do not constitute a violation of traffic ordinances. 
(c)	The chief of police shall require the return to him of each traffic citation and all copies thereof except that copy required to be retained in the book as provided herein, which has been spoiled or upon which an entry has been made, and has not been issued to an alleged violator. 
(d)	The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained in connection with every traffic violation issued by a member of the police department, a record of the disposition of the charge by the municipal court of the city. 
(e)	The chief of police shall also maintain or cause to be maintained a record of all warrants issued by the municipal court of the city, all the traffic fines which are delivered to the police department for service and of the final disposition of the warrant. 
(f)	It is unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the police department or other officer of public employ to dispose of, alter, or deface any traffic citation or any copy thereof or the record of issuance of any traffic citation, complaint or warrant in any manner other than is required in this section. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-222)
 
Sec. 40-16. Audit of records and reports.
Every record of traffic citations, complaints thereon, and warrants issued therefor required in this chapter shall be audited at least monthly by the city clerk, who shall submit a report of such audit, together with a summary thereof to the mayor and city council. Such reports shall be public records. For the purpose of this chapter, the city clerk or his duly authorized representative shall have access at all times to all necessary records, files and papers of the municipal court of this city, and the police department. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-223)
 
Sec. 40-17. When copies of citations are deemed lawful complaint.
In the event the form of citation provided herein includes information and is sworn to, then such citation, when filed with the municipal court, shall be deemed to be a lawful complaint for the purpose of prosecution under this chapter. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-224)
 
Sec. 40-18. Failure to obey citation.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon the issuance of a traffic citation regardless of the disposition of the charge for which citation was originally issued. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-225)
 
Sec. 40-19. Failure to comply with traffic citations attached to parked vehicle.
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a traffic citation affixed to such motor vehicle within a period of days as specified on the citation, the clerk of the municipal court may send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event such letter is disregarded for the specified period of days, a warrant of arrest may be issued. On any occasion where two or more such traffic citations have been affixed on the same motor vehicle and the traffic citations have been disregarded, a warrant of arrest may be issued without sending the letter provided in this section. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-226)
 
Sec. 40-20. Presumption in reference to illegal parking.
(a)	In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. 
(b)	The presumption in subsection (a) of this section shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in this chapter has been followed. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-227)
 
Sec. 40-21. Illegal cancellation of traffic citations.
It is unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than is provided by this chapter. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-228)
 
Sec. 40-22. Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrants, and complaints.
(a)	Every police officer upon issuing a traffic citation to an alleged violator of any provision of the motor vehicle laws of this state or any traffic law of this city shall deposit the original and a duplicate copy of the citation with his immediate superior officer, who shall cause the original to be delivered to the municipal court. 
(b)	Upon the filing of the original citation in the municipal court, the citation may be disposed of only by trial in the court or by other official action by a judge of the court, including forfeiture of bail or by payment of a fine. 
(c)	The chief of police shall maintain a record of all warrants issued by the municipal court which are delivered to the police department for service, and of the final disposition of the warrants. 
(d)	No member of the police department or other officer or public employee shall dispose of, alter, or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof, or the record of the issuance or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint, or warrant, in a manner other than as required in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-229)
 
Sec. 40-23. Court records; abstract to be sent to state department of public safety.
(a)	The municipal judge shall keep a record of every traffic citation deposited with or presented to the court and shall keep a record of every official action by the court or its traffic violations bureau in reference thereto, including, but not limited to, a record of every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture. 
(b)	Within ten days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this chapter or other law regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the municipal judge or clerk of the court in which the conviction was had or bail was forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward to the state department of public safety a certified abstract of the court's record of the case. An abstract need not be made of any conviction involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle. 
(c)	The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the state department of public safety and shall include the name and address of the party charged, the number of his operator's or chauffeur's license, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine or forfeiture. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-230)
 
Sec. 40-24. Width, height, length, and load.
No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width, height, length, weight, or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law, except in accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the chief of police. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-305)
 
Sec. 40-25. Operation of wrecker vehicles; city wrecker rotation procedure.
(a)	Compliance with state law required. Wrecker vehicles operated within the city limits shall conform to the applicable laws of the state, which are set forth in 47 O.S. § 951 et seq. 
(b)	City request for towing services. Requests by the city for wrecker or towing services for removal of vehicles from public property shall be made in accordance with 47 O.S. § 951 et seq. and the following: 
(1)	The city shall require an annual contract with wrecker or towing services for the removal of vehicles from public property when needed. Annually, the city clerk shall open bids for the annual contract for wrecker or towing services provided in the city prior to the end of the fiscal year. 
(2)	Wrecker and towing services shall be called on a rotating basis to ensure fairness to all service providers. Logs shall be kept by the city police department as verification for the rotation. 
(3)	To select wrecker and towing service providers annually, a panel composed of the fire chief, police chief, and the city clerk shall review bids and make a recommendation to the city manager for final approval by the city council. At a minimum, the selection criteria shall include the following: 
a.	Be licensed with the state department of public safety as a class A wrecker service and present a copy of the state license; 
b.	Present proof of current driver's license and driving record for every wrecker driver employed and on future employees thereafter; 
c.	Present a copy of current insurance coverage in the amount set by state law; 
d.	Provide 24-hour response capability and be able to respond to most general calls within 20 minutes of notification; 
e.	Provide nontoll (not long distance) telephone access for user agency; 
f.	Provide fenced and secured storage impoundment yard not less than 10,000 square feet accessible from a paved roadway or gravel parking lot or roadway; 
g.	Provide heated and secured indoor storage capability for temporary storage of a vehicle for technical processing and evidentiary reasons; 
h.	Provide a business office building for dealing with the public; 
i.	Provide adequate signing to indicate business location and for ease of locating business; 
j.	Provide a storage facility without charge to the city for vehicles impounded on narcotic or other seizure or forfeiture reasons. 
(Code 1983, §§ 15-1501, 15-1502; Ord. No. 416-05-02, 6-20-2002; Ord. No. 505-09-07, 9-20-2007)
 
Secs. 40-26—40-40. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. SPEED
 
Sec. 40-41. General speed; exceptions.
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than 25 miles per hour upon any street or highway within the city except: 
(1)	Emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this Code; 
(2)	When a different speed limit is otherwise designated and posted; or 
(3)	When a different speed limit is established in this Code. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-401; Ord. No. 228-A, 4-11-1985)
 
Sec. 40-42. School zones.
No vehicle shall be driven at a greater speed than that posted speed per hour between the hours posted on any street adjacent to any school in a designated school zone on days when school is in session, unless a different speed limit or time is otherwise designated and posted. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-402)
 
Sec. 40-43. Speed never to exceed that which is reasonable or prudent for existing conditions; specific limits.
(a)	No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into consideration among other things, the conditions of the vehicle, the traffic, roadway surface or width, the amount of light or darkness, the presence of pedestrians in or near the roadways, and the obstruction of views. No person shall drive any vehicle at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(b)	When no such hazard exists, the following maximum safe speeds shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits shall be unlawful: 
(1)	55 miles per hour on any five lane U.S. Highway, except where official signs or markings indicate a different speed; 
(2)	45 miles per hour on any four or two lane street, except where official signs or markings indicate a different speed; 
(3)	40 miles per hour on any two lane street or road designated a through street, except where official signs or markings indicate speed; 
(4)	35 miles per hour on any two lane street or road, except where official signs or markings indicate a different speed; 
(5)	25 miles per hour on any street not designated a boulevard or through street and in all school zones, which will be effective to coincide with the commencing and ending of each day's school sessions including summer school; and 
(6)	15 miles per hour on any alley, except where official signs or markings indicate a different speed. 
(c)	Maximum speed limits for highway, streets, roads and alleys located within the city are established as follows: 
(1)	No vehicles, except emergency vehicles being lawfully driven as provided in this article, shall be driven at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour upon any street or highway within this city, except when it is declared and determined upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation conducted by the city manager or his designated representative that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared by proper authority when signs are in place giving notice thereof; 
(2)	In any case where speed limits are established for certain specified streets, locations, areas or zones, or certain classes of traffic at rates either greater or less than those generally provided herein, the same shall be considered and deemed as authorized exceptions to the general speed limits herein provided insofar as rates of speed are affected, and otherwise the general regulations herein set forth shall apply. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-403; Ord. No. 228-A, 4-11-1985; Ord. No. 334-4-95, 4-13-1995)
 
Sec. 40-44. Minimum speed requirements; exception.
No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed in relation to the effective maximum speed allowed as to constitute a hazard or to interfere with the normal movement of other traffic except when the slow speed is unavoidable. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-404)
 
Sec. 40-45. Obedience to maximum and minimum speed limits.
Where official signs and markings give notice of both maximum and minimum speed limits in effect on any street, no vehicle shall be driven at rates in excess of the maximum nor slower than the minimum except as required by an authorized officer or in obedience to posted official signs. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-405)
 
Secs. 40-46—40-59. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. DRIVING, OVERTAKING, PASSING
 
Sec. 40-60. Drivers in a procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-511)
 
Sec. 40-61. Funeral processions to be identified.
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of such identifying insignia as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-512)
 
Sec. 40-62. Overtaking and passing in school zones.
(a)	No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which is in motion and being driven in the same direction in any school zone between the hours posted on all days when schools are in session. 
(b)	Wherever a school zone is located on a multiple lane street which is divided into three or more clearly marked lanes for traffic or where the right half of the roadway has been divided into two or more lanes, or on one-way streets, vehicles shall be allowed to pass slower moving vehicles being driven in the same direction where passing does not involve a change of lane movement. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-513)
 
Sec. 40-63. Driving of vehicles on sidewalk prohibited; exception.
No person shall drive any vehicle within or upon any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-516)
 
Sec. 40-64. Limitation on use of motorcycles, bicycles and motor scooters.
(a)	No driver of a two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle or bicycle shall carry any other person upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway, except as provided in this section: 
(1)	If any two-wheel or three-wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of 12 inches or greater or any bicycle shall have either a double seating device with double foot rests or a side car attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of the side car, then it shall be permissible for an operator who has attained the age of 16 or older to carry a passenger; and 
(2)	A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is permissible. 
(b)	No motorcycle or motor scooter shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the city. 
(c)	No rider of a motorcycle, bicycle, or motor scooter shall hold onto any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled. 
(d)	A person operating a motor scooter, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or motor bicycle, shall ride only on the permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(e)	No driver of a motorcycle or motor scooter shall pass other vehicles in between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. Authorized emergency vehicles are excepted from the provisions of this subsection. 
(f)	No person under the age of 16 years shall operate any motorcycle, motor bicycle, or motor scooter within the city between and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 4:00 a.m. of the next day. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-518)
 
Sec. 40-65. Required motorcycle equipment, headgear.
(a)	In addition to all other requirements motorcycles and motor scooters shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)	Handle bars which do not exceed 12 inches in height, measured from the crown or point of attachment; 
(2)	Two mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of 200 feet to the rear of his vehicle; 
(3)	Brakes adequate to control the movement of the vehicle, to stop and hold the vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes. One means for applying the brakes shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the front wheel, and one means shall be to effectively apply the brakes to the rear wheels. All such vehicles shall be equipped with a stop lamp on the rear of the vehicle which shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than 100 feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and which shall be activated upon application of the service brake; 
(4)	A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for that vehicle shall be provided; 
(5)	A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer; 
(6)	One lighted headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at least 300 feet in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding, and one tail lamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the rear. The lights required by this subsection shall be burning whenever the vehicle is in motion during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly discernible at a distance of at least 500 feet ahead; and 
(7)	A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects. In lieu of the windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or face shield of material and design to protect him from foreign objects. 
(b)	No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any vehicle covered under this section unless the person is equipped with and wearing on the head a crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use by the operators of such vehicles. All crash helmets shall consist of lining, padding and chin straps and be of the type as not to distort the view of the driver. 
(c)	No person may operate a motorcycle or motor scooter with the exhaust system modified so that motor noise is increased greater than that of the original muffler equipment provided by the manufacturers of the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-519)
 
Sec. 40-66. Special speed limitation on motorcycles and motor scooters.
No person shall operate any motorcycle or any motor scooter at a speed greater than the speed limit legally posted. In no event nor at any time may an operator under the age of 16 years operate a motorcycle or motor scooter, including a motor-driven bicycle, at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour, or at any time or any speed when prohibited by state law. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-520)
 
Sec. 40-67. Careless or negligent driving, stopping, or parking.
It is unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked, or stop any vehicle: 
(1)	In a careless manner; 
(2)	In a negligent manner; 
(3)	In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property; or 
(4)	In such a manner or condition as to interfere with the lawful movement of traffic or use of the streets. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-524)
 
Sec. 40-68. Full time and attention to driving required.
The operator of every vehicle while driving upon the streets and highways of the city shall devote full time and attention to such driving. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, §§ 15-525, 15-530)
 
Sec. 40-69. Requirement of any person driving a vehicle on a public way to operate same in a careful and prudent manner.
Any person driving a vehicle on a public road or way shall drive the same in a careful and prudent manner and at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the public way and any other conditions then existing. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-526)
 
Sec. 40-70. Speed contest prohibited.
(a)	No person shall engage in, aid or abet any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed on any street or highway. 
(b)	No person shall, for the purpose of facilitating or aiding or as an incident to any motor vehicle speed contest upon any street or highway, in any manner obstruct or place any barricade or obstruction upon any street or highway. 
(c)	When three or more persons assemble to witness or participate in an unlawful speed contest such assembly is unlawful assembly and any person who participates in such unlawful assembly is guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-531)
 
Sec. 40-71. Permits required for parades and processions.
No funeral, procession, or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles except the military forces of the United States and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-532)
 
Sec. 40-72. Private service drives.
No vehicle or animal shall be driven through any private service driveway or private service area except for the purpose of obtaining service or merchandise. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-540)
 
Sec. 40-73. Truck driving and route restrictions.
The city council may prescribe routes through the city for the use of trucks in general, trucks of particular kinds or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city. Appropriate and adequate signs shall be placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed, as provided above, while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving within the city and not merely through the city. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-541)
 
Sec. 40-74. Roads on vehicles.
(a)	No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, shifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway. 
(b)	No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders, or other loose material susceptible to blowing or escaping by reason of wind shall have the load covered or dampened so as to prevent the blowing or escaping of the load from the vehicle. 
(c)	This section shall apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry or agricultural products only except baled agricultural products, provided that any such truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-542)
 
Sec. 40-75. Through streets.
(a)	The city council may designate any street or part of a street a through street. 
(b)	Whenever the city council designates and describes a through street, the stop sign, or yield sign if deemed more appropriate, shall be placed and maintained on every street intersecting a through street, or intersecting that portion thereof, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic control signals. 
(c)	At the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the city's manager if deemed desirable. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-548)
 
Sec. 40-76. Intersections where stop or yield required.
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections upon other than through streets where particular hazards exist and to determine whether: 
(1)	Vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, in which event it shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place a stop is required; or 
(2)	Vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street as provided in this part in which event it shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where yield is required. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-549)
 
Sec. 40-77. Stop or yield sign construction and placement.
Every stop or yield sign erected pursuant to this article shall bear the word "stop" or "yield" in letters not less than eight inches in height for a stop sign and not less than seven inches in height for a yield sign. Every stop or yield sign shall at night be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. Every stop or yield sign shall be located as close as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if there is no crosswalk, then the sign shall be located at the nearest line of the intersecting roadway. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-550)
 
Sec. 40-78. Stop when traffic obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-556)
 
Sec. 40-79. Commercial vehicles not to use certain streets.
(a)	No person shall operate a vehicle that is required by law to have a commercial tag exceeding a 2½ ton rated capacity by the manufacturer at any time upon any streets in the city, except on: 
(1)	Post Road. 
(2)	Midwest Boulevard. 
(3)	N.E. 36th Street. 
(4)	N.E. 50th Street. 
(5)	Spencer Road. 
(6)	Douglas Boulevard. 
(7)	N.E. 23rd Street. 
(8)	N.E. 51st Street between Spencer Road and Palmer Road. 
(b)	Such vehicles may be operated on other streets not enumerated herein for the purpose of delivering or picking up material or merchandise, and then only by entering such street at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle from the streets enumerated herein, and proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-559; Ord. No. 302-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 40-80—40-101. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
Sec. 40-102. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The city manager or the public works director shall have the authority to place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as authorized or required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control signs, signals, and devices as they may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic control ordinances of this city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1983, § 15-601; Ord. No. 480-10-05, 11-17-2005)
 
Sec. 40-103. Uniform requirements.
(a)	All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the "Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices" approved by the state department of public safety. 
(b)	All signs, signals, and devices required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and relative location throughout the city. All traffic control devices erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-602)
 
Sec. 40-104. Obedience to official traffic control devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto, placed in accordance with the provisions of this article, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exemptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this part. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-603)
 
Sec. 40-105. When official traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes.
No provision of this article for which official traffic control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. If a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-604)
 
Sec. 40-106. Play streets, authority to establish.
City personnel, subject to any directions given by the council, shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-611)
 
Sec. 40-107. Play streets, restriction on use.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-612)
 
Sec. 40-108. Designation of crosswalks and safety zones.
(a)	City personnel, subject to any directions given by the council, may: 
(1)	Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in their opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as they may deem necessary; and 
(2)	Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at such places as they may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-613)
 
Secs. 40-109—40-129. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
 
Sec. 40-130. Illegal parking declared public nuisance.
Any vehicle in violation of any regulation contained in this article governing, limiting or prohibiting the parking or standing of a vehicle on any street or public thoroughfare is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, and each separate traffic citation issued as authorized herein for such violation shall constitute a separate notice thereof to the owner or operator of such vehicle. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-701)
 
Sec. 40-131. Application of standing or parking regulations.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable when it is necessary for a vehicle to stop to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-702)
 
Sec. 40-132. Parking time limits may be established, signs.
City personnel, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution, may establish parking time limits or prohibit parking on designated streets or parts of streets and have appropriate signs placed on the streets. When the signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation of the sign. No such time limits shall be effective unless a sign is erected and in place at the time of the alleged violation. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-703)
 
Sec. 40-133. Parking more than 48 hours.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than 48 hours. The parking of a vehicle for more than 48 hours shall constitute prima facie evidence of abandonment of the vehicle. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-704)
 
Sec. 40-134. Brakes; motor not to be left running.
Adequate brakes shall be set on all parked vehicles. No driver of a motor vehicle shall leave the vehicle with the motor running while parked. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-705)
 
Sec. 40-135. Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
The city manager, subject to any directions given by the city council by motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted, and shall have such streets marked or signed. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-706)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1004(c). 
 
Sec. 40-136. Obedience to angle-parking signs or markings.
On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-707)
 
Sec. 40-137. Parking in spaces marked off.
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-708)
 
Sec. 40-138. Permits for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb.
(a)	City personnel are authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. The city's manager may revoke such permits at any time. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-709)
 
Sec. 40-139. Hazardous or congested places; stopping, standing, parking.
(a)	City personnel are hereby authorized to determine and regulate by proper signs the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles when such stopping, standing or parking would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)	When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall violate such signs. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-710)
 
Sec. 40-140. Blocking of intersection or crosswalk prohibited.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-712)
 
Sec. 40-141. Standing or parking on one-way roadway.
(a)	If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. 
(b)	The city council may determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-713)
 
Sec. 40-142. Standing or parking on left side of one-way streets.
City personnel may have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When the signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-714)
 
Sec. 40-143. Parking adjacent to schools.
(a)	City personnel may have signs erected indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)	No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any such signs. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-715)
 
Sec. 40-144. Parking prohibited at intersections.
The parking of vehicles at the curb where streets intersect shall be prohibited 15 feet in advance of the crosswalk on the near side of such intersection. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-716)
 
Sec. 40-145. Parking in alleys, blocking driveways.
No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within a street or alley in such position as to block a driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-717)
 
Sec. 40-146. Entry on private property; trespass; evidence; burden of proof.
(a)	No person shall make an entry with any vehicle upon real property owned or legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent except where such private property is provided as public parking and the general use of the property is not restricted by signs or proper markings. 
(b)	Where entry is made upon real property owned or legally occupied by another without the owner's or occupant's consent, except on unrestricted public parking, and is complained of by the owner or legal occupant of the premises, the burden is put upon the person making the entry to show that permission for such entry was given. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-718)
 
Sec. 40-147. Truck parking prohibited.
(a)	It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to park any of the following vehicles which exceed a weight limit of 2½ tons on any street or alley in the city except as provided in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)	Truck; 
(2)	Bus; 
(3)	Tractor; 
(4)	Trailer; 
(5)	Truck-trailer, semi-trailer, or combination of any of the above; or 
(6)	Any other commercial vehicle. 
(b)	The vehicles listed in subsection (a) of this section may be parked entirely on private property so long as they are in accordance with section 40-79 which states that no person shall operate a vehicle that is required by law to have a commercial tag exceeding a 2½-ton rated capacity by the manufacturer at any time upon any streets in the city, except on: 
(1)	Post Road; 
(2)	Midwest Boulevard; 
(3)	N.E. 36th Street; 
(4)	N.E. 50th Street; 
(5)	Spencer Road; 
(6)	Douglas Boulevard; 
(7)	N.E. 23rd Street; and 
(8)	N.E. 51st Street between Spencer Road and Palmer Road. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-719; Ord. No. 302-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 40-148. Double parking.
(a)	No driver shall double park or double stop a vehicle under the following conditions: 
(1)	Within 50 feet of an intersection except alley intersections, or within ten feet of an alley intersection; 
(2)	Opposite a double parked or double stopped vehicle across the street; 
(3)	When such double parking or double stopping would or does block or interfere materially with the normal movement of traffic; 
(4)	When parking space adjacent to the curb is available; 
(5)	When directed by a police officer to move on; or 
(6)	In any position other than parallel to the curb and within two feet of the adjacent vehicle parked next to the curb. 
(b)	A driver may double park or double stop a vehicle only as authorized in this section. There must be a licensed driver in any vehicle while it is double parked or double stopped. 
(c)	A driver may double stop for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, subject, however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out. 
(d)	A driver may double park for the purpose of, but only while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of merchandise, subject, however, to all the general conditions hereinabove set out. No such vehicle shall be double parked longer than ten minutes. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-720)
 
Sec. 40-149. Parking prohibited for trucks transporting hazardous materials.
It is unlawful to park, store or otherwise let stand a truck or other vehicle which is used for the purpose of transporting or delivering flammable and combustible liquids as defined by the fire prevention code of the American Insurance Association and trucks or other vehicles which are used for the transportation and delivery of liquefied petroleum gases in any area within the city. However, the trucks and vehicles restricted in this section may be temporarily parked at locations otherwise zoned for the purpose of loading and unloading flammable and combustible liquids and liquefied petroleum gases for a period not to exceed 1½ hours during any 24-hour period. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-721)
 
Sec. 40-150. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of: 
(1)	Displaying the vehicle for sale; 
(2)	Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for sale or selling merchandise or other things; or 
(3)	Washing, cleaning, or repairing the vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-722)
 
Sec. 40-151. Negligent parking.
No person shall park, cause to be parked, stop or leave unattended any vehicle as follows: 
(1)	In a careless or negligent manner; 
(2)	In such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property; or 
(3)	In such manner as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or use of the streets. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-724)
 
Sec. 40-152. Right-of-way to parallel parking space.
(a)	The driver of any vehicle intending to occupy a parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary and which is being vacated by another vehicle shall stop his vehicle to the rear of the parking space until the vacating vehicle has cleared and entered normal traffic. He then shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space over any other vehicle attempting to park therein. 
(b)	The first of two or more vehicles to reach the rear boundary of an unoccupied parallel parking space where a backing movement is necessary to occupy, shall be deemed to have the right-of-way to such parking space. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-725)
 
Secs. 40-153—40-163. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. LOADING
 
Sec. 40-164. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial vehicle means: 
(1)	A truck designated for delivery purposes with the name of the owner or his business painted on both sides of the vehicle, regularly used during normal business hours for the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight and which bears a regular state commercial license tag; 
(2)	A passenger vehicle used regularly and actually engaged during normal business hours in the delivery and handling of merchandise or freight, and which bears a special numbered license plate issued by the city at the rear of the vehicle attached to the state license plate together with an identically numbered decal, issued vehicle. 
Freight loading zones means all curb loading zones authorized and regularly used exclusively for the loading and unloading of merchandise for storage, trade, shipment or re-sale. 
Passenger loading zones means all loading zones authorized and used regularly and exclusively for the loading and unloading of passengers except bus stops, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-801)
 
Sec. 40-165. Curb loading zones, designation.
(a)	City personnel, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution, may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating the zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(b)	No person shall stand or park a vehicle in violation of signs erected in accordance with this section. 
(c)	If any loading zone is established on request of any person, the signs shall not be placed until the applicant pays to the city an amount of money estimated by the city council to be adequate to reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing the same. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-802)
 
Sec. 40-166. Loading zones to be used only for designated purpose.
No curb loading zone authorized and established as a passenger loading zone shall be used as a freight loading zone, and no freight loading zone shall be used as a passenger loading zone except as may be specifically provided by law. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-803)
 
Sec. 40-167. Stopping, standing or parking in passenger curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a passenger curb loading zone for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, during the hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-804)
 
Sec. 40-168. Stopping, standing or parking in freight curb loading zone.
(a)	No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a commercial curb loading zone for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. Vehicles using any commercial loading zone shall be subject to the licensing requirements and regulations provided by this chapter. 
(b)	The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any commercial vehicle which is waiting to enter the zone. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-805)
 
Sec. 40-169. Designation of public carrier stops and stands.
City personnel may establish loading zones for common carriers, including, but not limited to, bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles, on such public streets in such places and in such number as they shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such loading zone shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-806)
 
Sec. 40-170. Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and the appropriate signs are in place. The driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus, or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-807)
 
Sec. 40-171. Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxis.
(a)	The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein. 
(b)	The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage except in a bus stop, stand or loading zone designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)	The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)	The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-808)
 
Secs. 40-172—40-180. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. TURNING MOVEMENTS
 
Sec. 40-181. Turning markers or indicators.
(a)	City personnel, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution, are authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The course to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(b)	When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-901)
 
Sec. 40-182. Designation of restricted turns.
City personnel are hereby authorized to determine those street intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and shall have proper signs placed at the intersections. The making of the turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours. Where turns are restricted during certain hours pursuant to this section, the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when turns are permitted. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-902)
 
Sec. 40-183. Obedience to no-turn signs.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, the driver of a vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-903)
 
Sec. 40-184. U-turns.
(a)	The driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the city at the following locations: 
(1)	At intersections controlled by traffic control devices or signals unless such turns are specifically authorized; 
(2)	Where a police officer is directing traffic except at the latter's direction; or 
(3)	At any other location where an official "no-U-turn" sign has been placed and is maintained. 
(b)	Manner of making U-turns. A U-turn may be made only when it can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. No person shall make a U-turn except in the following manner: 
(1)	By approaching the intersection as closely as practical to the right curb or edge of the roadway, the driver giving and continuing to give a signal for a left turn until the turn is completed, proceeding to make the turn across the intersection; 
(2)	In one continuous movement without stopping or backing the vehicle; 
(3)	By yielding the right-of-way at all times to all vehicles until such turn in completed; and 
(4)	Without constituting a hazard to or interfering with any other vehicle. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-904)
 
Sec. 40-185. Turns into or from alleys.
(a)	No vehicles shall turn left when proceeding into or proceeding out of an alley except when necessary to enter a one-way street, and no vehicle shall cross any street or highway when proceeding into or proceeding out of any alley except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	Left turns may be made when proceeding out of an alley if a traffic survey conducted by the traffic engineer shows that such turn may be made safely and official signs are erected authorizing such turns. 
(c)	The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to bus terminals used by licensed and authorized bus lines. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-909)
 
Secs. 40-186—40-195. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. PEDESTRIANS
 
Sec. 40-196. Pedestrians prohibited from soliciting rides, business or donations from vehicle occupants.
(a)	No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, donations, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)	No person shall: 
(1)	Stand in any street, roadway or park and stop or attempt to stop and engage any person in any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting contributions or the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street; 
(2)	Sell or attempt to sell anything to any person in any vehicle; 
(3)	Hand or attempt to hand to any person in any vehicle any circular, advertisement, handbill or any political campaign literature, or any sample, souvenir or gift; or 
(4)	In any other manner, while standing in the street or roadway, attempt to interfere with the normal flow of traffic for any other similar purpose. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1007)
 
Sec. 40-197. Drivers to exercise due care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person on the roadway. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1008)
 
Secs. 40-198—40-208. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IX. BICYCLES
 
Sec. 40-209. Application of bicycle regulations.
The provisions of this article shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or public way; or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1101)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 40-210. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths.
(a)	Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)	Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)	If usable paths for bicycles are provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1105)
 
Sec. 40-211. Speed of bicycle.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1106)
 
Sec. 40-212. Emerging from alley or driveway.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley or driveway shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the alley or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area. Upon entering the roadway, the bicycle operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadways. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1107)
 
Sec. 40-213. Carrying articles.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand on the handle bars. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1108)
 
Sec. 40-214. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against the building or at the curb in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1109)
 
Sec. 40-215. Riding on sidewalks.
(a)	No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)	The city council, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same. 
(c)	Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1110)
 
Sec. 40-216. Lamps and equipment on bicycles.
(a)	Bicycles in use at night-time shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from 500 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)	No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet. 
(c)	A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use, any siren or whistle. 
(d)	Bicycles shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Prior Code, title 40; Code 1983, § 15-1111)
 
Chapter 42 UTILITIES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 42-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of trustees means the board of trustees of the city public utilities authority. 
General manager means the manager of the city public utilities authority. 
Willfully and willingly, when used with regard to nonpayment of utility bills, means that the act of nonpayment must have been done willingly, beyond a reasonable doubt, rather than for the reasons of financial inability to pay in full a city utility bill for water, sewer, garbage or other municipal services when and after such a bill is due. It is the intent of the city that a punishable omission must be knowingly, willfully and willingly done by persons having the ability to pay the utility bill in whole or in part. Bona fide indigency may be an affirmative defense to the charge of willingly or willfully failing to pay a city utility bill when such indigency is successfully proved by the defendant. 
(Prior Code, § 41-2.5; Code 1983, § 17-109; Ord. No. 275-A, 4-11-1989)
 
Sec. 42-2. Use of public water supply required.
When any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city, and the lot, parcel or tract that it is located upon abuts on any street, alley or right-of way-within which there is located a public water main of the city, then the owner is required at his expense to install suitable water facilities therein, and connect such water facilities directly with the public water supply in accordance with the provisions of this section within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the public water main is located within 100 feet of the exterior property line of the aforementioned lot, parcel or tract. 
(Code 1983, § 17-215.1; Ord. No. 272-A, 11-10-1988)
 
Sec. 42-3. Trunk line construction.
(a)	Any person who elects to construct a utility trunk line, as defined in this section, shall be eligible to receive reimbursement for a portion of the costs of construction of the utility trunk line, in a negotiated amount not to exceed 90 percent of the cost of the utility trunk line. 
(b)	The term "utility trunk line" is hereby defined as a water or sewer line located in public easements and connecting service lines and/or lateral lines to existing main utility lines of the city and the city authority. 
(c)	To be eligible for reimbursement for a portion of the costs of construction of the utility trunk line the person constructing the utility trunk line shall, prior to the installation of said trunk line, submit plans for the construction of said utility trunk line together with plans for all service lines and/or lateral lines that said person is installing for use with the utility trunk line. 
(d)	Prior to construction beginning, the person desiring to construct the utility trunk line shall seek a recommendation from the city economic development commission. After a recommendation has been obtained from the SEDC, the applicant shall seek written approval of the city and the city utility authority. The applicant's request shall include a full description of the utility design and construction, including size and location of the utility construction. The approval required by this subsection shall be in addition to and not in lieu of approval required by other sections and provisions of this Code, the subdivision regulations of the city and any other requirements or regulations for the city or city utility authority. 
(e)	Prior to written approval of the city, and the city utility authority, the person constructing the utility trunk lines shall enter into a written agreement between the city utility authority and the city, outlining the specific conditions for reimbursement. 
(f)	Under no circumstance shall the city or the city utility authority be liable to any person for failure to comply with the terms of an agreement entered into pursuant to this section. 
(g)	Reimbursement for utility trunk line construction costs will be made from impact fees collected from parties benefiting from the construction of the utility trunk line. 
(h)	No person shall be entitled reimbursement for any cost of construction for connections made to any utility trunk line more than 15 years after the completion of the utility trunk line. 
(i)	The city and the city utility authority shall maintain in permanent files a full and complete description of all utility trunk lines constructed pursuant to this section. The permanent files and records of the city shall include a copy of the agreement between the city utility authority, the city and the person constructing the utility trunk line pursuant to this section. The records with regard the each utility trunk line constructed pursuant to this section shall include the date of completion of the utility trunk line and the total cost of the utility trunk line as evidenced by the sworn statement of the person constructing same. 
(j)	The city and the city utility authority shall clearly note upon the municipal utility maps the existence of all utility trunk lines constructed pursuant to this section and shall maintain such clear designation for a period of ten years from the date of the completion of construction of said utility trunk line. 
(k)	The written agreement between the person constructing a utility trunk line and the city and the city utility authority shall address the conditions and amounts of reimbursement to which the person is entitled. No construction shall begin until such agreement has been fully approved and executed by all parties. 
(l)	No property owner or developer shall be compelled to install a utility trunk line, however, the city and the city utility authority shall not be compelled to allow any person to use its public easements or rights-of-way for the installation of utilities. 
(m)	Any utility trunk line constructed pursuant to this section shall be dedicated to the city and the city utility authority immediately upon its completion and the construction of said lines shall be in compliance with all federal, state and municipal statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(n)	No property owner or developer shall be compelled to connect to a utility trunk line constructed pursuant to this section, however any such connection made within 15 years from the completion of said utility trunk line shall require the imposition of an impact fee in such amount and under such conditions as set forth in the negotiated agreement between the city, city utility authority and the person constructing the utility trunk line pursuant to this section. In addition to the imposition of said impact fee, the city shall also assess other fees, including connection fees to recover the city's costs for said connection. 
(o)	At its choice, the city may at any time accelerate payments to the developer in order to accomplish an early payoff. 
(Code 1983, § 17-501; Ord. No. 468-03-05, 3-17-2005)
 
Secs. 42-4—42-24. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. WATER UTILITY
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 42-25. Water system as public utility.
The water system of the city is hereby declared to be a public utility and a proper source of city revenues and expenditures for the upkeep and maintenance of the water system. 
(Code 1983, § 17-201)
 
Sec. 42-26. Not to disturb system.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, unless duly authorized by the water superintendent, to disturb, interfere with, or damage any water, water pipes, machinery, tools, buildings or implements connected with or under the control of the city waterworks or distribution system of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 44-3.2; Code 1983, § 17-213)
 
Sec. 42-27. Not to obstruct water meters.
(a)	It shall be an offense for an owner or occupant of any premises to obstruct or allow the obstruction, in any manner, of access to a water meter for inspection or repair by the city. 
(b)	The term "obstruct" or "obstruction," as used herein, shall include, but not be limited to, parking automobiles, trailers, boats or other vehicles over meters, planting shrubs over or allowing shrubbery to cover meters, or placing any trash or debris over or allowing any trash or debris to cover the meter, in such a manner that prevents access to the meter for inspection or repair by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 17-213.1; Ord. No. 304-A, 12-13-1990)
 
Sec. 42-28. Not to obstruct fire hydrants.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire hydrant, by parking any vehicle or by placing around or upon such hydrant any stone, brick, lumber, dirt, or other material, or to open or operate any fire hydrant, or to draw or attempt to draw any water therefrom, or to willfully or carelessly injure the same. 
(Prior Code, § 44-3.3; Code 1983, § 17-214)
 
Secs. 42-29—42-59. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. DEPARTMENT AND SUPERINTENDENT
 
Sec. 42-60. Establishment of the department.
The city has established a utility department that shall consist of a utilities superintendent and such other personnel as shall be authorized by the council. The utilities superintendent shall also be known as and have the duties of the water superintendent, sanitary sewer superintendent and the garbage superintendent. 
(Prior Code, § 41-1.1; Code 1983, § 17-101)
 
Sec. 42-61. Selection and employment.
The superintendent shall be selected and appointed by the city manager to serve at his pleasure. The city manager shall also select and employ all other workers and personnel of the department. The superintendent shall at all times be under the direction and control of the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 41-1.2; Code 1983, § 17-102)
 
Sec. 42-62. Custody of equipment.
The superintendent shall have custody of the equipment of the department and shall be accountable for the care and safekeeping of same to the city manager. He shall maintain a running inventory of the equipment together with all vehicles and shall maintain thereon the estimated value thereof which shall be revised from time to time. He shall furnish the city manager with a copy thereof and shall file a copy with the city clerk. The superintendent shall make recommendations to the city manager as to needed supplies and equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 41-1.3; Code 1983, § 17-103)
 
Sec. 42-63. Duties of the utility department.
It is the duty of the utility department to erect, maintain and operate the water system, the sanitary sewer system and the garbage system of the city. It shall install meters, extend water mains and lines and sewer laterals and gathering systems. It shall operate the water plants and maintain on hand at all times an adequate supply of water and chemicals necessary to treat same. It shall read all water meters and shall provide information for the billing of customers for water, sewer and garbage services monthly. It shall make all needed tests to ensure a wholesome supply of water and shall maintain and operate garbage and sanitation gathering routes and shall furnish the names of all customers for all utility services to the city clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 41-1.4; Code 1983, § 17-104)
 
Secs. 42-64—42-84. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. ESTABLISHING SERVICE CONNECTIONS
 
Sec. 42-85. Application for service.
(a)	Any person desiring to have premises connected with the city's water system, and all water customers whose water has been cut off or any premises that has had water service discontinued so as to render the application for reinstatement thereof necessary, shall present to the city clerk application, upon written form, containing the name of the owner, the legal description of the premises, the address of the house or building on the premises where such water is desired. The application shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be served, or his duly authorized agent, which includes any renter, real estate agent or occupant, and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)	The application shall contain a contract on the part of the person making same to pay for the water applied for at the rate and in the manner specified by the ordinances of the city and reserving the city the right to charge and collect the rates and enforce the penalties provided by ordinance, and to temporarily discontinue the service at any time without notice to the customer. 
(c)	The application shall also contain a provision that the contract is subject to all the provisions of the ordinances or regulations of the city or authority relating to the subject of water service, and it shall reserve to the city the right to furnish water to any person, firm or corporation, either within or without the corporate limits of the city at any time the city council deems expedient. 
(d)	The application shall state that the city shall not be held responsible for any damage by water or other causes resulting from defective plumbing or appliances on the premises supplied with water, installed by the owner or occupant of the premises, or by the failure to supply water, or the water supply shall be interrupted or fail for any reason whatsoever. 
(e)	At the time of the filing of such application, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk the fee for such water services as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 44-1.1; Code 1983, § 17-203; Ord. No. 299-A, 11-18-1990; Ord. No. 537-03-11, § 1, 3-17-2011)
 
Sec. 42-86. Water connection, location of meter.
In connecting any premises with the city's water supply system, there shall be used a copper lead pipe of sufficient size from the water main to the water meter. The meter shall be located near the property line of the premises to be served, the meter will be of sufficient depth in the ground to prevent freezing, and shall be covered and protected with a concrete block with a suitable cap or lid to cover same. 
(Prior Code, § 44-1.3; Code 1983, § 17-205)
 
Sec. 42-87. Meter to be installed.
No premises shall be connected with the city's water system, or no premises will be served with the city's water without the installation of a water meter of suitable size and proper function, so as to correctly determine the amount of water used nor shall it be permissible to serve two or more premises with one meter. 
(Prior Code, § 44-1.4; Code 1983, § 17-206)
 
Sec. 42-88. Meters to belong to the city.
All water meters installed by the city or authority shall be, and remain the property of the city or authority, and shall not be removed unless the use of water on the premises is to be entirely stopped, or the service connection discontinued or abandoned. In all cases where meters are lost, injured or broken by the carelessness or negligence of the owner or occupant of the premises, they shall be replaced or repaired by or under the direction of the water superintendent and the cost thereof charged against the owner or occupant of the premises, and in case of nonpayment, the water may be shut off, and will not be turned on until such charge and the charge for turning on the water paid. In the event the water meter becomes out of order or fails to register properly, the water customer shall be charged on an estimate made by the city on an average monthly consumption during the last three months that the same was in good order, or from such other date as the city considers to be the most reliable, at his command. 
(Prior Code, § 44-1.5; Code 1983, § 17-207)
 
Sec. 42-89. Installation fee.
The installation fee for water service within the city shall be as set by the city council or authority board of trustees from time to time by motion or resolution. When services are laid under pavement or other all-weather road condition or on installations, either large or small, either within or without the limits of the city, an additional charge sufficient to pay all costs of boring under or removing and replacing such pavement or other road construction, in good condition as it was before the installation fee shall belong to the city. 
(Prior Code, § 44-1.5; Code 1983, § 17-208)
 
Sec. 42-90. Installment payments.
(a)	For installations of service, in the event a customer is unable to pay the cost of installation, at the time of the application he may enter into a contract to pay for the installation of the water meter in equal monthly payments not to exceed three such payments. 
(b)	For ongoing service: 
(1)	Individual/family utility customers who become delinquent in their water or other utility bills may seek to arrange reasonable installment payments according to a written "agreement for deferred payment." Such agreement is to allow temporary continued habitability of homes for those customers who are truly indigent or subject to a very short term financial exigency; 
(2)	Carrying charges of ten percent per month, with a charge of $25.00 per month shall be assessed for such deferred payment plans; 
(3)	Application for such written agreement for deferred payment shall be made with the office of the city clerk-treasurer; and 
(4)	In case a complete agreement cannot be arrived at regarding either the availability or terms and conditions for a deferred payment plan, the customer may appeal to the city manager or general manager for a hearing regarding such. 
(Prior Code, § 44-1.7; Code 1983, § 17-209; Ord. No. 275-A, 4-11-1989; Ord. No. 489-06-06, 6-15-2006)
 
Sec. 42-91. Water deposits.
Applicants for water services, and all water customers whose water service has been discontinued or any premises that has had water service discontinued so as to render application for reinstatement of water service necessary, are hereby required to make a deposit to the city. Such deposit shall be in a reasonable sum to guarantee the payment of such service, and shall be based upon the probable consumption per month. In no event shall the deposit be less than $120.00, or such amount as may be set by motion or resolution of the authority board of trustees. 
(Code 1983, § 17-210; Ord. No. 365-9-97, 10-9-1997)
 
Sec. 42-92. Water service deposit fund.
There is hereby created and established a water service deposit fund, into which fund there shall be deposited all water deposits hereinabove required to be made by water customers and users, and the funds shall be disbursed and used first for water services discontinued on the premises, or where the water customer has moved from the premises, on which such deposit is made, by applying the deposit for payment of any unpaid balance owed to the city for water services and charges, or for sewer services, or for sanitation services, at the time of such discontinuance or removal. The balance of such deposit, if any, shall be refunded to the party in whose name the deposit was made. 
(Prior Code, § 44-2.1; Code 1983, § 17-211)
 
Sec. 42-93. Water not to be turned on or used.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to turn on any water after service has been cut off by the city or for any person to use any water from the water service supply to any premises, when the same has been turned on illegally. 
(Prior Code, § 44-3.1; Code 1983, § 17-212)
 
Sec. 42-94. Not to connect water main.
It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with any water main or pipe belonging to the water supply system of the city without obtaining a permit therefor or paying any inspection fees as may be required by the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 44-3.4, 44-3.5; Code 1983, § 17-215)
 
Secs. 42-95—42-116. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. FEES, BILLING AND COLLECTIONS
 
Sec. 42-117. Water fees and billings in general.
(a)	All fees and charges in connection with any customer's use of the city's sanitary sewer system, the city's water facility system, or the operation of the city's collection and disposal of refuse and garbage are billed in accordance with applicable rates set by the city council or the board of trustees of the public works authority. 
(b)	All fees and charges owing for any of these utility services shall be billed on one monthly bill submitted to the customer each month. The utility bills submitted under the terms of this section shall be payable on or before the past due date which is printed on the bill. 
(Code 1983, § 17-105)
 
Sec. 42-118. Failure to pay utility bills.
(a)	Upon failure of any customer to pay any part of a utility bill submitted by the city or authority for any utility services by the past due date which is printed on the bill, the following actions and penalties may result: 
(1)	A percentage or a fixed penalty of all amounts owing on a utility bill may be added to any utility bill which is not paid by the past due date printed on the bill; 
(2)	The authorized agents of the city or authority may disconnect or discontinue any or all utility services to the customer after mailing or posting written notice to the customer of the intent of the city or authority to disconnect or discontinue any or all of the utility services, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section; 
(3)	The authorized agents of the city or authority may discontinue to furnish water to any customer willfully refusing or neglecting to pay all or any part of a utility bill submitted after mailing written notice to the customer of the intent of the city to disconnect the water service, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	Prior to termination of utilities for nonpayment, the customer shall receive notice and an opportunity to be heard as follows: 
(1)	The city and the authority reserve the right, at any time without notice, to cut off the water supply for repairs, extension, or any other proper reason, except for nonpayment as noted below, and the city shall not be responsible for any damages resulting therefrom. 
(2)	The city clerk is specifically authorized to terminate water service to the location, address, or dwelling unit in question for nonpayment, subject to the provision of this section. 
(3)	Three days after the due date for utility payments, the utilities staff shall mail a second notice, if the utility bill is not totally paid and an agreement for deferred payment has not been signed by the utility customer and an authorized representative of the city clerk's office or the city manager; 
(4)	Termination of water services may not occur until at least ten calendar days after the second notice is mailed to all of the following: 
a.	The occupant, at the address or location for which service has not been fully paid, including persons residing in a duplex, triplex or apartment units on a master meter, and persons living in a manufactured home park with a master meter; 
b.	The property owner of record, according to the current tax roll of the county; and 
c.	The person, firm or corporation who opened the water service account, if that party is not the occupant nor the property owner of record; 
(5)	The second notice shall inform the customer of the following: 
a.	The proposed termination of water service for nonpayment of utility bills; 
b.	The customer's right to consult with the city clerk's office, regarding the amount of the bill and the meter readings involved within five working days after the second notice was mailed; 
c.	An individual or family residential customer's right to make formal arrangements for the timely payment in full of the utility bills by signing an agreement for deferred payment that is consistent with city and utility policy; 
d.	The customer's right to appeal, and request an informal hearing before the city manager or general manager, within three working days after the customer's consultation with the city clerk; and 
e.	Failure of a customer to pay their delinquent utility bills according to an agreement for deferred payment, or the terms of a city manager's or general manager's hearing decision shall cause the staff to hand deliver or hand post at each affected residence a notice or tag informing the residents that failure to pay the delinquent water bills in full within five working days will result in an immediate disconnection of water service. 
(c)	Disconnection procedures are as follows: 
(1)	Water service will be disconnected no sooner than five working days after the consultation of the customer, or customer's representative with the city clerk's office, or the customer's hearing before the city manager or general manager, whichever is later. In no event will service be terminated within ten calendar days after the second notice was mailed to the customer; and 
(2)	Disconnections of water service for nonpayment of bills will occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Mondays through Thursdays. 
(d)	To resume service: 
(1)	If a customer's water service has been turned off, and the customer pays delinquent utility bills, and the additional fee for reconnecting service, the utility authority will resume water service to that customer consistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(2)	Water service shall be reinstated during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (holidays excepted). However, in an emergency situation the fire department is authorized to reconnect the water service. 
(Code 1983, § 17-106; Ord. No. 275-A, 4-11-1989; Ord. No. 339-5-95, 5-11-1995)
 
Sec. 42-119. Security deposits.
(a)	Prior to approval of a new utility tap by the superintendent, the customer shall have paid the connection or tap charge as applicable and set by the council or board of trustees and a security deposit. The deposit shall serve as a guarantee for the payment of charges for utility service and other amounts owed to the city or authority in connection with the utility service. 
(b)	Amounts of deposits. 
(1)	Single-family dwellings.
a.	Those receiving only sanitation service for the removal of garbage and trash: renter, $50.00; owner, $40.00. 
b.	Those receiving sanitation and sewer service: renter, $75.00; owner, $65.00. 
c.	Those receiving sanitation, sewer and water service: renter, $120.00; owner, $90.00. 
d.	Out of city: $120.00. 
Active duty military personnel with proper identification will be charged the rate for homeowners. Rates apply only if owner is also the occupant of the premises; otherwise owner shall pay the deposit as a renter. 
(2)	Multi-family residential facilities. Multi-family residential facilities, including manufactured home parks, to be determined by one of the following methods, chosen at the discretion of the city manager or general manager, subject to another option being selected by the council or board of trustees on appeal by the owner, manager or operator of the multi-family property in question: 
a.	Twice the average monthly billing for such multi-family facility in the past year; 
b.	$120.00 per dwelling unit; or 
c.	An amount determined by the council or board of trustees based on reliable calculation factors provided or verified by the city engineer. 
(3)	Deposits for temporary utility accounts.
a.	Realtors, property management companies, and property owners making properties or homes ready for new occupancy shall establish a temporary account with a deposit of $25.00. Temporary accounts shall be billed monthly and paid in full prior to the issue of certificates of occupancy and before the setup of the account for the new customer. 
b.	Builders and construction companies shall establish a temporary account with a deposit of $75.00. Temporary accounts shall be billed monthly and paid in full prior to the issue of certificates of occupancy and the setup of new customer accounts. 
(c)	When a customer's utility service is disconnected, the deposit or any part of such amount deposited which remains after all such charges and amounts due the city or authority have been satisfied, shall be returned to the customer. 
(d)	A fee for reconnection of utility service where the service has been turned off or a meter has been disconnected by the city for any reason shall be set by the council or board of trustees of the authority: 
(1)	For any reconnection of utility service done after regular working hours (before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday) or on any legal holiday, the charge may be higher, as set by the council or board of trustees; or 
(2)	If any utility service is discontinued or disconnected pursuant to this section, the city or authority or its agents, shall not reconnect or reestablish the service until the full amount of any outstanding utility service bill is paid, plus the penalty provided in this section, plus any applicable charges or expenses in reconnecting or reestablishing the service. 
(Code 1983, § 17-107; Ord. No. 275-A, 4-11-1989; Ord. No. 365-9-97, 10-9-1997; Ord. No. 481-12-05, 12-15-2005)
 
Sec. 42-120. Other fees or charges.
The city council or authority board of trustees, from time to time by ordinance, motion or resolution, shall have the power to establish rates and charges governing all aspects of utility services, including monthly service fees, connection fees and charges, and deposits. 
(Code 1983, § 17-108)
 
Sec. 42-121. Penalties for nonpayment, fine, termination.
(a)	For willful nonpayment of utility bills, the following punishment will result: 
(1)	Any person who willfully fails to pay for water or sewer or garbage services used, or made available, when the same has become overdue by at least 30 days, shall be guilty of an offense; 
(2)	Each day the person willfully fails to pay for garbage or sewer or water service so used or made available, shall be deemed to be a separate offense; 
(b)	Termination of water service for nonpayment of utility bill can also result. In addition to, and separate from the penalty noted in subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk is authorized to seek enforcement of payment for city garbage or water or sewer services used or made available. The city clerk is specifically authorized: 
(1)	To employ any civil remedy; or 
(2)	To terminate water service to the location, address, or dwelling unit in question. Termination of water services may not occur until at least ten days after the second notice is mailed to: 
a.	The occupant, at the address or location for which service has not been fully paid; 
b.	The property owner of record, according to the current tax roll of the county; and 
c.	The person who opened the water service account, if that party is not the occupant nor the property owner of record. 
(Prior Code, § 41-2.5; Code 1983, § 17-109; Ord. No. 275-A, 4-11-1989)
 
Sec. 42-122. Charge for nonpayment of utility bill and returned checks.
The board of trustees of the city utilities authority has established a fee as provided by the city fee schedule to be charged for nonpayment of all or any portion of a utility bill for services provided by the city utilities authority or for any returned check which was tendered as payment for such service. 
(Code 1983, § 17-110; Ord. No. 481-12-05, 12-15-2005)
 
Sec. 42-123. Water adjustments.
(a)	The board of trustees of the city utilities authority has established a procedure for credits for water leaks within the city. 
(1)	A one-time credit will be given for a water leak that has been repaired with a copy of an invoice for the repair being furnished to the utility clerk. 
(2)	An average of the months of December, January and February will be taken to figure the adjustment. 
(3)	The adjustments will only be made on the water portion of the bill. 
(4)	To ensure the adjustment falls within the correct billing cycle, adjustments will not be given for an additional two months after the leak has been repaired. 
(b)	The board of trustees of the city utilities authority has established a procedure for credit adjustments for watering yards within the city. 
(1)	Customers shall request the adjustment for watering lawns for the months of June, July and August to be eligible for the adjustment. 
(2)	An average of the months of December, January and February will be taken to figure the adjustment. 
(3)	The adjustments will only be made on the sewer portion of the bill. 
(Code 1983, § 17-111; Ord. No. 440-06-04, 6-17-2004)
 
Secs. 42-124—42-144. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. WATER CONSERVATION
 
Sec. 42-145. Water shortages, declaration of emergency.
(a)	Whenever an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water due to inadequate supply, limited treatment or distribution capacity or failure of equipment or material, the mayor is hereby authorized to restrict or prohibit the use of water from the city's water system. 
(b)	An emergency exists whenever the city manager reasonably determines that the city's water system is unable or will within 60 days become unable to supply the full commercial and domestic needs of the users thereof, including adequate fire protection. 
(Code 1983, § 17-216)
 
Sec. 42-146. Restriction on water use in emergency.
(a)	Upon the determination that such an emergency exists, the city manager shall issue a proclamation declaring the emergency and setting out with particularity an order restricting use of water from the city system. The order may: 
(1)	Restrict water usage during certain periods of the day or week or according to any orderly and nondiscriminatory scheme; and 
(2)	Prohibit usages not essential to public health and safety. The order may be revised from time to time as the manager deems necessary. 
(b)	A duly proclaimed emergency shall continue and the terms of the proclamation shall be in force for 30 days or until such time as the manager shall cause to be published a proclamation that the emergency has ended, whichever is shorter, unless the council by resolution approved by a majority of all its members votes to terminate the emergency and proclamation upon a different date. 
(Code 1983, § 17-217)
 
Sec. 42-147. Proclamation and notice of emergency.
(a)	The proclamation required by the preceding section shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or, if there is no such newspaper in which the proclamation may be published within 24 hours after the emergency arises, publication shall be by posting a copy of the proclamation in ten prominent places in the city. The emergency shall be in full force and effect upon publication. Substantial compliance with this section is sufficient to affect the emergency. 
(b)	Whenever a sudden or unexpected event so reduces the availability of water or water pressure as to create an immediate threat to public health or safety the notice of the proclamation may be given by any reasonable means, including electronic means. The emergency shall be in full force and effect upon such notice. However, if any means other than that required in subsection (a) of this section is used, the proclamation shall be republished in accordance with subsection (a) of this section within 24 hours of the first notice. 
(Code 1983, § 17-218)
 
Sec. 42-148. Grievances with water restrictions.
Any person feeling aggrieved by a proclamation of the city manager shall have the right to present the matter to the next regular or special meeting of the city council or to any emergency session called to discuss the water emergency. The council may exempt such aggrieved person, wholly or in part, from compliance with the proclamation order upon a showing that compliance creates an immediate threat to the person's health or safety. The ruling of the council by a majority vote of all its members shall be final and binding as to the continuance of any terms of the proclamation. Until and unless the action of the city manager is modified or revoked by action of the council, all water users shall be bound by the proclamation. 
(Code 1983, § 17-219)
 
Secs. 42-149—42-179. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SEWER
 
Sec. 42-180. Sewer system as public utility.
The operation of the city's sanitary sewer system is hereby declared to be a public utility and a proper source of city revenues and expenditures for the upkeep and maintenance of the sewer system. 
(Code 1983, § 17-301)
 
Sec. 42-181. Sewer rates.
The city council or authority board of trustees shall, from time to time by ordinance, motion or resolution, set or amend the fees and charges for sewer used by customers of the city's sewer system. A copy of the current fees or charges shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1983, § 17-302)
 
Sec. 42-182. Waste disposal program established; coordinator.
There is hereby established an industrial waste disposal program within the city. It shall be the policy of the city that no person shall discharge or allow to be discharged from an establishment under his control any effluent that would injure the health, safety, and convenience of its people and in any way jeopardize the water resources of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.1; Code 1983, § 17-303)
 
Sec. 42-183. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
City refers to the geographical area within the corporate limits of the city. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Health officer means the health officer for the county. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet in watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solutions. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer into which stormwaters, surface waters, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of public works of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.1; Code 1983, § 17-304)
 
Sec. 42-184. Use of public sewers required.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)	It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage. 
(d)	The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Prior Code, §§ 35-2.3—35-2.6; Code 1983, § 17-305)
 
Sec. 42-185. Private sewage disposal.
(a)	Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 42-184, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a permit from the office of the city clerk. The applicant shall supplement the application with any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee as provided in the city fee schedule shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)	No part of a small sewage treatment system shall be covered or concealed in any manner unless it has been inspected for compliance with the applicable provisions of this article by the director of the city-county health department or his authorized representative. No person shall use or operate any small sewage treatment system installed, constructed, repaired or extended under this article without it first having been inspected and approved by the director of the city-county health department, or the director of the state department of environmental quality. 
(d)	The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of environmental quality. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 22,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(f)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)	No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(h)	When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt. 
(i)	Breaks, leaks or other threat. 
(1)	All persons and contracting parties utilizing or connecting to the city's sewer system shall exercise reasonable measures to prevent a break in or a leak from any private sewer line and to expeditiously repair any such defective private sewer line and thereby prevent any threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public by maintaining all private sewer lines in watertight and non-leaking condition and in accordance with all city standards and specifications; 
(2)	The superintendent of public works is hereby authorized to declare a break in or a leak from a private sewer line, directly or indirectly connected to the city's sewer system or a break in or a leak from a private sewer line directly or indirectly connected to a private sewer system which causes a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, to be a public nuisance. Upon the declaration by the superintendent of public works that a public nuisance exists, the contracting party or a responsible person at the serviced premises shall be notified by the city that a public nuisance exists, that the nuisance must be remedied, and that any failure or refusal to make or to cause to be made the necessary repairs may result in the suspension of water service to all premises contributing to the public nuisance. 
(Prior Code, §§ 35-2.7—35-2.14; Code 1983, § 17-306; Ord. No. 327-9-94, 9-8-1994)
 
Sec. 42-186. Percolation test.
(a)	Prior to the time of installing or constructing any small sewage treatment system with a subsurface absorption system, the installer thereof shall submit to the city manager the results of a percolation test made at the location of the proposed installation and conducted by a qualified registered professional sanitarian or a registered professional engineer. 
(b)	The city manager may perform such percolation test upon request and upon payment of the fees as provided for herein for such test. 
(Code 1983, § 9-406; Ord. No. 132A, 11-13-1980)
 
Sec. 42-187. Building sewers and connections.
(a)	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)	There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)	For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)	For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as provided in the city fee schedule for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)	All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)	Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)	The size, slope alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF manual of practice shall apply. 
(g)	Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)	No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF manual of practice. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(j)	The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(k)	All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Prior Code, §§ 35-2.15—35-2.25; Code 1983, § 17-307)
 
Sec. 42-188. Stormwater discharge into sanitary sewer prohibited.
(a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)	Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Prior Code, §§ 35-2.26, 35-2.27; Code 1983, § 17-308)
 
Sec. 42-189. Other discharges prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(2)	Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer; 
(3)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; and 
(4)	Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.28; Code 1983, § 17-309)
 
Sec. 42-190. Discharges prohibited in certain instances.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(2)	Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(3)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent; 
(4)	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(5)	Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials; 
(6)	Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7)	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)	Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5; 
(9)	Materials which exert or cause: 
a.	Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate; 
b.	Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
c.	Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirement in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; or 
d.	Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein; and 
(10)	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.29; Code 1983, § 17-310)
 
Sec. 42-191. Unlawful discharges, actions of city.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 42-190, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)	Reject the wastes; 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or 
(4)	Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this Code. If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.30; Code 1983, § 17-311)
 
Sec. 42-192. Interceptors required for greases and oil.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.31; Code 1983, § 17-312)
 
Sec. 42-193. Preliminary treatment at owner's expense.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.32; Code 1983, § 17-313)
 
Sec. 42-194. Buildings requiring manhole covers.
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.33; Code 1983, § 17-314)
 
Sec. 42-195. Samplings and tests of industrial wastes.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.34; Code 1983, § 17-315)
 
Sec. 42-196. Rate schedule for sewer use.
(a)	Rates shall be effected for residential or average strength sewage shall be as adopted by the city council by motion or resolution. 
(b)	The user charges shall not be assessed to taxable property only but to all users so that a fair and equitable revenue system can be generated to ensure proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among all users. 
(c)	The user charges shall be assessed to ensure sufficient revenues to offset all actual costs. Residential users shall pay charges as shown above. In addition, all user charges shall be levied in the following ways: 
(1)	A user charge as shown above shall be assessed to any user shown to be discharging any pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of management of the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works. No toxic pollutants shall be discharged as discussed in this article. 
(2)	A user charge shall be assessed equally among all users when extraneous flows are not directly attributable to any particular user; 
(3)	User charges assessed and collected which are in excess of any charges needed to pay all operation and maintenance (replacement equipment costs included) costs shall be carried forward into the next year's operation and maintenance budget with appropriate rate adjustments provided to all users; and 
(4)	For the first year of operation, operation and maintenance charge shall be based upon past experience for any existing collection and treatment works or by some other method that can be demonstrated to be appropriate to the level and type of services provided. 
(d)	System will be reviewed biannually and revised periodically to reflect actual treatment works O&M cost, to maintain the proportionate distribution of O&M cost among users, to generate sufficient revenue for total O&M, and to apply excess revenues collected from a class to the cost of that class for the next year. 
(e)	Records of all user charges, operation and maintenance costs, shall be maintained as necessary to document compliance with all federal regulations applicable to the operation and maintenance of the collection and treatment works. 
(f)	All users shall be notified at least annually of any rate and/or portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater collection and treatment works. 
(g)	This user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the city and users (including industrial users, special districts, other municipalities, or federal agencies or installations) which are inconsistent with the requirements of the act or applicable federal regulations. 
(h)	The user charge rate schedule herein is patterned after model 1 of appendix B, 40 CFR 35 of the federal regulations. 
(i)	These user charges shall be reviewed at least biennially and updated as required to maintain sufficient funds to operate and maintain the collection and treatment system. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.36; Code 1983, § 17-316)
 
Sec. 42-197. Protection of system from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.37; Code 1983, § 17-317)
 
Sec. 42-198. Inspectors may enter all properties for inspection.
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways of facilities for waste treatment. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.38; Code 1983, § 17-318)
 
Sec. 42-199. Inspectors are responsible for their own safety.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 42-198, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by section 42-194. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.39; Code 1983, § 17-319)
 
Sec. 42-200. Inspectors may enter city easements.
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.40; Code 1983, § 17-320)
 
Sec. 42-201. Reasonable time to abate violation.
(a)	Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 42-196 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)	Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 35-2.41; Code 1983, § 17-321)
 
Sec. 42-202. Heavy metals and toxic materials.
(a)	The following concentrations of toxic substances may not be exceeded in the receiving stream and are included herein as a guideline for discharge to the collection system: 
Element 	mg/L 
Arsenic 	0.05 
Barium 	5.0 
Boron 	1.0 
Cadmium 	0.01 hard 
0.04 soft 
Chromium 	0.5 
Copper 	0.05 soft 
Lead 	0.1 
Cobalt 	0.5 
Mercury 	0.002 
Nickel 	1.0 
Selenium 	0.05 
Silver 	0.1 
Zinc 	0.5 
Iron 	3.0 
Aluminum 	1.0 
Manganese 	0.5 

(b)	Exceptions may be spcifically granted subsequent to receipt and review and approval of certain information by both the city and the state department of health. The above list is not necessarily complete and each proposed industrial waste discharge must be evaluated by each municipality to determine if a problem may arise with the proposed discharge. The municipality is responsible for the adequate treatment of all wastes accepted into the sanitary sewer system. Additional substances such as polychlorinated biphenols, cyanides, phenols and other toxic materials may not be discharged into public sewers in such an amount to cause a detrimental impact on the waste treatment process or on the receiving stream. 
(c)	While the above values reflect in-stream standards, it is also essential that no impact occur upon the various portions of the waste treatment process. 
(d)	It is anticipated that the city will describe to the state department of health the mechanism by which the city will enforce this portion of the chapter. 
(e)	In addition to the requirements established in section 42-190, no toxic metals or materials (as listed above) shall be discharged or shall cause to be discharged into the collection and treatment system in either concentrated or diluted form. 
(Code 1983, § 17-322)
 
Chapter 44 ZONING, PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 44-1. Purpose.
The regulations contained herein are necessary to encourage the most appropriate uses of land; to maintain and stabilize the value of property; to reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public health; to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent undue concentration of population; and to create a stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public utilities and other facilities. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(Prior Code, § 45-1.2; Code 1983, § 12-202; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-2. Nature and application.
(a)	This chapter classifies and regulates the use of land, buildings, and structures within the corporate limits of the city as hereinafter set forth. The regulations contained herein are necessary to promote the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants by dividing the city into zoning districts and regulating therein the use of the land and the use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, the location of buildings, and the density of population. 
(b)	Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, no land shall be used and no building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in conformity with the regulations contained herein. 
(Prior Code, § 45-1.3; Code 1983, § 12-203; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-3. Interpretation of words and terms.
(a)	Interpretation. For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the building or premises. 
Accessory use means a use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same lot therewith. 
Advertising sign or structure means any cloth, card, paper, metal, glass, wooden, plastic, plaster, stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any character whatsoever, including a statuary, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building or structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, and otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure shall be determined as the area of the largest cross section of such structure. Neither directional, warning nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise or materials being offered for sale shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of this chapter. 
Alley means a minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
Apartment house. See definition of Dwelling, multiple. 
Automobile means a self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people including, but not limited to, the following: Passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters, and motorcycles. 
Basement means a story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
Boardinghouse means a dwelling other than a hotel where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more, but not exceeding 20 persons on a weekly or monthly basis. 
Building means a structure intended for shelter, housing or enclosure for persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated, shall be deemed a separate building. 
Building height means the vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
Building, main, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
Childcare center means any place, home or institution which receives three or more children under the age of 16 years, and not of common parentage, for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of this state, custody of children fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes or other church activities. 
Coverage means the lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs. 
District means any section of the city for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform for each class or kind of building therein. 
Dwelling means any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families, but not including trailer homes. (See definition of Trailer.) 
Dwelling, multiple, means a detached dwelling designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of hotels or motels. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached dwelling designed to be occupied by one family. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a detached dwelling designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not to exceed five persons not all related by blood or marriage, occupying a boardinghouse or lodginghouse, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. 
Garage apartment means a dwelling unit for one family erected above a private garage. 
Garage, parking, means any building, or portion thereof, used for the storage of four or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided is incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities are not provided. 
Garage, private, means an accessory building or a part of a main building used for storage purposes only for automobiles used solely by the occupants and their guests of the building to which it is accessory. 
Garage, repair, means a building in which are provided facilities for the care, servicing, repair, or equipping of automobiles. 
Gasoline service or filling stations means any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels, or other automobile accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but not including painting, major repair or automatic automobile washing or the sale of butane or propane fuels. 
Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings, and including, but not limited to, the following spaces: 
(1)	Basements; 
(2)	Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; 
(3)	Floor space for mechanical equipment with structural headroom of seven feet or more; 
(4)	Penthouses; 
(5)	Attic space providing headroom of seven feet or more; 
(6)	Interior balconies, mezzanines and enclosed covered porches and enclosed steps; and 
(7)	Accessory uses in enclosed covered space, but not including space used for off-street parking. 
Home occupation means any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of a dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings; provided that no training in merchandise is carried on and in connection with which there is no display of merchandise or advertising sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate not more than two square feet in area attached to the main or accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is customary for purely domestic or household purposes. A beauty or barbershop, tearoom or restaurant, rest home or clinic, doctor's or dentist's office, childcare center, tourist home, or cabinet, metal or auto repair shop shall not be deemed a home occupation. 
Hotel means a building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six or more sleeping rooms occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including trailer court or camp, sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed under restraint. 
Kennel means any lot or premises on which are kept five or more dogs, more than six months of age. 
Lot means any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building, or a group of main buildings, and accessory buildings and uses, including such open spaces as are required by this chapter and other laws or ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a street. 
Lot, area, means the total area measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines. 
Lot, corner, means a lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
Lot, depth, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot, frontage, means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot. 
Medical facilities.
Convalescent, rest or nursing homes means a health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation. 
Dental clinic or medical clinic means a facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients, provided that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions. 
Dental office or doctor's office means same as dental or medical clinic. 
Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
Public health center means a facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health services including related facilities such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection therewith. 
Sanatorium means an institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment and recuperation making use of natural therapeutic agents. 
Non-conforming use means a structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Parking space means a permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile together with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an automobile. 
Roominghouse means a building where lodging only is provided for compensation to three or more, but not exceeding 20 persons. A building which has accommodations for more than 20 persons shall be defined as a "hotel" under the terms of this chapter. 
Self-service laundry or dry-cleaning establishment means any attended or unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance which is operated primarily by the customer. 
Stable, private, means a stable with a capacity for not more than two horses or mules. 
Stable, public, means a stable, other than a private stable, with a capacity for more than two horses or mules. 
Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Story, half, means a space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
Street means any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street, intersecting, means a street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Tourist court means an area containing one or more buildings designed or intended to be used as temporary sleeping facilities of one or more transient families and intended primarily for automobile transients. 
Tourist home means a dwelling occupied as a permanent residence by an owner or renter in which sleeping accommodations in not more than four rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation. 
Trailer court ormanufactured home park means a parcel of land under single ownership which has been designed or improved or is intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one or more trailer houses or manufactured homes. 
Trailer, hauling, means a vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
Trailer home ormanufactured home means a portable or mobile living unit used or designed for human occupancy on a permanent basis. 
Trailer or manufactured home space means a plot of ground within a trailer court designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home. 
Trailer, travel or camping, means a portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants, and not constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants, and containing less than 175 square feet of floor area. 
Yard means an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter that an accessory building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
Yard, front, means a yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the main building. 
Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Yard, side, means a yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the main building. 
(Prior Code, § 45-2.1; Code 1983, § 12-204; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-4—44-24. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PLANNING COMMISSION
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 44-25. City planning commission, creation and membership.
A city planning commission is hereby created. It shall consist of five appointive members, all of whom shall be citizens of the city. The mayor shall serve as ex-officio member of the commission. The five appointive members shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the council. Each appointed member shall serve for a term of three years, or until his successor takes office. of the original appointive members, however, one shall serve a term of one year; two shall serve a term of two years and two shall serve a term of three years. Thereafter, the terms of members shall be three years. Vacancies occurring other than by expiration of the term shall be filled only for the unexpired terms by the mayor with confirmation of the council. The members shall serve without compensation. The council may remove a member of the planning commission only for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. Members shall be appointed solely with reference to their fitness and not party affiliation. Whenever a member of the planning commission is absent from more than one-half of all meetings of the planning commission, regular and special, held within any period of four consecutive months, the member shall thereupon cease to hold office. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.1; Code 1983, § 12-101; Ord. No. 214-A, 8-9-1984; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-26. Quorum.
Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; provided, however, that no action shall be taken which is binding upon the commission, unless concurred in by not less than a majority of all members comprising the commission. 
(Code 1983, § 12-102; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-27. Organization, meetings, rules.
The commission shall elect a chairman and a secretary and may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary. The terms of the chairman and secretary shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transactions of business and keep a record of its regulations, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Prior Code, §§ 30-1.2—30-1.4; Code 1983, § 12-103; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-28. Personnel hiring authority.
The planning commission may recommend such employees as it deems necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. The commission may also recommend to the city council the employment of city planners, engineers, architects and consultants for such other services as it may require. The city council may provide funds for the salaries of employees and the expenses of the commission as for other functions of the city government. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.7; Code 1983, § 12-104; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-29. General advisory duties of commission.
The commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the plan. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish the commission within a reasonable time such available information as it may require for its work. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.8; Code 1983, § 12-105; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-30. Commission may enter land.
The commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.9; Code 1983, § 12-106; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-31. General powers of commission.
In general, the commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning and carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.10; Code 1983, § 12-107; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-32. Subdivision of land.
The commission may prepare and recommend to the council for adoption rules and regulations governing subdivision of land within the city limits. All plans, plats and replats of land laid out in two or more lots, plats or parcels, or streets or alleys, or other ways intended to be dedicated for public use shall be first submitted to the commission for its recommendations. The commission shall check the proposed dedication or subdivision to insure compliance with the comprehensive plan. The disapproval of any plan, plat or replat by the city shall be deemed the refusal of the dedication thereon. No plat or replat of subdivision of land, or dedication of street or alley, or other easement shall be entitled to record unless it bears the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, certifying the approval and acceptance by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 30-120; Code 1983, § 12-116; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-33. Zoning commission, regulations.
(a)	The planning commission shall also act as the zoning commission, which shall have the power to prepare and recommend to the council, for adoption a zoning plan to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, the size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the location and use of building structures and land for trade, industry, residences or other purposes. 
(b)	The commission may recommend the division of the city into districts of such number, size and area that may be deemed best suited to carry out the zoning plan. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of building throughout the district, but the regulations from one district may differ from those of other districts. Nothing in this subsection (b) shall be construed to apply to telephone exchange buildings. 
(Prior Code, §§ 30-1.21, 30-1.22; Code 1983, § 12-117; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-34. Purpose of zoning plan.
Zoning regulations shall be made in accordance with the comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to promote health and the general welfare, to promote adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and the public requirements, such regulations to be made with a reasonable consideration among other things as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a view to conserving the value of buildings, and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.23; Code 1983, § 12-118; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-35—44-56. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
 
Sec. 44-57. Adoption of plan.
The commission shall have the power and duty to prepare and recommend to the council for adoption a comprehensive plan for the physical development and betterment of the city, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.11; Code 1983, § 12-108; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-58. Purposes of plan.
The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provisions for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, and wise and efficient expenditure of public funds. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.12; Code 1983, § 12-109; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-59. Contents of plan.
The comprehensive plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of the territory, including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces, and the general location of public buildings and other public property; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of property, as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.13; Code 1983, § 12-110; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-60. Adoption of parts of plan may be recommended.
As the work of making the whole comprehensive plan progresses, the planning commission may recommend to the city council from time to time adopting and publishing parts thereof, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.14; Code 1983, § 12-111; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-61. Recommending amendments to plan.
The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend to the city council amendments, extensions or additions to the plan. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.15; Code 1983, § 12-112; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-62. Cooperation with county.
The city planning commission may cooperate with the county planning commission in connection with planning for areas beyond the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.17; Code 1983, § 12-113; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-63. Procedure for adoption of plan.
The city council may adopt the plan as a whole by a single ordinance, or may, by successive ordinances, adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographic sections or divisions of the city, or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Before the city planning commission recommends to the city council the adoption of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension or addition, the planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The adoption of the plan or of any part or amendment or extension or addition shall be by ordinance of the city council carried by the affirmative votes of a majority of the city council. The ordinance shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman of the commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the city council for the approval of the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.18; Code 1983, § 12-114; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-64. Approval by commission of improvements.
Whenever the city council shall have adopted the comprehensive plan of the city or of one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, or public building or structure, or other governmental enterprise shall be constructed or authorized in the city, or in such planned section and district until the location, character or extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the commission; provided, that in case of disapproval, the commission shall communicate its reason to the city council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of a majority of its membership. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1.19; Code 1983, § 12-115; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-65—44-86. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
 
Sec. 44-87. Creation and authority.
There is hereby created a zoning board of adjustment consisting of five members, citizens of the city, each to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. For the first appointments under the provisions of this article, however, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year; two members shall be appointed for a term of two years; and two members shall be appointed for a term of three years. All appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three years. The board shall elect a chairman from its membership to serve for a term of two years. Whenever a member of the board of adjustment is absent from more than one-half of all meetings of the board of adjustment, regular and special, held within any period of four consecutive months, the member shall thereupon cease to hold office. 
(Prior Code, § 45-7.1, 45-7.2; Code 1983, § 12-121; Ord. No. 215-A, 8-9-1984; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. of 11-4-2019(1) , § 1)
State law reference(s)—Creation and powers of board of adjustment, 11 O.S. §§ 44-101—44-110. 
 
Sec. 44-88. Meetings and procedures.
The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and require the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. The concurring vote of three members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant or any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance or code, or to affect any variation in such ordinance or code. 
(Prior Code, § 45-7.3; Code 1983, § 12-122; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-89. Appeals.
(a)	Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the city clerk notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor, and by paying a filing fee as provided in the city fee schedule at the office of the city clerk at the time the notice is filed. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)	An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on the cause shown. 
(c)	The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Prior Code, § 45-7.4; Code 1983, § 12-123; Ord. No. 200-A, 4-12-1984; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-90. Powers to decide appeals.
The board of adjustment shall have the powers to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative officer in the enforcement of the zoning regulations set forth in section 44-1 et seq. 
(Prior Code, § 45-7.5; Code 1983, § 12-124; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-91. Powers to grant variances.
The board of adjustment shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of the zoning regulations in section 44-1 et seq. as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning regulations, will in any individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the zoning regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of adjustment that: 
(1)	At the time of the original adoption of the regulations there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property; 
(2)	The strict application of the zoning regulations to this particular and exceptional piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed by the owner or developer; 
(3)	Such conditions are peculiar only to the particular piece of property involved and not generally prevalent in the area; and 
(4)	Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the zoning regulations, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by the zoning regulations set forth in section 44-1 et seq. 
Provided further that no relief shall be granted if it results in the location of a free-standing manufactured home outside of a manufactured home park or a R-5 zoning district. 
(Prior Code, § 45-7.5; Code 1983, § 12-125; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-92. Powers relative to exceptions.
The board shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which the board is required to pass under this chapter. Upon appeal, the board is empowered to permit the following exceptions: 
(1)	To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record; 
(2)	To interpret the provisions of this article where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map fixing the several districts, which map is on file in the office of the city clerk; 
(3)	To grant exceptions to the off-street parking requirements set forth in section 44-1 et seq. when it is determined that the size and shape of the lot to be built on is such that off-street parking provisions could not be complied with, and that the proposed use will not create undue traffic congestion in the adjacent streets; and 
(4)	To review the uses listed in the specific district regulations as "Uses Permitted on Review." These are so classified because they are more intensely dominant in the area in which they are located than other uses permitted in the district; however, the nature of such uses may make it desirable that they be permitted to locate therein. 
(Prior Code, § 45-7.5; Code 1983, § 12-126; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-93. Uses permitted on review.
The following procedure is established to integrate properly the uses permitted on review with the other land uses located in the district, pursuant to the board's powers granted in the preceding section. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedures: 
(1)	An application shall be filed with the board of adjustment for review. The application shall show the location and intended use of the site, the names of all the property owners and existing land uses within 300 feet, and any other material pertinent to the request which the board of adjustment may require, all as required by applicable state law; 
(2)	The board of adjustment shall hold one or more public hearings. Notice shall be published and mailed to property owners at least ten days before the hearing as required by applicable state law; and 
(3)	The board of adjustment within 45 days of the date of application, shall study the effect of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities and other matters pertaining to the general welfare, and authorize or deny the issuance of a permit for the use of land or buildings as requested. 
(Prior Code, § 45-7.5; Code 1983, § 12-127; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-94. Housing project reviews.
The board may also permit the exceptions for a housing project consisting of a group of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements of the zoning regulations to the individual buildings in such housing project. The application of the zoning requirements to such housing project may be changed, in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a density of land use no higher than allowed, and a standard of open space at least as high as required by the zoning regulations in the district in which the proposed project is to be located. In no case shall a use or building height or density of population be permitted which is less than the requirement of the district in which the housing project is to be located. 
(Prior Code, § 45.7.5; Code 1983, § 12-128; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-95. Exercise of powers.
In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. In considering all appeals from rulings made under this chapter, the board shall, in making its findings on any specific case, determine the effect of the proposed change upon the supply of light and air to adjacent property, upon the congestion of the public streets, upon the public safety from fire and other hazards, upon the established property values within the surrounding area, and upon other factors relating to the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and general welfare of the people of the city. Every ruling made upon any appeal to the board shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact based upon the testimony received at the hearing afforded by the board, and shall specify the reason for granting or denying the appeal. 
(Prior Code, § 45.7.5; Code 1983, § 12-129; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-96. Appeal to district court.
(a)	An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the board of adjustment may be taken by any person, jointly or severally aggrieved, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city to the district court by filing notice of appeal with the city clerk and with the board of adjustment within ten days from the filing of the decision of the board, which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, the board shall transmit to the court clerk the original or certified copy of all the papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the board. 
(b)	An appeal to the district court from the board of adjustment stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the chairman of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is taken certifies to the court clerk, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the district court or superior court upon application or notice to the administrative officer in charge of the enforcement of the terms and provisions of this title, and upon notice to the chairman of the board of adjustment from which the appeal is taken, and upon due cause being shown, the court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review. 
(Prior Code, § 45-7.6; Code 1983, § 12-130; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-97—44-120. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. ZONING AMENDMENTS
 
Sec. 44-121. Amendment procedure.
The council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulations and districts herein established. Every such proposed amendment shall be referred by the council to the city planning and zoning commission for report and recommendation prior to amendment action. In case, however, of a protest against such change, signed not less than ten days prior to the public hearing, by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by the owners of 50 percent or more of the area of the lots immediately abutting on any side of the territory included in such change, or separated therefrom only by an alley or street less than 300 feet wide, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fifths of all of the members of the council. It is the duty of the council to vote upon such amendment within 90 days of the filing of same by the petitioners with the city clerk. If any area is hereafter transferred to another district by changing the district boundaries, or amendments as provided in this section the provisions of this chapter or amendments thereto with regard to buildings or premises existing at the time of the passage of this chapter shall apply to buildings or premises existing in such transferred area at the time of the passage of such amendment. 
(Prior Code, § 45-8.7; Code 1983, § 12-380; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-122. Application for amendments.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to have any land or premises rezoned shall make application therefor in writing to the city zoning commission, setting forth the legal description of the property to be rezoned, and the street address or approximate location within the city, the names and addresses of the owners thereof, the use district in which it is to be rezoned, the present use of the premises, and the intended use thereof; there shall accompany the application a plot plan, showing the boundaries of the property to be rezoned, and the location of any building or buildings thereon, or to be erected thereon for the new use, and a list of the names and addresses of all owners of the property within a 300 foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the subject property, either certified to by bonded abstractor, or verified under oath, as to the correctness thereof, and deposited with the city clerk of the city, the following fee: A non-refundable filing fee as provided in the city fee schedule plus a deposit to be applied to the actual costs of the city; provided that any portion of the deposit exceeding the actual costs will be refunded to applicant. 
(Code 1983, § 12-381; Ord. No. 129A, 9-11-1980; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-123. Public notice and public hearing practices; planning commission.
(a)	The planning commission shall give 15 days' notice of a public hearing on a proposed zoning ordinance or map amendment by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall include a map of the area to be affected which indicates street names or numbers, streams, or other significant landmarks in the area. 
(b)	In addition, 20 days' notice of public hearing shall be given by mailing notice to all owners of property located within 300 feet from the exterior boundary of the properties proposed for rezoning. The notice shall contain: 
(1)	Date, time and place of the public hearing; 
(2)	Legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location of the property; and 
(3)	Present zoning district classification of the property and the proposed zoning district classification. 
(c)	If the city council proposes zoning reclassifications in order to revise its comprehensive plan or official map or to identify areas which require specific land use development due to topography, geography, or other distinguishing features, including, but not limited to, floodplain, drainage, historic preservation, and blighted areas, in addition to the notice requirements provided for in subsection (a) of this section, a sign may be posted on designated properties within the area affected by the proposed zoning reclassification. The sign and the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public street or streets toward which it faces. Such notice shall state: 
(1)	The date, time, and place of the public hearing; 
(2)	Who will conduct the public hearing; 
(3)	The desired zoning classification; 
(4)	The proposed use of the property; and 
(5)	Other information as may be necessary to provide adequate and timely public notice. 
(d)	Notice of public hearing involving a proposed map amendment shall confer authority on the planning commission to consider a reclassification of the subject property to a more restrictive zoning district at the time of public hearing. 
(e)	Parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before any regulation, restriction or district boundary shall become effective. The public hearing shall be conducted by the city planning commission, at which time the commission shall make a recommendation thereon which shall be forwarded to the city council, as prescribed below. 
(f)	After notice and public hearing, the planning commission shall vote to: 
(1)	Recommend to the city council that the application be approved as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or 
(2)	Recommend to the city council that the application be denied. 
(g)	An application recommended for approval or approval subject to modification shall be transmitted, with the report and recommendations of the planning commission, to the city council within 30 days from the date of planning commission action. 
(h)	In the event the planning commission arrives at a tie vote, the application shall be transmitted with a report and notation of the tie vote, to the city council within 30 days from the date of the planning commission action. 
(i)	An application recommended for denial, shall not be considered further, unless the applicant within 30 days from the date of the planning commission action files a written request with the city clerk's office for a hearing by the city council. If the applicant is the city, then the matter shall be sent to the city council. Upon notice of such request, the planning commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report and recommendations to the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 45-8.9; Code 1983, § 12-382; Ord. No. 277-A, 5-11-1988; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-124. City council procedure.
(a)	Upon receipt of planning commission recommendations for approval on any zoning matter, the city council may act on the same with no additional public notice. 
(b)	Additional public notice of a public hearing before the city council shall be given if: 
(1)	There is a modification of the rezoning proposal as stated in the notice given prior to the planning commission public hearing; 
(2)	An applicant whose request was denied by the planning commission files, within 30 days of the date of the planning commission decision, a written request with the city clerk's office seeking a hearing before the city council; or 
(3)	The planning commission arrived at a tie vote. 
(c)	Public notice shall be given by the city clerk's office for those items noted in subsection (b) of this section, in the manner of publication and mailed notice as directed by section 44-121. 
(d)	Written protests against proposed changes shall be filed with the city clerk's office at least three days before the date of the public hearing before the city council. 
(e)	If protests are filed by: 
(1)	The owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots included in a proposed change; or 
(2)	The owners of 50 percent or more of the area of the lots within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the territory included in a proposed change; 
Then the proposed change or amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fifths of the total membership of the city council, present and absent. 
(Prior Code, § 45-8.10; Code 1983, § 12-383; Ord. No. 277-A, 5-11-1988; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-125. Effect of denial of application.
(a)	In the event an application for amendment of the official zoning map or an amendment to the regulations is denied, the application shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one year subsequent to such denial. 
(b)	A new application affecting or including all or part of the same property must be substantially different from the application denied, in the opinion of the chairman of the planning commission, to be eligible for consideration within less than one year of the denial of the original application. 
(Code 1983, § 12-384; Ord. No. 277-A, 5-11-1988; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-126. Vacation of public easements.
Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the portion vacated shall have the same district classification as the land to which the vacated portion accrues. 
(Prior Code, § 45-8.11; Code 1983, § 12-385; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-127—44-150. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 44-151. Number of districts.
For the purpose of this article, the following districts are hereby established for the city: 
(1)	Agricultural district: A-1 Suburban Agricultural District. 
(2)	Residential districts.
a.	R-1 One-Family Residential District. 
b.	R-2 Two-Family Residential District. 
c.	R-3 General Residential District. 
d.	R-4 Medium-High Density Residential District. 
e.	R-5 Single-Family Manufactured Home District. 
(3)	Commercial districts.
a.	C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
b.	C-2 Neighborhood Shopping Center District. 
c.	C-3 General Commercial District. 
(4)	Industrial districts.
a.	I-1 Restricted Industrial District. 
b.	I-2 Light Industrial District. 
c.	I-3 Heavy Industrial District. 
(5)	Floodplain district. The city is hereby divided into districts as shown on the zoning districts map filed with the city clerk. The zoning districts map and all of the explanatory material thereon is hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 45-3.1; Code 1983, § 12-205; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999; Ord. No. 411-02-02, 6-20-2002)
 
Secs. 44-152—44-170. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
 
Sec. 44-171. A-1 Suburban Agricultural District, general description.
This district is intended to provide a location for the land situated on the fringe of the urban area that is used for agricultural purposes, but which will be undergoing urbanization in the near future. Many tracts in this district will be in close proximity to residential and commercial uses. Therefore, the agricultural activities conducted in this district should not be detrimental to urban land uses. It is not intended that this district provide a location for a lower standard of residential, commercial, or industrial development than is authorized in other districts. The types of uses, required area, and the intensity of use of land permitted in this district is designed to encourage and protect agricultural uses so long as the land therein is devoted primarily to agriculture. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.1; Code 1983, § 12-210; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-172. Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an A-1 Suburban Agricultural District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Detached one-family dwelling. 
(2)	Church. 
(3)	Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as ordinarily given in the public schools and having no rooms regularly used for housing or sleeping. 
(4)	Agricultural crops. When agricultural real property is used for the growing of hay the hay shall be cut at least once by August 31 every year. 
(5)	The raising of farm animals in accordance with the ordinances of the city but not the operation of commercial feed pens for livestock. The raising or keeping of swine (hogs) is prohibited. 
(6)	Oil well or gas well, including the drilling thereof. 
(7)	All of the following uses: 
a.	Country club and golf course. 
b.	Home occupation. 
c.	Library. 
d.	Park or playground or public recreation area. 
e.	Plant nursery. 
(8)	Transportation, pipeline and utility easements and rights-of-way. 
(9)	Bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 40 square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired or sold. 
(10)	Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building, including barns, sheds, and other farm buildings, and private garages and accessory buildings which are a part of the main building. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.2; Code 1983, § 12-211; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 377-05-98, 5-14-1998; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-173. Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the board of adjustment in accordance with the provision contained in this section: 
(1)	Airport or landing field. 
(2)	Cemetery. 
(3)	Home beauty shop located in a dwelling provided such shop is conducted within the main dwelling, and is operated only by the inhabitants thereof and does not exceed one operator. The use shall be conducted in such a way that it is clearly incidental to the dwelling use and shall not change the character thereof. No sign shall be permitted except one nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area, attached to the main building. 
(4)	Kennel. 
(5)	Private marina, boat docks, golf course or driving range, or other private outdoor recreation activity. 
(6)	Public stable or riding academy. 
(7)	Radio and television stations and transmission towers. 
(8)	Sewage lagoons. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.3; Code 1983, § 12-212; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-174. Area regulations.
(a)	Front yard. All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following front yard requirements: 
(1)	All buildings shall set back from a state or federal highway, county highway or section line road a minimum of 25 feet from the right-of-way line or 75 feet from the center line of the right-of-way easement, whichever is greater. 
(2)	On all public roads or streets other than federal, state or county highways and section line roads, all buildings shall set back a minimum of 25 feet from the right-of-way line or 55 feet from the center line of the right-of-way easement, whichever is greater. 
(3)	If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than six feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by existing buildings, but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
(4)	When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be complied with on both streets. 
(b)	Side yard. For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than eight feet or dwellings of one story, and of not less than 12 feet for dwellings of more than one story, except as hereinafter provided in section 44-122. 
(1)	For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than eight feet; provided, however, that unattached one story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located more than 90 feet behind the front lot line. 
(2)	For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
(3)	Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 25 feet. 
(c)	Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building. 
(d)	Lot width. For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of 80 feet at the front building line and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(e)	Intensity of use.
(1)	For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than two acres. 
(2)	For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas required in article XII of this chapter. 
(f)	Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the lot area on interior lots, and 30 percent of the lot area on corner lots; accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.4; Code 1983, § 12-213; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-175. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height except as provided in section 44-295. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.5; Code 1983, § 12-214; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Secs. 44-176—44-203. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 44-204. R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District—General description.
The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area. These residential areas are intended to be defined and protected from encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different uses. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.11; Code 1983, § 12-230; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-205. Same—Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an R-1 Single-Family Dwelling District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Detached one-family dwelling. 
(2)	Churches, but not including missions or revival tents or arbors. 
(3)	Public school or school offering general educational courses the same as ordinarily given in public schools and having no rooms regularly used for housing and sleeping. 
(4)	Public park and playground. 
(5)	Library. 
(6)	Agricultural crops but not the raising of farm animals or poultry. 
(7)	Home occupation. 
(8)	Transportation and utility easements, alleys, and rights-of-way. 
(9)	Accessory buildings which are not a part of a main building, including one private garage, or accessory buildings which are a part of a main building, including one private garage. 
(10)	A temporary bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of a building or premises, which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises is leased hired or sold. 
(11)	A church bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in area, located behind the front building line on the same lot with the church building. 
(12)	Temporary building of the construction industry which is incidental to the erection of buildings permitted in this district, and which shall be removed when construction work is completed. 
(13)	Parking lot required to serve the uses permitted in this district. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.12; Code 1983, § 12-231; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-206. Same—Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the board of adjustment in accordance with provisions contained in this section: 
(1)	Golf course. 
(2)	Municipal use, public building and public utility. 
(3)	Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection therewith. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.13; Code 1983, § 12-231; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-207. Same—Area regulations.
All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements: 
(1)	Front yard.
a.	The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.	If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than six feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
c.	When a lot has double frontage the front yard requirements shall be complied with on both streets. 
(2)	Side yard.
a.	For dwellings on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than five feet for dwellings of one story, and not less than ten feet for dwellings more than one story, except as provided in section 44-334. 
b.	For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located more than 90 feet behind the front lot line. 
c.	For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
d.	Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 25 feet. 
(3)	Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building. 
(4)	Lot width. For dwellings there shall be a minimum lot width of 50 feet at the front building line and such lot shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 35 feet in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
(5)	Intensity of use.
a.	For each single-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall be a lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet in the R-1 single-family dwelling district. 
b.	For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas required in article XII of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall not be less than 21,000 square feet. 
(6)	Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the lot area on interior lots, and 30 percent of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.12; Code 1983, § 12-233; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999; Ord. No. 2020-07-17 , § 1, 7-16-2020; Ord. No. 2021-02-18-2 , § 1, 2-18-2021; Ord. No. 2021-04-15 , § 1, 4-15-2021)
 
Sec. 44-208. Same—Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height except as provided in section 44-295. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.10; Code 1983, § 12-234; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-209. R-2 Two-Family Dwelling District—General description.
This is a residential district to provide for a slightly higher population density but with basic restrictions similar to the R-1 district. The principal use of land is for single-family and two-family dwellings and related recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide a balanced and attractive residential area. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through the consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different uses. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.16; Code 1983, § 12-240; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-210. Same—Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an R-2 Two-Family Residential District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Any uses permitted in R-1 One-Family Residential District. 
(2)	Two-family dwelling or a single-family dwelling and a garage apartment. 
(3)	Accessory building and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.17; Code 1983, § 12-241; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-211. Same—Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the board of adjustment in accordance with provisions contained in this section: 
(1)	Any use permitted on review in R-1 One-Family Residential District. 
(2)	Childcare center. 
(3)	Home beauty shop located in a dwelling provided such shop is conducted within the main dwelling, and is operated only by the inhabitants thereof and does not exceed two operators. The use shall be conducted in such a way that it is clearly incidental to the dwelling use and shall not change the character thereof. No sign shall be permitted except one nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding two square feet in area, attached to the main building. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.18; Code 1983, § 12-242; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-212. Same—Area regulations.
All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements: 
(1)	Front yard.
a.	The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.	If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than six feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
c.	When a lot has double frontage the front yard requirements shall be complied with on both streets; 
(2)	Side yard.
a.	For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than eight feet for dwellings of one story, and of not less than ten feet for dwellings of more than one story, except as hereinafter provided in section 44-334. 
b.	For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located more than 90 feet behind the front lot line. 
c.	For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
d.	Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 25 feet. 
(3)	Rear yard. For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of a single-family dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building. 
(4)	Lot width. For single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings or single-family dwellings and garage apartments, there shall be a minimum lot width of 60 feet at the front building line and such lot shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(5)	Intensity of use.
a.	For each single-family dwelling and accessory buildings there, shall be a lot area of not less than 6,600 square feet. 
b.	For each two-family dwelling and accessory building, there shall be a lot area of not less than 7,600 square feet. A garage apartment located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling shall have the same area requirements as a two-family dwelling, and for purposes of intensity shall constitute a two-family dwelling. A garage apartment shall not be located on the same lot with a two-family dwelling. 
c.	For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas required in article XII of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall not be less than 21,000 square feet. 
(6)	Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 30 percent of the lot area on interior lots, and 30 percent of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.19; Code 1983, § 12-243; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-213. Same—Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height except as provided in section 44-335. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.20; Code 1983, § 12-244; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-214. R-3 General Residential District—General description.
This is a residential district to provide for medium and high population density. The principal use of land may range from single-family to multiple-family and garden apartment uses. Certain uses are permitted which are more compatible functionally with intensive residential uses than with commercial uses. The recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area are included. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each use permitted in the district. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.21; Code 1983, § 12-250; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-215. Same—Uses permitted.
The following uses are permitted: 
(1)	Any use permitted in an R-2 Two-Family Residential District. 
(2)	Multiple-family dwelling. 
(3)	Roominghouse or boardinghouse. 
(4)	Garage apartment, when located on a separate lot or on the same lot with another dwelling use. 
(5)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when located on the same lot. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.22; Code 1983, § 12-251; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-216. Same—Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the board of adjustment in accordance with provisions contained in this section: 
(1)	Any use permitted on review in an R-2 Two-Family Residential District. 
(2)	Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature. 
(3)	Private clubs, sororities, fraternities, and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
(4)	Medical facility. 
(5)	An off-street parking lot associated with a commercial use as required under the provisions of article XII of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.23; Code 1983, § 12-252; Ord. No. 65-A, 8-8-1974; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-217. Same—Area regulations.
All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way lines, or lot lines, or other buildings to comply with the following yard requirements: 
(1)	Front yard.
a.	The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.	If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than six feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 40 feet. 
c.	When a lot has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be complied with on both streets. 
(2)	Side yard.
a.	For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than eight feet for dwellings of one story, and an additional four feet shall be provided for each additional story or part thereof. 
b.	For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located more than 90 feet behind the front property line. 
c.	For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
d.	Churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings and trailers, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 25 feet. 
(3)	Rear yard.
a.	For main buildings, other than garage apartments, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building. 
b.	Garage apartments may be located in the rear yard of another dwelling, but shall not be located closer than ten feet to the rear lot line. 
(4)	Required court dimensions. Whenever a multiple-family dwelling or group of multiple-family dwellings is designed with inner or outer courts, the yard requirements shall not be less than the following: 
a.	The width of an outer court including, but not limited to, those upon which windows from a living room, bedroom, or dining room open shall not be less than the height of the opposing wall forming the court. 
b.	The least dimension of an inner court shall not be less than the average height of the walls enclosing such court, but in no case shall the least dimension be less than 40 feet. 
c.	An open unobstructed passageway shall be provided at the grade level of each inner court. Such passageway shall have a cross section area and sufficient head room to permit the passage of firefighting equipment and shall be continuous from the inner court to a yard or unobstructed open area between buildings having direct connection with the street. 
(5)	Lot width. There shall be a minimum lot width of 60 feet at the front building line for single-family and two-family dwellings and ten feet additional width at the front building line for each family, more than two, occupying a dwelling. However, a lot width at the front building line shall not be required to exceed 100 feet. A lot shall abut on a street not less than 35 feet. 
(6)	Intensity of use.
a.	There shall be a lot area of not less than 6,600 square feet for a single-family dwelling, not less than 7,600 square feet for a two-family dwelling, and for each additional family, exceeding two, which occupies the dwelling there shall be provided an additional 2,000 square feet. 
b.	For multiple-family dwellings of less than five stories in height, there shall be a lot area equal to two times the gross floor area of the building plus the coverage of the building, and for multiple-family dwellings of five or more stories in height there shall be a lot area equal to the gross floor area of the building plus the coverage of the building. 
c.	There shall be a lot area of not less than 7,600 square feet where a garage apartment is located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. When a garage apartment is located in the rear yard of a two-family or multiple-family dwelling, the lot area shall be not less than 2,000 square feet more than is required for the two-family or multiple-family dwelling. 
d.	For churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, the lot area shall be adequate to provide the yard areas required by this section and the off-street parking areas required in article XII of this chapter; provided, however, that the lot area for a church shall not be less than 21,000 square feet. 
(7)	Coverage. Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 35 percent of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.24; Code 1983, § 12-253; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-218. Same—Height regulations.
No building shall exceed eight stories or 90 feet in height except as provided in section 44-335. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.25; Code 1983, § 12-254; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-219. R-4 Medium-High Density Residential District—General description.
This is a residential district to provide for a medium-high population density. The principal use of land is for manufactured home parks and manufactured home park subdivisions to be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this code pertaining to manufactured home parks. 
(Code 1983, § 12-260; Ord. No. 65-A, 8-10-1974; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-220. Same—Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an R-4 Medium-High Density Residential District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Any use permitted in R-3 General Residential District except private clubs and lodges. 
(2)	Manufactured home parks and manufactured home park subdivisions. 
(Code 1983, § 12-261; Ord. No. 65, 8-10-1974; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-221. Same—Regulations.
Manufactured home parks shall be regulated and shall comply with the provisions contained in this article. They shall be planned in such a manner that no trailer or related building shall be located closer than ten feet to any side lot line. 
(Code 1983, § 12-262; Ord. No. 65, 8-10-1974; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-222. R-5 Single-Family Manufactured Home District—General description.
(a)	The principal use of land in the R-5 district is for single-family manufactured homes and related recreational units normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area. These residential areas are intended to be defined and protected from encroachment of uses which are not appropriate to residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air, and open space for manufactured home and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of the different uses. The term "dwelling," as used herein, shall mean single-family home or manufactured home. 
(b)	The following zoning requirements also apply: 
(1)	All properties not serviced by city water and sewer must furnish the city planning commission and city council with a copy of perc test, and follow all city, county and state health department regulations. 
(2)	Applicants shall pay to the city clerk a deposit of $300.00, furnish all names of property owners within 300 feet of property to be zoned, and file with city clerk proper zoning applications. 
(c)	R-5 single-family manufactured home zonings shall be prohibited in the city limits except where there is a minimum of five acres available for location of the manufactured home as defined by section 44-599. This shall not prohibit the placement of manufactured homes or travel trailers as defined by section 44-599 and section 44-3(b). 
(Code 1983, § 12-263; Ord. No. 190-A, 10-13-1983; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999; Ord. No. 476-07-05, 6-21-2005)
 
Sec. 44-223. Same—Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an R-5 Single-Family Manufactured Home District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	One detached one-family manufactured home. 
(2)	Agricultural crops, but not raising of farm animals. 
(3)	Home occupation. 
(4)	Accessory buildings which are not a part of a main building, including one private garage, or accessory buildings which are a part of a main building, including one private garage. 
(5)	A temporary bulletin board or sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises, which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired, or sold. 
(Code 1983, § 12-264; Ord. No. 190A, 10-13-1983; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Sec. 44-224. Same—Area regulations.
All buildings shall be set back from street right-of-way and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements: 
(1)	Front yard requirements are as follows: 
a.	The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.	If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 25 feet, and no building varies more than six feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater than 40 feet. 
c.	When a lot has double frontage the front yard requirements shall be complied with on both streets. 
(2)	Side yard requirements are as follows: 
a.	For dwellings located on interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the main building of not less than eight feet for dwellings of one story, and of not less than ten feet for dwellings of more than one story, except as hereinafter provided in section 44-334. 
b.	For unattached buildings of accessory use, there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet; provided, however, that unattached one story buildings of accessory use shall not be required to set back more than three feet from an interior side lot line when all parts of the accessory building are located more than 90 feet behind the front lot line. 
c.	For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting streets of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 25 feet in every other case. The interior side yard of a corner lot shall be the same as for dwellings and accessory buildings on an interior lot. 
(3)	For rear yard requirements, there shall be a rear yard for a main building of not less than 20 feet or 20 percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is smaller. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building. 
(4)	For lot width requirements for dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of 60 feet at the front building line, and such lot shall abut a street for a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(5)	Intensity of use requirements are as follows: 
a.	For each dwelling, and buildings accessory thereto, there shall be a lot area of not less than 6,600 square feet. 
b.	Each single-family manufactured home shall be mounted on a foundation and tied down with the axles removed. 
(6)	Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than 25 percent of the lot area on interior lots, and 30 percent of the lot area on corner lots. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
(Code 1983, § 12-265; Ord. No. 190-A, 10-13-1983; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990; Ord. No. 380-07-98, 1-14-1999)
 
Secs. 44-225—44-241. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 44-242. C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District—General description.
This commercial district is for the conduct of retail trade and personal service enterprises to meet the regular needs and for the convenience of the people of adjacent residential areas. Because these shops and stores may be an integral part of the neighborhood closely associated with residential, religious, recreational and educational uses, more restrictive requirements for light, air, open space, and off-street parking are made than are provided in other commercial districts. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.26; Code 1983, § 12-270; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-243. Same—Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Any use permitted in an R-3 General Residential District and R-4 Medium-High Density Residential District. 
(2)	Any use permitted on review in an R-3 General Residential District. 
(3)	Retail stores and shops which do not exceed 12,000 square feet of gross floor area and which supply the regular and customary needs of the residents of the neighborhood and which are primarily for their convenience as follows: 
a.	Antique shop. 
b.	Appliance store. 
c.	Arts school, gallery or museum. 
d.	Artists materials, supply studio. 
e.	Baby shop. 
f.	Bakery goods store. 
g.	Bank. 
h.	Barbershop. 
i.	Beauty shop. 
j.	Book or stationery store. 
k.	Camera shop. 
l.	Candy store. 
m.	Catering establishment. 
n.	Cleaning, pressing, laundry collection agency. 
o.	Curio or gift shop. 
p.	Drugstore or fountain. 
q.	Dry goods store. 
r.	Dairy products or ice cream store. 
s.	Delicatessen. 
t.	Dress shop. 
u.	Florist shop, greenhouse, nursery. 
v.	Furniture store. 
w.	Grocery store or supermarket. 
x.	Hardware store. 
y.	Hotel. 
z.	Jewelry or notion store. 
aa.	Lodge hall. 
bb.	Meat market. 
cc.	Medical facility. 
dd.	Messenger or telegraph service. 
ee.	Musical instrument sales. 
ff.	Newspaper or magazine sales. 
gg.	office business. 
hh.	Optometrists sales and service. 
ii.	Package store for sale of beer. 
jj.	Photographer studio. 
kk.	Pharmacy. 
ll.	Radio and television sales and services. 
mm.	Restaurant. 
nn.	Self-service laundry or dry cleaning. 
oo.	Sewing machine sales, instruction. 
pp.	Sporting goods sales. 
qq.	Shoe repair shop. 
rr.	Tailor shop. 
ss.	Toy store. 
tt.	Variety store. 
(4)	Nameplate and sign relating only to the use of the store and premises or to products sold on the premises. 
(5)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
(6)	A building used for any of the above enumerated uses may not have more than 40 percent of its floor area devoted to purposes incidental to the primary use. No material or goods offered for sale or stored in connection with the uses enumerated in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section shall be displayed or stored outside of a building. 
(7)	Drive-in restaurants, dairy products stores, and other stores where drive-in facilities provide the principal means of servicing customers, shall not be permitted in this district. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.27; Code 1983, § 12-271; Ord. No. 185-A, 6-30-1983; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-244. Same—Area regulations.
The area requirements for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of the R-3 General Residential District. The following requirements shall apply to all other uses permitted in this district: 
(1)	Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard having not less than 25 feet in depth. 
(2)	Side yard. On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet. There shall be a side yard setback from an intersecting street of not less than 25 feet. 
(3)	Rear yard. There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof, of not less than 30 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.28; Code 1983, § 12-272)
 
Sec. 44-245. Same—Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in section 44-335. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.29; Code 1983, § 12-273; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-246. C-2 Neighborhood Shopping Center District—General description.
This commercial district is intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops and stores that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the neighborhood shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening materials. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.30; Code 1983, § 12-280; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-247. Same—Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in a C-2 Neighborhood Shopping Center District shall be used only for the uses enumerated below; provided, however, that these uses shall be located in the unified shopping center which shall have not less than five shops and stores, at least one of which shall be a supermarket or variety store of not less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. The shops and stores of the shopping center shall have a combined total gross floor area of not less than 20,000 square feet and shall be located on a tract of land of not less than 2½ acres. Any of the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)	Antique shop. 
(2)	Appliance store. 
(3)	Apparel store, family, children, men or women. 
(4)	Artists supplies. 
(5)	Automobile parking lot. 
(6)	Bakery goods store. 
(7)	Bank. 
(8)	Barbershop. 
(9)	Beauty shop. 
(10)	Book or stationery store. 
(11)	Camera shop. 
(12)	Candy store. 
(13)	Catering establishment. 
(14)	Cleaning and pressing collection station. 
(15)	Curio shop. 
(16)	Drug store or fountain. 
(17)	Dry-goods store. 
(18)	Dairy products or ice cream store. 
(19)	Delicatessen. 
(20)	Florist shop. 
(21)	Furniture store. 
(22)	Gift shop. 
(23)	Grocery store. 
(24)	Hardware store. 
(25)	Self-service laundry. 
(26)	Liquor store. 
(27)	Jewelry store. 
(28)	Meat market. 
(29)	Medical facility. 
(30)	Music store. 
(31)	Newspaper or magazine sales. 
(32)	Notions store. 
(33)	office supply store. 
(34)	Optometrists sales and service. 
(35)	Paint and decorating shop. 
(36)	Photographer studio. 
(37)	Pharmacy. 
(38)	Radio and television sales and services. 
(39)	Restaurant. 
(40)	Sewing machine sales and service. 
(41)	Sporting goods sales. 
(42)	Shoe store or repair shop. 
(43)	Specialty shop for women. 
(44)	Supermarket. 
(45)	Tailor shop. 
(46)	Toy store. 
(47)	Variety store. 
(48)	Office uses; provided, however, that the total gross floor area of all office uses, exclusive of those listed above, shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross floor area of the shopping center. 
(49)	Gasoline service or filling station; provided that it is designed as an integral part of the shopping center building group. 
(50)	Advertising signs relating to the shopping center, the stores and shops therein and products sold therein. All advertising signs and structures shall be designed as an integral part of the shopping center development and shall be harmonious with the other design features of the center. 
(51)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
(52)	Any use permitted in the R-4 Medium High Density Residential District. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.31; Code 1983, § 12-281; Ord. No. 185-A, 6-30-1983; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-248. Same—Area regulations.
(a)	Minimum and maximum area. The parcel of land on which a neighborhood shopping center is located shall not be less 2½ acres in area. 
(b)	Yards. It is intended that the grouping of buildings and parking areas be designed to protect, in so far as possible, adjacent residential areas, and that ornamental screening from noise and light be provided where necessary; provided, however, that in no case shall the design of the shopping center provide less than the following standards: 
(1)	All buildings shall set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than 25 feet; 
(2)	On the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet; 
(3)	There shall be a rear yard, alley, service court, or combination thereof, of not less than 30 feet in width, and all of the service area of all buildings shall be completely screened from public view with permanent ornamental screening materials. 
(c)	Coverage. Buildings shall not cover more than 40 percent of the site on which the shopping center is located. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.32; Code 1983, § 12-282; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-249. Same—Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 2½ stories, or 35 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.33; Code 1983, § 12-283; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-250. Same—Off-street parking.
The off-street parking requirements set forth in this section, may be complied with by providing a permanent common off-street parking facility for all of the uses within the shopping center, provided that the lot contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements; provided, however, that in no case shall the amount of off-street parking area, including driveways required for ingress and egress and circulation, be less than 3½ times the gross floor area used for retail trades in the shopping center. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.34; Code 1983, § 12-284; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-251. Same—Administration procedures for shopping center development.
(a)	Rezoning application. An application for rezoning for a neighborhood shopping center shall include the following, in addition to the administrative requirements set forth in this section: 
(1)	The developer shall submit site plans of the proposed development which shall be in adequate detail to determine compliance with the provisions of this section, and which shall show the arrangement of buildings, types of shops and stores, design and circulation pattern of the off-street parking area, landscaped yards, ornamental screening, service courts, and utility and drainage easements and facilities, and the relationship of the shopping center development to adjacent areas which it may affect; and 
(2)	Evidence that indicates, to the satisfaction of the board and planning commission, the ability and intent of the developer to carry out the development of the shopping center in accordance with plans submitted in accordance with subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)	Development procedure.
(1)	The developer shall obtain a building permit for the shopping center in accordance with the requirements and procedure of this section, and shall begin construction of the shopping center within two years after the effective date of rezoning for the shopping center, and shall make a reasonable and continuous progress toward completion. If the shopping center is not under construction within two years after the effective date of the shopping center rezoning, the planning commission shall review the status of the development, and if it shall find that the developer cannot proceed immediately with the development in conformity with the requirements of this section, this fact, and the reasons thereof, shall be reported to the city board. The city board may, at its discretion, rezone the shopping center district to a zoning district classification consistent with the master plan; and 
(2)	Any substantial deviation from the plans submitted at the time of rezoning shall constitute a violation of the building permit authorizing construction of the shopping center. Substantial changes in plans shall be resubmitted to the city board and the planning commission to ensure compliance with the requirements and purpose and intent of this section, and no building permit shall be issued for any construction which is not in substantial conformity with the approved plan. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.35; Code 1983, § 12-285; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-252. C-3 General Commercial District—General description.
This commercial district is intended for the conduct of personal and business services and the general retail business of the community. Persons living in the community and in the surrounding trade territory require direct and frequent access. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and delivery of retail goods. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.36; Code 1983, § 12-290; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-253. Same—Uses permitted.
(a)	Property and buildings in a C-3 General Commercial District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Any use permitted in a C-1 or C-2 commercial district. 
(2)	Amusement enterprises. 
(3)	New automobile sales and services, new machinery sales and service, and public garages, provided no gasoline is stored above ground; used automobile and machinery sales and services, and automobile repairing if conducted in conjunction with a retail agency and wholly within a completely enclosed building, but not including automobile or machinery wrecking establishments or junk yards. 
(4)	Advertising signs or structures. 
(5)	Auto court or tourist court. 
(6)	Automatic automobile wash. 
(7)	Ambulance service, office or garage. 
(8)	Bait sales. 
(9)	Bakery. 
(10)	Bath house. 
(11)	Boat sales. 
(12)	Bus terminal. 
(13)	Cleaning plant, commercial laundry or dry cleaning. 
(14)	Clothing or apparel store. 
(15)	Commercial school or hall. 
(16)	Dance hall. 
(17)	Department store. 
(18)	Drive-in theater or restaurant. 
(19)	Electric transmission station. 
(20)	Feed and fuel store. 
(21)	Frozen food locker. 
(22)	Furniture repair and upholstery. 
(23)	Furniture parlor or mortuary. 
(24)	Gasoline service or filling station. 
(25)	Golf course, miniature or practice range. 
(26)	Heating, ventilating or plumbing supplies, sales and service. 
(27)	Interior decorating store. 
(28)	Ice storage locker plant or storage house for food. 
(29)	Key shop. 
(30)	Kennel. 
(31)	Laboratories, testing and experimental. 
(32)	Laundry. 
(33)	Leather goods shop. 
(34)	Liquor store. 
(35)	Music, radio or television shop. 
(36)	Museums. 
(37)	Nightclub. 
(38)	Novelty shop. 
(39)	Nursery or garden supply store. 
(40)	Outdoor advertising signs. 
(41)	Pawnshop. 
(42)	Pet store. 
(43)	Printing plant. 
(44)	Recreation center. 
(45)	Research laboratories. 
(46)	Roller skating rink. 
(47)	Sign painting shop. 
(48)	Hospital for small animals. 
(49)	Sporting goods store. 
(50)	Stock and bond broker. 
(51)	Storage warehouse. 
(52)	Theater. 
(53)	Tavern where beer is sold. 
(54)	Toy store. 
(55)	Travel trailer park. 
(56)	Used automobile sales. 
(57)	Wholesale distributing center. 
(58)	Buildings, structures, and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that there shall be no manufacture, processing or compounding of products other than such as are customarily incidental and essential to retail establishments. 
(59)	Any other store or shop for retail trade or for rendering personal, professional or business service which does not produce more noise, odor, dust, vibration, blast, or traffic than those enumerated above. 
(b)	No article or material stored in connection with uses permitted under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(5) of this section shall be stored or displayed outside of a building unless it is so screened by permanent ornamental walls, fences or planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining streets or lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level; provided, however, that no screening in excess of seven feet in height shall be required. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.37; Code 1983, § 12-291; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-254. Same—Open display uses permitted.
(a)	The following uses even though not in an enclosed building shall be permitted in the C-3 General Commercial District, provided that they comply with the additional provisions of this section: 
(1)	Boat sales and service. 
(2)	Farm implement and machinery, new and used, sales. 
(3)	Metal and wood fencing, ornamental grillwork and decorative wrought iron work and play equipment sales. 
(4)	Manufactured home and travel trailer sales. 
(5)	Monument sales. 
(6)	New and used automobile sales. 
(7)	Prefabricated house sales. 
(8)	Trailers for hauling, rental and sales. 
(b)	The uses enumerated in subsection (a) of this section shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)	All open storage and display of merchandise, material and equipment shall be so screened by ornamental fencing or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen by a person standing on ground level adjacent to the side or the rear of the lot on which the open storage or display occurs; provided, however, that screening shall not be required in excess of seven feet in height. All planting shall be kept neatly trimmed and maintained in good condition at all times. Merchandise and materials which are not completely assembled or which are not immediately and actively being offered for sale, in addition to complying with the above screening requirements, shall be so screened by ornamental fences or evergreen planting or by permanent buildings that it cannot be seen from a public street; 
(2)	All yards, unoccupied with buildings or merchandise or used as traffic ways, shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good condition the year round; 
(3)	All of the lot used for the parking of vehicles, for the storage and display of merchandise and all driveways used for vehicle ingress and egress shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use; 
(4)	All servicing of vehicles carried on as an incidental part of the sales operation shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building; 
(5)	Driveways used for ingress and egress shall not exceed 25 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns; and 
(6)	Outdoor lighting, when provided, shall have an arrangement of reflectors and an intensity of lighting which will not interfere with adjacent land uses or the use of adjacent streets and shall not be of a flashing or intermittent type. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.38; Code 1983, § 12-292; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-255. Same—Other uses permitted, permits.
(a)	The city council, after public hearing, may issue a special permit for the erection, building or operation of any activity of a general nature of the uses permitted in C-3 General Commercial District, but not included therein, for property in the C-3 General Commercial District. 
(b)	No outdoor amusement enterprise shall be carried on in the district, which contemplates the large number of spectators, without a special permit. Nothing herein contained, however, shall be construed to apply to athletic events of the public or private schools, within the limits of the city. 
(c)	Special permits may be issued upon such requirements and conditions to be proposed by the council so that the intent and spirit of the article will be complied with, and the public peace, health, safety and welfare protected. 
(d)	In considering the issuance of a special permit for activities contemplating a large number of people, consideration will be given to comfort facilities and off-street parking. Such permits, when granted, will be revocable and may be revoked on 30 days' notice, if the conditions and requirements, set forth in the permit are not complied with, or if the facility grows to the extent that adequate provisions are not being made for the health, comfort and off-street parking of the patrons. 
(Code 1983, § 12-293; Ord. No. 53-A, 9-7-1973; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-256. Same—Area regulations.
The area regulations for dwellings shall be the same as the requirements of the R-3 General Residential District. The following requirements shall apply to all other uses permitted in this district: 
(1)	Front and side yards. There are no specific front or side yard requirements for uses other than dwellings; 
(2)	Rear yard. There shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof, of not less than 30 feet in width; and 
(3)	Area for off-street parking. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set forth in article XII of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.39; Code 1983, § 12-294; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-257. Same—Height regulations.
The height regulations for dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings shall be the same as those of the R-2 General Residential District. For other uses no building shall exceed 90 feet in height except as hereinafter provided in section 44-335. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.40; Code 1983, § 12-295; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-258—44-277. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IX. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 44-278. I-1 Restricted Industrial District—General description.
This industrial district is intended primarily for manufacturing and assembly plants and warehousing that are conducted so the noise, odor, dust, and glare of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed building. These industries may require direct access to rail, air, or street transportation facilities; however, the size and volume of the raw materials and finished products involved should not produce the volume of freight generated by the uses of the light and heavy industrial districts. Buildings in this district should be architecturally attractive and surrounded by landscaped yards. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.41; Code 1983, § 12-300; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-279. Same—Uses permitted.
(a)	Property and buildings in an I-1 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Any use, except a residential use, permitted in a C-3 General Commercial District. No dwelling uses shall be permitted, except sleeping facilities for caretakers and night watchmen employed on the premises. However, this subsection shall not prohibit and there is hereby specifically allowed in this district any use permitted in the R-4 Medium High Density Residential District; 
(2)	Any of the following uses: 
a.	Bakery; 
b.	Bottling works; 
c.	Book bindery; 
d.	Candy manufacturing; 
e.	Engraving plant; 
f.	Electrical equipment assembly; 
g.	Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture; 
h.	Food products processing and packing; 
i.	Furniture manufacturing; 
j.	Instrument and meter manufacturing; 
k.	Jewelry and watch manufacturing; 
l.	Laundry and cleaning establishment; 
m.	Leather goods fabrication; 
n.	Optical goods manufacturing; 
o.	Paper products manufacturing; 
p.	Shoe manufacturing; 
q.	Sporting goods manufacturing; or 
r.	Wholesale or warehousing enterprise. 
(b)	All of the uses permitted under this section shall have their primary operations conducted entirely within enclosed buildings and shall not emit any dust or smoke or noxious odor or fumes outside of the building housing the operation, or produce a noise level at the property line that is greater than the average noise level occurring on the adjacent street. Any article or material stored temporarily outside of an enclosed building as an incidental part of the primary operation shall be so screened by ornamental walls and fences or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing at ground level. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.42; Code 1983, § 12-301; Ord. No. 185-A, 6-30-1983; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-280. Same—Area regulations.
(a)	All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way lines and lot lines to comply with the following yard requirements: 
(1)	Front yard. All buildings shall set back from the street right-of-way line to provide a front yard having not less than 25 feet in depth; 
(2)	Side yard. No building shall be located closer than 25 feet to a side lot line; 
(3)	Rear yard. No building shall be located closer than 25 feet to the rear lot line; and 
(4)	Coverage. Main and accessory buildings and off-street parking and loading facilities shall not cover more than 80 percent of the lot area. 
(b)	All yard areas required under this section and other yards and open spaces existing around buildings shall be landscaped and maintained in a neat condition. 
(Code 1983, § 12-302; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-281. Same—Height regulations.
No building or structure shall exceed 90 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in section 44-335. 
(Code 1983, § 12-303; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-282. I-2 Light Industrial District—General description.
This industrial district is intended primarily for the conduct of manufacturing, assembling, and fabrication. These uses do not depend primarily on frequent personal visits of customers or clients, but usually require good accessibility to major rail, air, or street transportation facilities. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.45; Code 1983, § 12-310; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-283. Same—Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an I-2 Light Industrial District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Any use, except dwellings, permitted in the C-3 General Commercial District or in the I-1 Restricted Industrial District. No dwellings use, except sleeping facilities required by caretakers or night watchmen employed on the premises, shall be permitted in an I-2 Light Industrial District. 
(2)	Any of the following uses: 
a.	Building material sales yard and lumber yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but not including a concrete batch plant or transit mix plant; 
b.	Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors; 
c.	Freighting or trucking yard or terminal; 
d.	Oil field equipment storage yard; 
e.	Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station; and 
f.	Sale barn. 
No article or material permitted above shall be kept, stored or displayed outside of a building unless it is screened by fences, walls or planting that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level immediately adjacent to the lot on which the use is located; provided, however, that screening shall not be required in excess of seven feet in height. 
(3)	The following uses when conducted within a completely enclosed building: 
a.	The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products; 
b.	The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stone, shell, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn, and paint not employing a boiling process; 
c.	The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas; 
d.	The manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial advertising structure, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like; 
e.	Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal stamps; 
f.	Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender works, truck repairing and overhauling, tire retreading or recapping, and battery manufacturing; 
g.	Machine shop; 
h.	Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metal not causing noxious fumes or odors; and 
i.	Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs, including the manufacture of small parts only, such as coils, condensers, transformers, crystal holders, and the like. 
(4)	Buildings, structures and uses accessory and customarily incidental to any of the above. 
(5)	The uses permitted under this section shall be conducted in such a manner that no noxious odor, fumes, or dust will be emitted beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.46; Code 1983, § 12-311; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-284. Same—Area regulations.
(a)	Front and side yards. There are no specific front or side yard requirements for uses in this district; provided, however, that a building shall set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the side lot line that adjoins a dwelling district. 
(b)	Rear yard. Where a building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alley, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof of not less than 30 feet in width or of adequate area and width to provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is greater. In all other cases, no rear yard is required; provided, however, that a building shall set back a distance of not less than 25 feet from the rear lot line that adjoins a dwelling district. 
(c)	Rear area. Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set forth in article XII of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.47; Code 1983, § 12-312; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-285. Same—Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 90 feet in height, except as hereinafter provided in section 44-335. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.48; Code 1983, § 12-313; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-286. I-3 Heavy Industrial District—General description.
This industrial district is intended to provide for heavy industrial uses and other uses not otherwise provided for in the districts established by this section. The intensity of uses permitted in this district makes it most desirable, that no dwelling use except sleeping facilities required by night watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises shall be permitted in an I-3 Heavy Industrial District. 
(Code 1983, § 12-315; Ord. No. 411-02-02, 6-20-2002)
 
Sec. 44-287. Same—Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in an I-3 Heavy Industrial District may be used for any use permitted in I-1 or I-2 industrial districts. No dwellings use except sleeping facilities required by night watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises shall be permitted in an I-3 Heavy Industrial District. 
(Code 1983, § 12-316; Ord. No. 411-02-02, 6-20-2002)
 
Sec. 44-288. Same—Uses permitted on review.
The following uses may be permitted on review by the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions contained in section 44-93, provided they comply with the following conditions: 
(1)	The use thereon shall be conducted in such a manner that all operation, display or storage of material or equipment is so screened by ornamental fences, walls, and/or permanent evergreen planting that it cannot be seen from a public street or from adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level; provided, however, that no screening in excess of seven feet in height shall be required. 
a.	Automobile salvage yard or junkyard. 
b.	Building material salvage yard. 
c.	Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture. 
d.	Commercial feed pens for livestock. 
e.	Disposal plants of all types including trash and garbage, sewage treatment including lagoons and comports plants. 
(2)	Sanitary or construction landfills or waste disposal area; provided a master development plan is submitted that satisfactorily addresses the following items, and any additional information that may be deemed by the governing body to be essential in determining the compatibility of the proposed use with the overall comprehensive plan of the city and/or surrounding land uses: 
a.	The operation meets state health department (DEQ) minimum requirements; 
b.	No nuisance due to smoke, odor or blowing debris shall be created; 
c.	An access road, having at least an industrial standard paved surface shall be created or available; 
d.	At least five parking spaces shall be provided on the site; 
e.	The city manager shall have the authority to approve or disapprove the proposed route to the site; 
f.	The site shall be restored to a condition compatible with the surrounding area upon conclusion of the operation; and 
g.	No landfill or waste disposal area shall be located closer than 2,640 feet to any residential dwelling, school or place of public assembly, provided, that a lesser distance may be allowed if written consent is received from all residents within 2,640 feet of the proposed site; 
(3)	No more than zero point one percent of the city's landmass shall be designated for use as a waste disposal plant or facility of any type including, trash, demolition or construction debris, garbage, and sewage. 
a.	Junkyard or salvage yard of any kind. 
b.	Natural gas production and distribution. 
c.	Paper manufacture. 
d.	Petroleum production and refining. 
e.	Salvage yards for automobiles, building materials, scrap metal, junk or for any other kind of salvage; provided, however, that all salvage operations shall be so screened by ornamental walls, fences or evergreen planting that it cannot be seen by a person standing at ground level at any place immediately adjacent to the lot on which the salvage operation is located. 
f.	Scrap metal storage yard. 
g.	Wholesale or bulk storage of gasoline, propane or butane, or other petroleum products. 
h.	Any use not otherwise authorized or permitted on review in the 1-3 Heavy Industrial District. 
(Code 1983, § 12-317; Ord. No. 411-02-02, 6-20-2002; Ord. No. 494-02-07, 2-21-2008)
 
Sec. 44-289. Same—Area regulations.
(a)	Where a building is to be serviced from the rear there shall be provided an alleyway, service court, rear yard, or combination thereof, of not less than 30 feet in width or of adequate area and width to provide for maneuver of service vehicles, whichever is greater. In all other cases no rear yard is required. 
(b)	Buildings shall be provided with a yard area adequate to meet the off-street parking requirements set forth in section 44-361 et seq. 
(Code 1983, § 12-318; Ord. No. 411-02-02, 6-20-2002)
 
Sec. 44-290. Same—Height regulations.
Where a lot adjoins a dwelling district the building shall not exceed 35 feet, unless it is set back ten feet from all front and side yard lines, plus an additional one foot of setback for each foot of additional height above 45 feet, except as otherwise provided in section 44-335. 
(Code 1983, § 12-319; Ord. No. 411-02-02, 6-20-2002)
 
Secs. 44-291—44-310. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE X. FLOODPLAIN
 
Sec. 44-311. F Floodplain District, general description.
This district is intended to comprise those areas which are subject to periodic or occasional flooding and therefore are unsuited for all residential uses and for most commercial and industrial uses. It is intended that the area be retained for agricultural and recreational uses only until danger from flooding is eliminated. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.54; Code 1983, § 12-330; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-312. Uses permitted.
Property and buildings in the F Floodplain District shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Public recreation. 
(2)	The growing of agricultural crops and nursery stock and gardening. 
(3)	The raising of poultry and livestock in accordance with the municipal ordinances relating thereto, but not with operation of commercial feed pens for cattle or hogs. 
(Prior Code, § 45-4.55; Code 1983, § 12-331; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-313—44-332. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XI. GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL OR TO SEVERAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 44-333. Application of regulation to the uses of a more restricted district.
(a)	Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district, permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to the conditions as set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district, unless otherwise specified. 
(b)	It is intended that these regulations be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit to be located on the same lot with or within a structure used or intended to be used for nonresidential purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.1; Code 1983, § 12-340; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-334. Open space.
The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)	An open space or lot area required for an existing building or structure shall not be counted as open space for any other building or structure; 
(2)	Open eaves, cornices, windowsills, and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet. Open uncovered porches or open fire escapes may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet. Fences, walls, or hedges in residential districts may be erected in any required yard, or along the edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building line shall exceed four feet in height, and no other wall or fence shall exceed seven feet in height; 
(3)	Where the dedicated street right-of-way is less than 60 feet, the front yard depth shall be determined by measuring 55 feet back from the centerline of the street easement; 
(4)	No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one street, at least 50 feet in width, for at least 35 feet. A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only a secondary means of ingress and egress. A garage apartment may be built to the rear of a main dwelling if there is compliance with all other provisions of this chapter. Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building may be built in the rear yard but shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard; 
(5)	No minimum lot sizes and open spaces are prescribed for commercial and industrial uses. It is the intent of this chapter that lots of sufficient size be used by any business or industry to provide adequate parking and loading and unloading space required for operation of the enterprise; 
(6)	On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure, or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two feet six inches and six feet above any portion of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of 25 feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection; 
(7)	An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall not be located closer than 25 feet to the street easement line; 
(8)	No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used; 
(9)	Whenever one or more residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings are proposed to be located in a cluster or grouping which has a different arrangement, orientation, or other site planning variation from that of other buildings, structures, or uses in the area or on adjacent properties, the architectural design, location, orientation, service, and parking areas of such buildings shall be planned so as not to adversely affect the use of adjacent or other properties in the area, as determined by the planning commission; and 
(10)	Where there exists, at the time of adoption of this chapter, lots of less than 60 feet in width at the building line, but not less than 50 feet in width at the building line, single family dwellings may be permitted provided, however, that the area of the lot is not less than 6,000 square feet. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.2; Code 1983, § 12-341; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-335. Height.
The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and supplement, as the case may be, the specific district regulations set forth in article VIII of this chapter: 
(1)	In measuring heights, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as a story. A story in a sloping roof, the area of which story at a height of four feet above the floor does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the story immediately below it and which does not contain an independent apartment, shall be counted as a half story; 
(2)	Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other projections not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit; and 
(3)	Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums, and other public and semi-public buildings may exceed the height limitation of the district if the minimum depth of rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards required in the district are increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of such public or semipublic structure exceeds the prescribed height limit. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.3; Code 1983, § 12-342; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-336. Group housing projects.
In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements of this chapter to the individual buildings in such housing project, the application of such requirements to such housing project may be changed by the board of adjustment, in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as required by this article in the district in which the proposed project is to be located. In no case shall a use or building height or density of population be permitted which is less than the requirement of the district in which the housing project is to be located. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.4; Code 1983, § 12-343; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-337. Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles.
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, camping and hauling, and manufactured homes shall not be parked or stored on any lot accompanied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed 1½ tons rated capacity, per family living on the premises, shall be permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products be permitted; 
(2)	Not more than one camping or travel trailer or hauling trailer per family living on the premises shall be permitted and the trailer shall not exceed 24 feet in length, or eight feet in width; and further provided that the trailer shall not be parked or stored for more than 48 hours unless it is located behind the front yard building line. A camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area within the incorporated limits except in a trailer court authorized under the ordinances of the city; and 
(3)	A manufactured home shall be parked or stored only in a trailer court which is in conformity with the ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.5; Code 1983, § 12-344; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-338. Architectural design of accessory buildings and fences.
The architectural design and materials used for the construction of accessory buildings and fences shall harmonize with the main building to which the building or fence is accessory. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.6; Code 1983, § 12-345; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-339. Animals.
Animals in any district shall be kept only in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.7; Code 1983, § 12-346; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-340. Storage of liquefied petroleum gases.
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the city and the regulations of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Administration of the state. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.8; Code 1983, § 12-347; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-341. Trailer park regulations.
Travel trailer parks and manufactured home parks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.9; Code 1983, § 12-348; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-342—44-360. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XII. OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE AND VEHICLE PARKING AND LOADING
 
Sec. 44-361. General intent and application.
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided off the street easement for each use of land within the city. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.10; Code 1983, § 12-350; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-362. Required open space.
(a)	off-street parking or loading space shall be a part of the required open space associated with the permitted use and shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(b)	The area required for off-street parking shall be in addition to the yard areas herein required; except that the front yard required in a C-1 Neighborhood Shopping Center District or an I-1 Restricted Industrial District may be used for uncovered parking area; and further provided that the front yard required in a residential district may be used for the uncovered parking area for six or less vehicles associated with a residential use when the area is surfaced with a sealed surface pavement adequate to prevent the occurrence of mud and dust with continued use, and may be used for uncovered parking area for more than six vehicles in accordance with the provisions of article XI of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.11; Code 1983, § 12-351; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-363. Location.
The off-street parking lot shall be located within 200 feet, exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have direct access to a street or alley. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.12; Code 1983, § 12-352; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-364. Joint parking facilities.
Whenever two or more uses are located together in a common building, shopping center or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility, cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.13; Code 1983, § 12-353; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-365. Size of off-street parking space.
The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than nine feet by 20 feet plus adequate area for ingress and egress. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.14; Code 1983, § 12-354; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-366. Amount of off-street parking and loading required.
(a)	Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in all districts in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)	Dwelling, single family or duplex. One parking space for each separate dwelling unit within the structure; 
(2)	Dwelling, multiple family. The number of spaces provided shall not be less than 1½ times the number of units in the dwelling; 
(3)	Boarding or rooming house or hotel. One parking space for each two guests provided overnight accommodations; 
(4)	Hospitals. One space for each four patient beds, exclusive of bassinets, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each three employees including nurses, plus adequate area for the parking of emergency vehicles; 
(5)	Medical or dental clinics or offices. Six spaces per doctor plus one space for each two employees; 
(6)	Sanatoriums, convalescent or nursing homes. One space for each six patient beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one space for each two employees including nurses; 
(7)	Community center, theater, auditorium, church sanctuary. One parking space for each four seats, based on maximum seating capacity; 
(8)	Convention hall, lodge, club, library, museum, place of amusement or recreation. One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area used for assembly or recreation in the building; 
(9)	office building. One parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in the building, exclusive of the area used for storage, utilities, and building services; 
(10)	Commercial establishment not otherwise classified. One parking space for each 150 square feet of floor space used for retail trade in the building and including all areas used by the public; and 
(11)	Industrial establishments. Adequate area to park all employees' and customers' vehicles at all times and adequate space for loading, unloading and storing all vehicles used incidental to or as a part of the primary operation of the establishment. 
(b)	For all uses not covered in subsection (a) of this section, the planning commission shall make a determination of the parking demand to be created by the proposed use, and the amount of parking thus determined shall be the off-street parking requirement for the permitted use. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.15; Code 1983, § 12-355; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-367. Paved surface required.
All parking spaces shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in a manner that no dust will result from the continued use. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.16; Code 1983, § 12-356; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-368. Off-street parking lots in residential districts.
Whenever off-street parking lots for more than six vehicles are to be located within or adjacent to a residential district, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	All sides of the lot within or abutting the residential district shall be enclosed with an opaque ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge having a height of not less than five nor more than six feet. Such fence, wall, or hedge shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)	No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line established 15 feet back of the property line of interior and corner lots wherever the parking lot is located in a residential district or immediately abuts the front yard of a residential unit. In all cases no setback shall be required; 
(3)	All yards shall be landscaped with grass and shrubs and maintained in good condition the year round; 
(4)	Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed 25 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns; 
(5)	All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use; 
(6)	Whenever lighting is provided, the intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not to interfere with residential district uses; and 
(7)	No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to state the condition and terms of the use of the lots. Only non-intermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 45-5.17; Code 1983, § 12-357; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-369—44-388. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIII. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES OF LAND
 
Sec. 44-389. Nonconforming buildings and structures.
A nonconforming building or structure existing at the time of adoption of this article may be continued, maintained, and repaired, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 45-6.1; Code 1983, § 12-360; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-390. Alteration of enlargement of buildings and structures.
A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless the building or structure, including additions and enlargements, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located; provided, however, that if a building or structure is conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards or height or off-street parking space, the building or structure may be enlarged or added to provided that the enlargement or addition complies with the yard and height and off-street parking requirements of the district in which the building or structure is located. No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to another location on the lot unless every portion of the building or structure is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Prior Code, § 45-6.2; Code 1983, § 12-361; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-391. Outdoor advertising signs and structures.
Any advertising sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure, or statuary, which is lawfully existing and maintained at the time this article became effective, which does not conform with the provisions hereof shall not be structurally altered and all such nonconforming advertising signs, billboards, commercial advertising structures and statuary, and their supporting members shall be completely removed from the premises not later than three years from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Prior Code, § 45-6.3; Code 1983, § 12-362; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-392. Building vacancy.
A building or structure or portion thereof, which is nonconforming as to use, which is or hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of one year shall not thereafter be occupied except as a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Prior Code, § 45-6.4; Code 1983, § 12-363; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-393. Change in use.
(a)	A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such conforming building or structure or changed except to a conforming use. If such a nonconforming use or a portion thereof, is discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building, structure or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building or structure is located. A vacant or partially vacant nonconforming building or structure may be occupied by a use for which the building or structure was designed or intended if occupied within a period of one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived but otherwise it shall be used in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(b)	The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a use of the same or a more restricted district classification; but where the use of nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of more restricted district classification, it thereafter shall not be changed to a use of a less restricted district classification; provided, however, that a building or a structure that is nonconforming as to use at the time of adoption of this article, or any time thereafter, shall not be changed to a wholesale or retail liquor store unless such change in use conforms to the provisions of the district in which it is located. 
(Prior Code, § 45-6.5; Code 1983, § 12-364; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-394. Nonconforming uses of land.
A nonconforming use of land, where the aggregate value of all permanent buildings or structures is less than $1,000.00, existing at the time of adoption of this article, may be continued for a period of not more than three years therefrom, provided that: 
(1)	The nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded, nor shall it occupy more area than was in use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and 
(2)	If the nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a period of six months, or changed, any future use of such land, or change in use, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the district in which the land is located. 
(Prior Code, § 45-6.6; Code 1983, § 12-365; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-395—44-416. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIV. COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, MULTI-FAMILY, INDUSTRIAL SITE AND SPECIAL USE PERMIT PLAN REVIEW
 
Sec. 44-417. Purpose and applicability.
(a)	The purpose of this article is to establish a uniform procedure for the review of plans for the development of commercial, office, multi-family and industrial property located in the city. This review process shall apply to undeveloped properties as well as to alterations or modifications of properties where the proposed alteration or modification would increase the square footage of existing structures by 40 percent or more. It is hereby found that the establishment of this procedure will work toward assuring development compatible with area architectural and environmental elements in furtherance of the best interests of this community and with the Spencer Master Plan. 
(b)	This article, and all its provisions, shall apply to the following zoning districts, notwithstanding anything else to the contrary: "R-3," "R-4," "R-5," "C-1," "C-2," "C-3," "I-1," "I-2," and all special use permits. 
(c)	Nothing herein shall be deemed to abolish existing requirements or procedures for the obtaining of special use permits in any zoning district. 
(d)	The provisions of these regulations shall become a regular part of any application for any building permit in the zoning district specified hereinabove where the proposed construction, alteration or modification meets the criteria of subsection (a) of this section. No building permit may be issued prior to the completion of the site review process provided for in this article, notwithstanding any compliance with applicability nor constructions standards or codes in effect. 
(Code 1983, § 12-370; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-418. Application for review, contents.
(a)	The city manager shall prescribe the form and content of applications and other necessary forms. Completed applications shall be filed with the city clerk-treasurer, and as a minimum, shall include the following as a site plan: 
(1)	Disclosure of the boundaries of the property and building site, drawn to scale; 
(2)	Proposed landscaping and lighting; 
(3)	Proposed driveway locations, streets, parking lot and loading areas, sidewalks and on-site drives; 
(4)	Location of all structures, including elevations depicting the number of stories; 
(5)	Location, height and type of sight-proof fencing or screening; 
(6)	Location, height and type of all lighting facilities and signs; 
(7)	Disclosure of the proposed general architectural appearance of the structure, to include exterior finish; 
(8)	Disclosure of the proposed general motif and type of architecture; 
(9)	Provision for proper facilities for accumulation and disposal of garbage and trash; 
(10)	Provision of fences, walls and landscaping; and 
(11)	Provision of facilities and manner of maintenance thereof. 
(b)	Applications shall be made by the property owner or his authorized agent. If the applicant is not the property owner, a letter of agency shall be provided. 
(Code 1983, § 12-371; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-419. Review procedure.
Upon submission of the application as set forth herein, a fee shall be paid to cover the costs of public notice and investigation. At the same time, the applicant shall submit a list of all record property owners and their current addresses within a 300-foot radius of the boundaries of the total site to be used for the proposed development. 
(Code 1983, § 12-372; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-420. Hearing procedure.
(a)	The planning commission shall hold one or more public hearings and shall, within 45 days of the application, transmit to the city council its report as the effect of the proposed building conditions, public utilities, landscaping, and other matters pertaining to the general welfare, and the recommendations of the planning commission concerning the use thereon. Thereupon, the city council will hold one or more public hearings, at which time they may authorize or deny the issuance of a building permit for the site plan or buildings as requested. 
(b)	The action of the city council on any application will be made after consideration of the items shown on the plan, and may include the requirement of landscaping, fences, walls and other features deemed necessary to further the purposes these regulations, and such features shall be provided and maintained during the continuance of any use of which they are pertinent. In considering the site plans before it, the city shall be guided by the following criteria: 
(1)	The city shall examine submitted site plans to ensure that all provisions of these regulations and any other applicable city standards are complied with; 
(2)	Proposed building or remodeling shall not have a detrimental impact upon the district or the safety or convenience of persons residing or working in the area, or otherwise be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare; 
(3)	The height, area, setbacks and overall mass, as well as parts of any structure or attendant facilities shall be appropriate to the character and development of the district; 
(4)	Ingress, egress, internal traffic circulation, off-street parking facilities, loading and service areas and pedestrian ways shall be so designed as to promote both safety and convenience; 
(5)	The character of any proposed structure or alteration of an existing structure shall be in harmony with, and compatible to, those structures in the neighboring environment; 
(6)	In all applicable zoning districts of these regulations, totally exposed metal walls or untreated concrete block shall be permitted when visible from an adjacent residential zoning district, as observed from a person standing on the ground level at the property line; and 
(7)	In all applicable zoning districts, where any portion of any roof is visible to an observer standing on the ground level at any place along the property lines of the subject property, then in that event no roofs or metal construction shall be permitted unless the same be of standing seam construction or the functional and architectural equivalent thereof. For purposes of this subsection, construction commonly known as "mansard" projections shall be deemed to be a part of the roof. 
(Code 1983, § 12-373; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-421. Landscaping required.
(a)	It is the intent of this section that all new construction in the city be so designated that landscaping is included as an integral part of the environment to provide a quality of life and amenities in keeping with the natural physical surroundings of the city. 
(b)	All applicable zoning districts to these regulations shall be landscaped with trees, ornamental shrubs and green areas according to the following standards: 
(1)	No less than five percent of the total land area of the lot shall be landscaped with trees, ornamental shrubs and green areas. The five percent landscaped area shall be placed in the front or side yards; 
(2)	Application for site plan approval shall be accompanied by a detailed landscaping plan for both the required lot area and the area within the street right-of-way between the property line and the curb. The plan shall meet the following requirements: 
a.	The type of plans shall be designated; 
b.	There shall be a live tree having a minimum height of five feet provided for every 500 square feet of area to be landscaped, including the area within the street right-of-way; 
c.	Artificial grass or any form of synthetic plant shall not be permitted as part of the minimum required by these regulations for landscaping; 
d.	Decorative rock used as a part of rock gardens may be counted in meeting the minimum requirements for landscaped area; 
e.	The plan shall especially respect sight triangles at intersections and be approved for all elements relating to traffic control; and 
f.	The minimum trees required shall have at least two inch caliper; 
(3)	A certificate of occupancy for any structure shall not be issued until the landscaping has been installed in accordance with the plan and it shall be illegal for any person, firm or corporation to occupy or operate a business in any new structure for which landscaping, as shown by the plans, is not provided except that if a structure and all its site improvements is complete except for these landscaping requirements and the season of the year will not permit the planting and growing of plants, temporary occupancy may be permitted until a date certain in the growing season. This date shall be set by the building department on the designated date to determine if the landscaping has been installed. If the landscaping has not been completed by this inspection date, the same shall constitute a violation of these regulations. Upon conviction, the person, firm or corporation granted the temporary occupancy permit shall be fined not more than $70.00. Each day that landscaping is not completed shall constitute a separate offense; 
(4)	All landscaping improvements shall be maintained in a live and healthy condition and failure to maintain landscaping is an offense. 
(Code 1983, § 12-374; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Sec. 44-422. Approval, denial and amendments.
(a)	The city may approve a particular project, or portion thereof, with or without attaching such conditions as may be required to ensure compliance with the standards of these regulations and other applicable ordinances. 
(b)	The city may deny any application if it is found that applicable criteria, standards or policies have not been complied with, or if the applicant fails or refuses to comply with the same. 
(c)	City approval of any project shall expire and become null and void one year from the date of such approval; provided that a building permit has not been issued, unless the city for good cause shown, has specified a different date. The city shall also have the power, upon good cause shown, to extend any such period of time. 
(d)	No building permit shall be issued for any project for which city approval is required, unless and until, such approval has been granted and the applicable time limitation has not expired. 
(e)	The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to order and direct the cessation of any work for which approval is required but which has not been obtained. 
(f)	Any substantial change or modification in the proposed and approved site plan or building permit shall not be permitted. In the event any applicant desires to amend his application or plans subsequent to site approval and such amendment constitutes, in the opinion of the city planner, a substantial variation from the original, then the approved permit shall become void and a new application under these regulations must be submitted. Further, no minor change shall be allowed without written approval of the city prior to commencement of any work toward construction. 
(g)	No person, firm or corporation shall do any work in furtherance of any construction, alteration or modification of any property subject to these regulations without there being in existence, a valid and current building permit for such work. Further, no such person shall do any such work where the design or construction thereof varies from the approved site plan therefor. 
(Code 1983, § 12-375; Ord. No. 301-A, 11-8-1990)
 
Secs. 44-423—44-442. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XV. LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISIONS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERAL STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
 
Sec. 44-443. Purpose and authority.
In order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of present and future residents of the city and to bring about the coordinated, efficient, and economic development and growth of the city, the following regulations for the development and subdividing of land and property within the corporate limits of the city are hereby adopted and established pursuant to law. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.1; Code 1983, § 12-401)
 
Sec. 44-444. Jurisdiction.
These regulations shall apply to the following forms of subdividing and developing of land within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)	The establishment, erection, or construction of a building or dwelling of any nature on any tract, lot, site, or parcel of land containing five acres or less in area; 
(2)	The erection, establishment, development or construction of two or more buildings or residence of any nature, on any tract, lot, site, or parcel of land containing ten acres or less in area; 
(3)	The dividing of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites, or parcels, any part of which when subdivided shall contain five acres or less in area; 
(4)	The redividing of land, previously divided or platted into tracts, lots, sites, or parcels any part of which when redivided, shall be five acres or less in area; 
(5)	The dedicating, vacating, or reserving of any public or private easement through any tract of land, regardless of area involved, including those for use by public and private utility companies; and 
(6)	The dedicating of any street or alley, or additions to any street or alley, through any tract of land, regardless of the area involved. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.1; Code 1983, § 12-402)
 
Sec. 44-445. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a way from which an inferior means of access to abutting property is obtained. 
Cul-de-sac means provisions for a turnaround at the closed end of a local street. 
Development means the planning, erection, construction, or establishment of buildings or residences of any nature. 
Double frontage lot means a lot which runs through a block from street to street and has frontage on two or more streets. 
Final plat means a map or chart showing land subdivisions giving in a form suitable for filing in the office of the county clerk, releases, affidavits, dedications and acceptance, and containing a complete engineering description (including reference to field markers) sufficient to locate on the ground all streets, areas, blocks, lots, parcels and other divisions of the subdivision. 
Planning commission means the city planning commission of the city. 
Preliminary plat means a map or chart of a proposed land subdivision, showing the character and general details of the proposed development. 
Reverse frontage lot means a corner lot of such size and shape that a building erected on it might logically be designed to face on either adjoining street, thus causing it to rear on the side line of an abutting lot. 
Street means a public way from which the principal means of access to abutting property is obtained. 
Subdividing means the dividing or redividing of land into tracts, lots, sites, or parcels or the providing of or vacating of public or private easements, whether shown on a map or chart or described by metes and bounds. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.1; Code 1983, § 12-403)
 
Sec. 44-446. Neighborhood associations.
(a)	It is the desire of the city council to support the development of neighborhood associations within the city. Residents of the city are encouraged to organize neighborhood associations to identify, prioritize and address the needs and concerns of the city in an organized and unified fashion. This creates a manageable framework for community action and allows the city to provide services more efficiently. 
(b)	Neighborhood associations organized within the city are encouraged to submit a letter announcing their presence to the city clerk. The letter may state the following: 
(1)	The name of the association. 
(2)	The boundaries or name of the subdivision the association represents. 
(3)	The names, titles, addresses, and contact information of the officers of the association. 
(4)	Designated meeting times. 
(5)	The ward the association operates within (ward 1, 2, 3, or 4). 
(c)	Neighborhood associations operating within the city are encouraged to submit a copy of the following with their announcement letter: 
(1)	Statement as to the nonprofit status of the association. 
(2)	A copy of the association bylaws as adopted by the association. 
(3)	A copy of the mission or vision statement as adopted by the association. 
(d)	Neighborhood associations are encouraged to notify the city clerk in writing of changes to any of the information submitted pursuant to this section. 
(e)	Noncompliance with the above guidelines shall not prevent citizens from operating or organizing a neighborhood association within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(f)	No fees shall be required to register a neighborhood association organized within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(g)	Upon receipt of neighborhood association registration materials, the city clerk shall maintain a log of such organizations within the city. 
(h)	The city clerk shall notify the mayor and the members of the city council of neighborhood associations organized within the respective ward. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1102; Ord. No. 483-03-06, 7-20-2006)
 
Sec. 44-447. Procedures generally.
(a)	For all cases of subdividing or developing land within the scope of these regulations, a plat of the land in question shall be drawn and submitted to the planning commission and city council for their approval or its disapproval as provided by law. 
(b)	No plat or description of land subdividing land or area in the city shall be filed in the office of the county clerk until same shall have been given preliminary and final approval by the planning commission and approved by the city council as required by law. All final plats shall be filed within one year of date of approval by the city council and no lots, tracts, sites, or parcels shall be sold until the plat shall have been recorded as herein provided. Failure to record such approved plat within one year shall void all approvals thereto. 
(c)	Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be placed on the city's planning commission agenda only after fulfilling the appropriate requirements of these regulations. However, a plat not meeting all the requirements may be submitted; provided the subdivider presents with the plat a letter requesting the specific exemptions and enumerating in detail the reasons therefor. 
(d)	To defray partially the costs of notification, field and special studies there shall be paid to the city at the time of submission of preliminary platting, a fee in such amount as is set by the council by motion or resolution. 
(e)	After any final plat has been approved by the city planning commission or the city council and the subdivider desires to make any change thereto, he shall pay to the city a fee equal to 50 percent of the fee required upon the filing of the preliminary plat; provided, however, that special consideration may be made by the council for minor or slight changes only. 
(f)	Reserved. 
(g)	Plats containing three lots or fewer may be exempted from all or part of the provisions of this section upon written approval of the city council and zoning commission. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.2; Code 1983, § 12-404; Ord. No. 2020-07-16 , § 1, 7-16-2020)
 
Sec. 44-448. Preliminary approval, procedures.
(a)	The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat for presentation to the city planning commission. It shall conform to the minimum requirements of the comprehensive plan for the city, which shall have been previously ascertained by the subdivider. It shall be submitted in duplicate directly to the office of the city manager not less than ten days before the next planning commission meeting. Two signed statements describing the proposed use of the land, the proposed improvements thereon, and the proposed restrictions on future construction and development shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor of the state. 
(b)	The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and shall show: 
(1)	Scale, north point, and date; 
(2)	The proposed name of the subdivision; 
(3)	The name and address of the owner of record of the subdivided land and the name and address of the registered engineer preparing the plat; 
(4)	A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision with reference to existing or proposed major streets and to government section lines; 
(5)	The names with location of intersecting boundary lines of adjoining subdivisions, and the location of the city limits, if falling within or immediately adjoining the tract; 
(6)	The land contours with vertical intervals not greater than two feet referenced to the United States Geological Survey or Coast and Geodetic benchmark or monument; 
(7)	The locations of buildings, water, water course, and the location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin or are immediately adjacent, provided that actual measured distances shall not be required; 
(8)	The length of the boundaries of the tract measured to the nearest foot and the proposed location and width of streets, alleys, easements and setback lines and the approximate lot dimensions; 
(9)	The location, size, and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, power and natural gas lines and other surface and subsurface structures and pipelines existing within or immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision, and the location, layout, type and proposed size of the following structures and utilities: 
a.	Water mains; 
b.	Sanitary sewer mains, submains, and laterals; 
c.	Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structure; and 
d.	Street improvements; 
(10)	Location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all run-off from the proposed subdivision and the location and size of all drainage easements relating thereto, whether they are located within or without the proposed plat. 
(c)	The preliminary plat so submitted shall be routed to the chief of police, the fire chief, and the city engineer for checking and comments. 
(d)	The preliminary so submitted together with the recommendations of the police chief, the fire chief, and the city engineer shall be submitted to the planning commission to be placed on their agenda. The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the plat within 60 days of its presentation by the applicant; provided, however, that if, in the opinion of this planning commission, additional information is needed, action upon the plat may be deferred until the subdivider or city official supplies to the planning commission the required information. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, or approved conditionally, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be signed by the planning commission chairman, and shall be attached to one copy of the plat and submitted to the applicant. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the applicant, and no action is taken by the planning commission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. If the plat is conditionally approved, the planning commission may require submission of a revised preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all the standards or if the applicant and planning commission agree upon any revisions, which shall be filed with the planning commission on a revised copy, the applicant may proceed with the staking of streets and roads and with preparation of the final plat. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.3; Code 1983, § 12-405)
 
Sec. 44-449. Final approval, procedures.
(a)	The final plat must be prepared by a land surveyor, registered in the state and approved by an engineer as to conformity with the accompanying papers as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. The final plat shall be neatly drawn on tracing cloth and three dark line prints thereof shall be submitted to the office of the city manager, not less than ten days before final approval. At the same time, there shall be submitted three sheets of the proposed specifications or restrictions in final form. 
(b)	The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch from an accurate survey and on sheets whose dimensions are 21 inches by 36 inches between border lines. On the first sheet of every plat, there shall be a key map showing the location of the subdivision, reference to the government survey section lines, and major streets. If more than two sheets are required for the plat, the key map shall show the number of the sheet for each area; a border of one inch surrounding the sheet shall be left at the top, bottom, and right hand side and a margin of three inches on the left hand side for binding purposes. 
(c)	In addition to the map specifications for the preliminary plat, the final plat shall show: 
(1)	The location and description of all section corners and permanent survey monuments in or near the tract to at least one of which the subdivision shall be referenced; 
(2)	The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and decimals thereof, and the value of all required true bearings and angles dimensioned in degrees and minutes as hereafter specified; 
(3)	The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings and the location of boundary lines of adjoining lands with adjacent subdivision identified by official names; 
(4)	The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings or angles; 
(5)	The lines of all proposed alleys, where the length or direction of an alley is not readily discernable from data available for lot and block lines, then the length or bearings shall be given; 
(6)	The width and names where appropriate of all proposed streets and alleys and of all adjacent streets, alleys and easements, shall be properly located; 
(7)	The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by length and bearings or angles except that where a lot line meets a street line, at right angles, the angle or bearing value may be omitted; 
(8)	The outline of any property which is offered for dedication for public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the area marked "public;" 
(9)	The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block with areas to be excluded from platting marked "reserved" or "not a part" or "not platted;" 
(10)	The location of all building lines, set-back lines and easements for public service or utilities with dimensions showing their locations; 
(11)	The radii, arcs, points of tangency, points of intersection, and central angles of all curvilinear streets and radii of all property returns; 
(12)	The proper acknowledgment of owners and the consent by the mortgagee to plat restrictions; 
(13)	The following shall be made and shown on the cloth tracing: 
a.	Owner's certificate and dedication duly signed and acknowledged; 
b.	Land surveyors certificate of survey duly executed with the seal affixed, and approved by the engineer with his seal affixed; 
c.	Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to the public, duly signed and acknowledged; 
d.	Treasurer's certificate; 
e.	Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive covenants filed in the office of the county clerk, which directly affect the land being subdivided; 
f.	Certificate of planning commission approval; and 
g.	Certificate of city council acceptance of ways, easements and public land dedications; 
(14)	A title which shall include: 
a.	The names of the subdivision; 
b.	The City of Spencer, County of Oklahoma, State of Oklahoma; and 
c.	Location and description of the subdivision reference by section, range and township. 
(d)	There shall be filled with the final plat, plans and specifications for the construction of all required water mains and laterals, sanitary sewer mains and laterals and storms sewers or drainage structures, as required by the planning commission and the city council; the plans and specifications to be prepared by any registered engineer registered to do business in the state, and approved by the city engineer. There shall be deposited therewith an inspection fee as hereinafter set forth. The planning commission may give its final approval to the final plat prior to the receipt of the plans and specifications, upon the developer or subdivider's entering into a written undertaking with the city in the following form: 
In consideration by the city of the city planning commission approving the final plat of ___________ an addition to the city, the undersigned subdivider hereby agrees with the city as follows: 
(1)	To construct dedicated drainage structures as required by the city engineer; 
(2)	To construct, erect, and install such water mains and laterals and sewer mains and laterals and such paved streets as is required by the city planning commission and city council in a manner approved by the city engineer of the city; 
(3)	To supply the city a one-year maintenance bond on all paving in the amount of 100 percent of the contract price, and in the amount of 15 percent of the contract price for one year thereafter, and to supply to the city a one-year maintenance bond on all sewer and water mains in the amount of 100 percent of the contract price for one year, and in the amount of 15 percent of the contract price for four years thereafter, all to be on forms as approved by the city. The city shall be provided two sets of "as built" plans of the improvement; 
(4)	To furnish the city with one certified copy of the final plat; 
(5)	To pay to the city an inspection fee according to the scale provided in subsection (e) of this section; and 
(6)	To comply with such additional reasonable requirements for data or information relative to such subdivision as may be required by the city planning commission or the city engineer. 
___________ 
Developer 
The final acceptance of the final plat and dedication shall be withheld until the plans and specifications have been submitted and approved by the city council. 
(e)	The subdivider shall pay an inspection fee of two percent based upon the engineer's estimate of the cost of construction of all improvements to the subdivision to be dedicated for public use including streets, water, sanitary sewer and storm sewers. The payment to be made to the city prior to any work order being issued thereon, and shall cover the cost of the city for inspection of the improvements. Any and all costs of testing as set forth in the standard specifications shall be paid for by the subdivider or the contractor before the work receives final approval by the city. 
(f)	The planning commission shall act upon the final plat within 45 days after it has been submitted for final approval. This approval shall be shown on the plat with the date of such approval and over the signature of the commission chairman. Unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to by the applicant and if no action is taken by the planning commission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved. A certificate by the planning commission as to date of submission of plat for final approval and failure of planning commission to act thereon, within such time, shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement or approval above named. If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be transmitted with a copy of prints and tracings to the applicant. 
(g)	Before recording of the final plat, it shall be submitted to the city council for its approval and acceptance of public use and dedication. This approval of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the mayor and attested to by the city clerk or his deputy. The disapproval of any plat or plan by the city council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon; provided, however, that the mayor may withhold the signature as an indication of approval until plans and specifications for all improvements as herein set forth have been submitted and approved by the council. 
(h)	After a final approval of the plat and the affixing of all the signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide the planning commission with three dark line prints thereof. One of these shall be retained in the permanent files of the planning commission, one shall be filed with the office of the city engineer, and one shall be filed with the office of the city manager. The applicant shall file the original tracing, one dark line print on cloth, and one contact reproducible cloth tracing or film with the county clerk. 
(i)	One set of specifications or subdivision restrictions with one reproducible cloth tracing of the plans for any improvements and marked "as built" shall be deposited by the subdivider in the office of the city manager. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.4; Code 1983, § 12-406)
 
Sec. 44-450. Design standards.
(a)	All plats shall be prepared in conformance with the purpose and spirit of these standards. 
(b)	Whenever the area is divided into lots containing one or more acres and there is an indication that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building plots, consideration must be given to street and lot arrangements of the original subdivision so that additional minor streets can be opened to permit a logical arrangement of smaller lots. 
(c)	All natural drainage courses into which other drainage courses empty shall be left undisturbed and shall be provided with adequate dedicated rights-of-way. Street alignment should follow contour lines or be generally parallel to such drainage ways. 
(d)	The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining areas, (or their proper projection where adjoining land is not subdivided), insofar as may be deemed necessary by the planning commission for public requirements. The width of such streets in new subdivisions shall not be less than the minimum street width established herein. The street and alley arrangement must also be such as to cause no hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. Streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named, shall bear the names of the existing streets, east and west streets shall be designated by number and north and south streets shall be designated by name. 
(e)	Streets, alleys, and easements within the subdivision shall be arranged for the most advantageous development of the tract and in harmony with existing or potential development of adjoining tracts. 
(1)	Installation of rights-of-way as stated herein.
a.	Primary thoroughfares, 100 feet; 
b.	Secondary thoroughfares, 80 feet; 
c.	Collector streets, 60 feet; 
d.	Local streets, 50 feet if permanent curb and gutter and street surface are to be immediately installed and 60 feet in every other case. 
(2)	Street lengths, and deflections.
a.	A cul-de-sac court or similar type street may be permitted where size, location or topography of the tract do not permit a normal street pattern. A cul-de-sac should be not more than 500 feet in length as measured from entrance to center of turnaround and if more than 100 feet in length shall be provided with a turn-around having a minimum radius of 50 feet at the property line and 40 feet at the curbline; and 
b.	Where any street deflects an angle of ten degrees or more, a horizontal curve having a minimum radius of 300 feet for major streets and 150 feet for minor streets shall be provided. 
(3)	Alleys. Alleys when provided at the rear of business lots shall be at least 30 feet in width and when provided in residential blocks shall be at least 20 feet in width. At the intersection of two alleys, the corners of the abutting property shall be provided with a property line return of a radius of ten feet. All business property shall be designed to provide off-street loading entrances; 
(4)	Easements. Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than 7½ feet wide shall be provided along each rear lot line, and alongside lot lines where necessary for use by public and private utilities. Easements of greater width may be required along or across lots where necessary for the extension of storm and sanitary sewer mains and other utilities and where both water and sewer lines are located at the same easement. Where necessary, aerial easements may be required for use by service utilities; 
(5)	Street grades. All grades shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer with the following minimum standards observed: 
a.	Street grades for major streets shall not exceed five percent; 
b.	Street grades for all other classes of streets shall not exceed eight percent; 
c.	No street surface shall have a finish grade of less than 0.35 of 1 percent; or 
d.	When deemed necessary, the planning commission may permit a violation from these grades in order to adjust to the topographical conditions; 
(6)	Street drainage and flood control. All subdivisions shall provide for adequate drainage of surface waters as follows: 
a.	All land developments shall be related to the surrounding drainage pattern with proper provisions made for proper drainage facilities; 
b.	Minimum runoff shall be determined by the rational method with approved rainfall intensity frequency data; and 
c.	If stormwater is to be diverted from its natural course the following requirements shall be made: 
1.	A sketch showing the existing water way and the location of the proposed drainage change; and 
2.	Profile of the existing water course. 
(f)	Block requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Blocks shall be of such size and shape as to best utilize the tract subdivided and in conformity with the surrounding area and for the development and in correlation with private development in the area. Normally, a block will not be longer than 800 feet. However, blocks not to exceed 1,320 feet may be permitted whenever it is determined by the planning commission that the movement of traffic is provided; and 
(2)	Business lots shall be of such depth and size to allow for off-street parking as required by the zoning ordinance. Proper access shall be provided for all lots abutting on platted streets. Where grade separation structures or similar traffic regulators are or may be needed, the block shall be so arranged to provide adequately for such streets or improvements. 
(g)	Lot requirements are as follows: 
(1)	All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curve street lines. Double frontage lots should be void where possible; 
(2)	For corner lots, a property return with a radius of 20 feet may be required; provided, however, if in the opinion of the planning commission there is an existing or potential future need, a major radius not to exceed 40 feet may be required. On lots reserved to business use a chord may be substituted for the circular arc; 
(3)	The minimum lot width, area, and off-street parking requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be offset in the lot and block design. In no case shall the lot area per family be less than 6,000 square feet for detached single family dwellings; 
(4)	The minimum lot width at the street line shall be not less than 35 feet and at the building line not less than 50 feet; and 
(5)	A minimum of 60 feet width shall be provided on all corner lots irrespective of whether they rear upon lots facing the side streets. 
(h)	Building lines shall be shown on all plats intended for residential use of any character as follows: 
(1)	In residential districts a front yard set-back line shall be provided on every lot. The depth of the front yard set-back line shall be at least 25 feet; 
(2)	On any corner lot to be used for residential purposes, the setback lines on the intersecting street shall be located not less than 15 feet from the right-of-way line, in case such lot is back-to-back with another lot, and 25 feet in every other case; and 
(3)	Restrictions shall be made, requiring that all buildings to be used for residential purposes be set back from side lot lines at least five feet on all interior side lot lines. 
(4)	Restrictions requiring buildings to be set back to such building lines shall be shown either on the plat, or shall be contained in a separate recorded instrument and referred to in the plat. 
(i)	Whenever a subdivision is developed as a neighborhood unit, wherein adequate park or playground area is provided, through traffic is adequately cared for, and the majority of the minor streets are of the cul-de-sac variety, the planning commission may vary the requirements of this section in order to allow the subdivider more freedom in the arrangement of streets and lots, but at the same time protect the convenience, health, safety, and welfare of the probable future residents of the subdivision, as well as the character of the surrounding property and the general welfare of the entire community. In no case, however, shall the lot area per family be less than 6,000 square feet for detached single family dwellings. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.5; Code 1983, § 12-407)
 
Sec. 44-451. Improvements.
(a)	Plans for the improvements herein required shall be prepared by the city engineering department or by a qualified engineer registered and licensed in the state. Two sets of prints on the 'as built' plans and specifications for all improvements shall be filed with the city manager. One set of 'as built' plans and specifications certified and signed by a registered, licensed engineer shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the acceptance of the city of any improvements installed by the subdivider. These improvements shall be installed as listed below. In lieu of their completion, the city council shall require the subdivider to file a surety bond with the city clerk to secure to the city the actual construction of such improvements in a satisfactory manner, within a period not exceeding two years. Such bond shall be in an amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement, as determined by the council and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the council; provided, however, that where all streets and utilities are installed according to the plans and specifications prior to the issuing of any building permit for construction within the subdivision, no surety bond will be required; provided, however, that before the acceptance of the improvements by the city, the developer shall file with the city a bond of corporate surety, licensed to do business in the state, to be approved by the council guaranteeing the maintenance of all pavement and paved streets for a period of five years and all sewer and water lines and mains for a period of two years. Public utilities shall be designed in accordance with all elements of the comprehensive plan in order that they may be easily expanded or extended wherever necessary to serve an area beyond the limits of the proposed installations. 
(b)	Each block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less than one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches long set at least one inch below finished grade; and each subdivision corner shall be marked with a permanent concrete marker capped with a noncorrosive metal plate, set not less than one inch below the finished grade. 
(c)	Street improvement requirements are as follows: 
(1)	Streets and alleys shall be laid out, graded and otherwise improved as designated on the approved final plat and as deemed necessary by the city council. Such street layout and all improvement shall be done under the supervision of the city engineer and shall be subject to his inspection and approval; 
(2)	Roadway surfacing shall be in accordance with the standard specifications of the city as approved by the city council. The paving design of the intersection of any new street with a state or federal highway shall be approved by and be in conformance with the specifications of the state highway department. Widths shall comply with standards established by the council; and 
(3)	No building permits shall be issued for the construction of any building within the subdivision until the street layout and improvement and culvert installation have been completed or a surety bond filed. 
(d)	Sidewalks may be required along officially designated major streets. Sidewalks may be required along any minor streets where deemed essential for public convenience or safety by the planning commission. All required sidewalks shall be paved and shall be constructed in accordance with standards established by the city council. 
(e)	The subdivider shall provide water service throughout the tract as platted and made available to each lot within the area. Fire hydrants shall be provided by the subdivider in accordance with the requirements of the office of the city engineer and the city fire department. 
(f)	Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and shall provide adequate sewer lines accessible to each lot. Subdivision sewer systems shall comply with the regulations of the city council and shall be constructed under the supervision of the city engineer. 
(g)	In event the construction of sanitary sewers is not feasible in the opinion of the city engineer, the developer may install individual sewage disposal devices for each lot, but all such individual disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the state and city health department and the city engineer, and under the supervision of the departments and on any lot where a septic tank is to be installed, the lot shall be of a size to comply with the following provisions: 
(1)	The lot shall contain adequate area for the installation of a minimum of 400 feet of septic tank lateral lines; 
(2)	No part of any septic tank or laterals shall be located closer than 20 feet to the rear of the rear building line of the principal structure to be placed on the lot; and 
(3)	Where a water well is to be placed on the same lot with a septic tank the lot area required for the water well shall be in accordance with the requirements of the state health department and the county health department, and shall be in addition to the area above required for septic tanks. 
One set of blue prints of blue line prints of the 'as built' plans of all streets and utilities shall be filed with the city engineer. 
(h)	Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of stormwater subject to the approval of the city council. 
(i)	The subdivider should plant trees in new residential subdivisions that are not located in wooded areas. Before the trees are planted, the subdivider shall submit a plan of such planting to the planning commission for its study and recommendation in order to prevent the planting of certain species that would become nuisances either because of insects or disease or because they might unduly interfere with sewer mains or other utilities. It is recommended that the planting of trees in parking lots be a minimum distance of four feet from the curb and 30 feet on center with each other. 
(j)	Whenever any stream or important surface drainage course is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate an adequate easement along each side of the stream for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving or protecting the stream or for drainage, parkway or recreational use. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.11; Code 1983, § 12-408)
 
Sec. 44-452. Variations and exceptions.
Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in substantial hardship or inequity, the planning commission may vary or modify, except as otherwise indicated, such requirements of design, but not of procedure or improvements, so that the subdivider may develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so, at the same time, the public welfare and interest of the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of these regulations are preserved. Such modification may be granted upon written request of the subdivider, or his engineer, and stating the reasons for each modification and may be waived by three-fourths vote of the regular membership of the planning commission. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.12; Code 1983, § 12-409)
 
Sec. 44-453. Administration and amendment.
The city council may from time to time adopt, amend, and make public rules and regulations for the administration of these regulations to the end that the public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited. These regulations may be enlarged or amended by the city council after public hearing, due notice of which shall be given as required by law. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.13; Code 1983, § 12-410)
 
Sec. 44-454. Time of approval of final plat.
The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission and city council for final approval within one year of the date on which the preliminary plan was approved. If not submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plan shall be considered as having been disapproved unless the planning commission agrees to an extension of time. The final plat shall be filed in the office of the county recorder within one year after approval by the city council and planning commission, whichever is later, or if not filed within such time, the approval shall be considered as having been voided. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.14; Code 1983, § 12-411)
 
Sec. 44-455. Violation and penalty.
No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land which itself does not comply with all the provisions of this article. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1.16; Code 1983, § 12-412)
 
Secs. 44-456—44-478. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. ADDITIONAL STREET AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS
 
Sec. 44-479. Construction to conform to specifications.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to construct, erect or establish any paved streets or sidewalks in the city which do not conform to the specifications adopted by the city and as hereinafter set forth. The provisions of this article shall be applicable throughout the city, not restricted by the terms of section 44-444. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.2; Code 1983, § 12-420)
 
Sec. 44-480. Plans to be submitted.
Before grading, drainage, guttering, curbing, paving, installing of sidewalks or otherwise improving any city street, avenue, alley, or other public place within the city is started by any person, firm or corporation, not under contract with the city for the construction of such improvement, complete accurate and detailed plans, profiles, specifications, and estimates of cost of the work contemplated, showing the size, grade, length, width, thickness, location and the materials out of which the same is to be constructed, is prepared, submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.3; Code 1983, § 12-421)
 
Sec. 44-481. Plans to receive recommendation of city engineer.
The plans, profiles, specifications and estimates of cost of the improvements contemplated will be submitted in triplicate copies to the city engineer for his inspection. After careful consideration and study, the city engineer shall recommend to the council his approval or disapproval, or his recommendations for any change in the improvements so offered for consideration and approval, which is endorsed upon such plans. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.4; Code 1983, § 12-422)
 
Sec. 44-482. Council to approve revision.
The council shall consider and study such plans so submitted, together with the recommendations of the city engineer, and may approve or disapprove the same as appears to be in the best interest of the city and its inhabitants. If such plans, profiles, specifications and estimates of cost are approved, the same is signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk, and one copy is filed with the city clerk, one copy to be retained by the city engineer, and one copy to be returned to the person, firm or corporation submitting the same. If disapproved in whole or in part, the three copies are returned to the person, firm or corporation submitting the same for correction, revision, addition, re-design or such other change as may be required by the council. The plans, profiles, specifications and estimates of cost of the improvement contemplated, so revised, changed or corrected may be re-submitted for re-examination and approval by the council. The final approval thereof, and the furnishing of the bond as hereinafter provided, shall constitute the authority to construct such improvements. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.5; Code 1983, § 12-423)
 
Sec. 44-483. Bond to be furnished.
Every person, firm or corporation shall at the time such plans are approved, furnish a construction bond, executed by himself and surety company, authorized to do business in the state, in a sum equal to 100 percent of the construction cost of such improvements, in favor of and to be approved by the city, conditioned as follows: 
(1)	That the improvements will be made according to the approved plans, and without unnecessary delay; 
(2)	To pay for all labor and materials going into the improvements; and 
(3)	Engaging to hold the city harmless against all claims for injury to persons and damage to property arising from or growing out of the construction work. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.6; Code 1983, § 12-424)
 
Sec. 44-484. Work to be inspected.
It is the duty of the city engineer or any competent person authorized by him, to inspect, check, test or measure any or all work or improvements so approved by the council at any time during the work of construction. If he should discover the same is not in compliance with the approved plans, then such engineer shall order the work discontinued until full compliance with the plans is made. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.7; Code 1983, § 12-425)
 
Sec. 44-485. Improvement to become city property.
Upon the completion of the improvements, and the total construction cost thereof having been paid in full, and the final inspection having been made and the work approved, the city shall accept such improvements and make the same a part of the public improvements of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.8; Code 1983, § 12-426)
 
Sec. 44-486. Inspection fees.
An inspection fee is paid by every person, firm or corporation, making such improvement in such sums computed as follows: a flat fee of 2½ percent for all construction improvement. A sum equal to the inspection fee hereby assessed is deposited with the city clerk at the time the plans are submitted for inspection and approval. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.9; Code 1983, § 12-427)
 
Sec. 44-487. Warning.
Every person doing any such construction work shall give warning thereof to the traveling public, and where the same is in an unsafe condition for travel, such warning shall disclose such condition, and shall place lighted flares about the same at night. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.10; Code 1983, § 12-428)
 
Sec. 44-488. Acts prohibited.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to engage in, commence or to make any improvements above specified: 
(1)	Without submitting and securing the approval of the plans, profiles, specifications and estimates of cost; 
(2)	Without furnishing the bond required herein; 
(3)	After the same has been ordered stopped by the city engineer; 
(4)	In an unauthorized manner; or 
(5)	To fail or neglect to give the warning, or to place such flare lights at night, all as herein required. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.11; Code 1983, § 12-429)
 
Sec. 44-489. Permit required for cutting paving; fee.
It is unlawful for any person to cut, alter, mutilate or change in any way or manner for any purpose any paved or traveled portion of any street or alley, or any curb, gutter, catch basin or any other appurtenance of any street or alley or any sidewalk in the city without securing a permit from the city clerk, on approval of the city engineer, to make such cut, alteration or change. However, this requirement shall not apply to any person acting under the direct supervision of the city engineer or city manager, nor shall it apply to any person repairing or replacing a sidewalk under a sidewalk permit; provided such person only changes the sidewalk. Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a fee as set by the city for each cut to be made. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.12; Code 1983, § 12-430)
 
Sec. 44-490. Deposit to cover cost of restoring street.
It is the duty of any person desiring to make any cut, alteration or change in any paved or traveled portion of any street or alley, or appurtenance thereto, or in any curb or sidewalk to secure from the city engineer a statement specifying the estimated cost of restoring the street, alley, curb, gutter or sidewalk or other appurtenance thereto, and the person shall deposit such estimated sum with the city clerk who shall issue a duplicate receipt to such person for same. The duplicate receipt or copy thereof is delivered to the city engineer by such person who shall then issue authority to the city clerk to issue a permit for such cutting, altering or change. The holder of the permit at the conclusion of the restoring of such street, alley, gutter, curb, sidewalk or appurtenance shall notify the city engineer who shall make an inspection of the same. If the work is satisfactory, the city engineer shall give a statement to the person to that effect. The city clerk, upon presentation of such statement, shall refund the deposit. If the work is not the same in a satisfactory manner within ten days from the receipt of such notice and if such work is not satisfactorily completed, then the city engineer or city manager shall have it done and pay for the same out of the deposit, and the balance, if any, is refunded by the city clerk. It is the duty of the city clerk to keep the deposits in a separate fund. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.13; Code 1983, § 12-431)
 
Sec. 44-491. Driveways, aprons and approaches; permit required.
Before any driveway, apron, or approach is installed over that portion of the street including the city's right-of-way easement, a permit must be obtained from the city clerk with the approval of the city engineer. The application for the driveway, apron or approach is accompanied by the details, plans, profiles, specifications, and estimate of cost thereof. The construction of the driveways, aprons, or approaches shall conform to the specifications approved by the city council for paving of streets. Such permit is issued only to a licensed contractor. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.14; Code 1983, § 12-432)
 
Sec. 44-492. Driveway inspection fee.
Before the permit as provided for in section 44-491 is issued, the applicant shall pay an inspection fee as required for paving streets, but in no event shall the inspection fee be as provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Prior Code, § 37-2.15; Code 1983, § 12-433)
 
Secs. 44-493—44-522. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. PERMITS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING ON CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY
 
Sec. 44-523. Application for permit required.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to establish off-street parking for automobiles or other vehicles which is wholly or partially upon a street right-of-way in the city, shall, before any grading, drainage, or work of any kind is done thereon and before any vehicles are so parked, make application for a permit therefor to the engineering and inspection department of the city. The provisions of this division shall be applicable throughout the city, not restricted by the terms of section 44-444. 
(Prior Code, § 37.5.1; Code 1983, § 12-440)
 
Sec. 44-524. Requirements of application.
The application submitted to the engineering and inspection department is in writing and shall contain complete, accurate and detailed plans, profiles and specifications and estimate of cost for the work contemplated showing the size, grade, length, width, thickness, location and materials out of which same is to be constructed. The application is to be submitted in triplicate. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.2; Code 1983, § 12-441)
 
Sec. 44-525. Approval of engineer required.
The plans, profiles, specifications and estimate of cost of the improvement contemplated by this division are to be considered and studied by the city engineer, who shall recommend to the council of the city his approval or disapproval and his recommendation for any changes in the improvement so offered for consideration and approval, which recommendation is endorsed upon the plans. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.3; Code 1983, § 12-442)
 
Sec. 44-526. Approval of council required.
The council shall consider and study such plans so submitted, together with the recommendation of the city engineer, and may approve or disapprove the same as it appears to be in the best interest of the city and its inhabitants. If such plans, profiles, specifications and estimates of cost are approved, the same is signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk and one copy is filed with the city clerk, two copies to be retained by the city engineer and one copy to be returned to the person, firm or corporation submitting the same. If disapproved, in whole or in part, three copies of the four copies should be returned to the person, firm or corporation submitting the same for correction, revision, addition, re-design or such other changes as may be required by the council. The plans, profiles, specifications and estimate of cost of the improvements contemplated so revised, changed or corrected may be re-submitted for examination and approval of the council, and the final approval thereof and the furnishing of bond as required herein provided shall constitute the authority for the construction of such improvement. 
(Prior Code, § 37.5.4; Code 1983, § 12-443)
 
Sec. 44-527. Bonds, inspection.
Every person shall, at the time such plans are approved, furnish a construction bond executed by himself and a surety company authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city, in a sum equal to 100 percent of the construction cost of such improvements in favor of and to be approved by the city, conditioned as follows: 
(1)	That the improvement is made according to the approved plans and without unnecessary delay; 
(2)	To pay for all labor and materials going into or used in connection with such improvement; 
(3)	To hold such city harmless against all claims for injuries to persons and damage to property arising out of or growing out of construction work; 
(4)	The improvement is maintained in good condition for a period of five years from the date of the completion and acceptance of same; and 
(5)	It is the duty of the city engineer or his inspectors to inspect, check, test or measure any and all work or improvement so approved by the council at any or all times during the construction of the project and if he shall discover that the same is not in compliance with the approved plans, then such engineer shall order the work discontinued until full compliance with the plans is made. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.5; Code 1983, § 12-444)
 
Sec. 44-528. Property of city.
Upon completion of the improvements and the total construction thereof having been fully paid and the final inspection having been made, and the work approved, the improvement or so much thereof that is on the street right-of-way is to be and remain the property of the city but the owner of the premises making application therefor, and all successors in ownership thereof, are fully responsible for the maintenance of same. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.6; Code 1983, § 12-445)
 
Sec. 44-529. Inspection fee.
An inspection fee of two percent of the construction cost of such improvement is paid by every person, firm or corporation making such improvement and before such plans are approved, and a sum equal to the inspection fee hereby assessed is deposited with the city clerk before delivery of the approved plans to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.7; Code 1983, § 12-446)
 
Sec. 44-530. Warning signs.
Every person, firm or corporation doing any such work shall give warning thereof to the traveling public and where the same is in an unsafe condition for travel, such warning shall disclose such condition and shall place lighted flares about the same at night. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.8; Code 1983, § 12-447)
 
Sec. 44-531. Interference with traffic prohibited.
No plan for off-street parking on street right-of-way is to be approved that will interfere with the traveling public or pedestrians using the right-of-way, nor shall any off-street parking be established at or near an intersection or so close thereto as to obstruct the view of the traveling public approaching the intersection. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.10; Code 1983, § 12-448)
 
Sec. 44-532. Unlawful construction.
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to engage in or make any improvements above specified without submitting and securing the approval of the plans, profiles, and specifications and estimate of cost or to do any work without furnishing the bonds required or to commence or carry on such work after same has been ordered stopped by the city engineer as provided herein, or to commence or carry on any such work in an unauthorized manner, or to fail or neglect to give a warning or place such flares at night as required herein or to commence any work prior to paying the inspection fee as provided herein. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.10; Code 1983, § 12-449)
 
Sec. 44-533. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Prior Code, § 37-5.11; Code 1983, § 12-450)
 
Secs. 44-534—44-559. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XVI. FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 44-560. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)	Ensure the potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1983, § 12-501; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-561. Findings of fact.
The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1983, § 12-502; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-562. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations are established to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1983, § 12-503; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-563. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeal means a request for a review of an interpretation by the floodplain administrator of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet. This condition occurs where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be comprised. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building that is: 
(1)	Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and 
(2)	Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base. 
(3)	In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zone V1-30, VE, or V, the term "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood hazard boundary-floodway map. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodplain orfloodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only is not a "habitable floor." 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the city. 
Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), means and includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, replacement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start date" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial improvement.
(1)	The term "substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.	Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.	If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred; 
(2)	For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
(3)	The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.	Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.	Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1983, § 12-504; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-564. Application; compliance; interpretation.
(a)	This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)	No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(c)	This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(d)	In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1983, § 12-505; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-565. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Spencer" with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for Oklahoma County, Oklahoma, and incorporated areas, map number 40109C0245 G, effective July 2, 2002, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 12-506; Ord. No. 414-05-02, 6-20-2002)
 
Sec. 44-566. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 12-507; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-567. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1983, § 12-508; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-568. Designation of administrator; duties.
(a)	The city manager is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article; 
(2)	Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building site will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(3)	Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article; 
(4)	Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344, from which prior approval is required; 
(5)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions); 
(6)	Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state water resources board prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(7)	Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(8)	When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 44-565, obtain review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 44-571 et seq.; and 
(9)	When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Code 1983, § 12-509; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-569. Permit procedures; approval or denial.
(a)	Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)	A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 44-572; 
(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
(5)	Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with this article. 
(b)	Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; 
(7)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and 
(10)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Code 1983, § 12-510; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-570. Variance procedures.
(a)	The city board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. It shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of the chapter. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 44-569(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of section 44-560. 
(c)	Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided that: 
(1)	The criteria outlined in all of this section are met; and 
(2)	The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(d)	Prerequisites for granting variances include the following: 
(1)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(2)	Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.	A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation may result in the cost of flood insurance increased commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(e)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(f)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in subsection (b), (c) or (d) of this section. 
(g)	The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Code 1983, § 12-511; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-571. General standards; flood hazard areas.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1983, § 12-512; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-572. Specific standards; flood hazard areas.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in sections 44-565, 44-568, and 44-573, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 44-569 is satisfied; 
(2)	Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one or more feet above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below one foot above the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific evaluation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator; 
(3)	Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed area below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.	A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; 
b.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
c.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)	Manufactured homes.
a.	All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces; 
b.	All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsection (1) of this section and section 44-573; and 
c.	All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot or more above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (4). 
(Code 1983, § 12-513; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-573. Standards for subdivision proposals; flood hazard areas.
(a)	All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 44-560 through 44-562. 
(b)	All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit requirements of sections 44-566, 44-569 and 44-570 et seq. 
(c)	Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres, if not otherwise provided pursuant to sections 44-565 and 44-568. 
(d)	All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)	All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1983, § 12-514; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-574. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 44-565 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.	Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the city's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.	Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads including the effects of buoyancy. 
(3)	A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 44-569(a)(1) are satisfied; and 
(4)	Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1983, § 12-515; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Sec. 44-575. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 44-565 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a professional registered engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and 
(2)	If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 44-571 et seq. 
(Code 1983, § 12-516; Ord. No. 258-A, 4-14-1988)
 
Secs. 44-576—44-598. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XVII. MANUFACTURED HOMES
 
Sec. 44-599. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dependent manufactured home means a manufactured home which does not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower. For purposes of regulation under this article, the term "dependent manufactured home" shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise specified. 
Freestanding manufactured home or travel trailer means any manufactured home or travel trailer not located in a manufactured home park or travel trailer park or in an approved manufactured home subdivision. 
Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the city or his authorized representative. 
Independent manufactured home means a manufactured home which has a flush toilet and a bath or shower. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this article, the term "manufactured home" shall mean an independent manufactured home. 
Inspection officer means the building inspector of the city or his authorized agent. 
Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a manufactured home park under the provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a movable or portable dwelling consisting of one or more components or of two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit designed for towing or transport on streets and highways on its own wheels, chassis or on flatbed or other trailers, both complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or permanent foundations, skirting, connection to utilities and similar operations. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this article, the term "manufactured home" shall refer to an "independent manufactured home" as defined in this section. 
Manufactured home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more manufactured homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Manufactured home space means a plot of ground within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home, and not located on a manufactured home sales lot. 
Manufactured home subdivision means a subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is in manufactured homes exclusively, and where manufactured home lots are sold for occupancy. 
Nonresidential mobile trailer means any vehicle having the basic characteristics of either a manufactured home or travel trailer, but which is used for purposes other than residential and is not being offered for sale as indicated by a clearly displayed sign on or near the trailer. 
Park means a manufactured home or travel trailer park. 
Permittee means any person to whom a temporary permit is issued to maintain or operate a manufactured home park under the provisions of this article. 
Public water system or public sewer system means any such system built and owned by, or dedicated to and accepted by the city; all other systems are private. 
Rural means any area shown on the city area general plan for suburban or rural development and which is zoned agriculturally. 
Service building means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men or women, and may also include buildings containing laundry facilities and other facilities. 
Subdivision means manufactured home subdivision, unless otherwise indicated. 
Travel trailer ortrailer means all vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis, designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation use not included in the definition of independent manufactured homes. For purposes of regulation under this article, a dependent manufactured home shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise specified. 
Trailer park ortravel trailer park means any plot of ground upon which two or more travel trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Travel trailer space means a plot of ground within a travel trailer park designed for accommodation of one travel trailer. 
(Prior Code, §§ 42-1-1—42-1-26; Code 1983, § 12-601)
 
Sec. 44-600. License and temporary permit.
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate any manufactured home park or travel trailer park within the city limits unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the city clerk with the approval of the inspection officer and health officer of the city, in the name of such person for the specific manufactured home park, except that the maintenance or operation of a manufactured home park or travel trailer park in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued under a temporary permit for such period of time and under such conditions as are hereinafter described. 
(b)	Application shall be made to the city clerk, who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with all pertinent provisions of this and other ordinances and regulations of the city. Every person holding such a license shall notify the city clerk in writing within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of, interest in or control of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such manufactured home park or travel trailer park. 
(c)	Application for original licenses shall be in writing signed by the applicant and accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application, and shall contain the following: 
(1)	Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)	The interest of the applicant in and the location and legal description of the park; 
(3)	A complete plan of the park showing compliance with all applicable provisions of this article and regulations promulgated thereunder; and 
(4)	Such further information as may be requested by the inspection officer and/or health officer. 
(d)	Applications for renewals of licenses shall be made in writing by the holder of the license and shall contain the following: 
(1)	Any change in the information submitted since the time the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted; and 
(2)	Other information requested by the inspection officer or health officer. 
(e)	A complete plan, as required by subsection (c)(3) of this section for the purpose of obtaining a license to be issued, shall show: 
(1)	The area and dimensions of the tract of land; 
(2)	The number, locations, and size of all manufactured home spaces or travel trailer spaces; 
(3)	The location and width of roadways, walkways, buffer strips and recreational areas; 
(4)	The locations of service buildings and other proposed structures; 
(5)	The location and size of utility and treatment facilities; and 
(6)	Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the park. 
(f)	Whenever the health officer or inspection officer finds conditions existing in violation of this article, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was issued that, unless such conditions or practices be corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice, the license will be suspended. At the end of such period, not to exceed 90 days, the inspection officer or health officer shall reinspect such park, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license was issued. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease operation of such park except as provided in subsection 44-448. 
(g)	Any person whose permit has been denied, suspended, or who has received notice from the inspection officer or health officer that his permit will be suspended unless certain conditions or practices at the park are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council, provided that when no petition for such hearing shall have been filed within ten days following the day on which notice of suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten-day period. 
(h)	A temporary permit, upon written request therefor, shall be issued by the city clerk upon written approval of the inspection officer and health officer for every manufactured home park or travel park in existence upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, permitting the park to be maintained and operated during the period ending one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, without being subject to the provisions of this article except such of the provisions as are made expressly applicable to permittees. 
(i)	The term of the temporary permit may be extended, upon written request, for not to exceed one additional period of up to 180 days if: 
(1)	The permittees shall have filed application for a license in conformity with this article within one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(2)	The park plans and specifications accompanying the application for license comply with all the provisions of this article is derived and all other applicable ordinances and statutes; and 
(3)	The permittee has diligently endeavored to make the existing park conform fully to the plans and specifications submitted with the application but has failed to do so due to circumstances beyond his control. 
(j)	Manufactured home parks and travel trailer parks in existence upon the initial effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which have concrete pads indicating the location of manufactured home spaces or travel trailer spaces need not comply with those sections of this chapter which would require the moving of concrete pads. They must, however, comply with all other requirements in accordance with subsections (h) and (i) of this section. In addition, any park expansion shall be in full compliance with provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 4-65; Code 1983, § 12-602)
 
Sec. 44-601. License fees and temporary permits, posting.
(a)	The city clerk shall charge and collect for each manufactured home park or travel trailer park an initial license or temporary permit with a fee as provided in the city fee schedule per park. The initial license or temporary permit shall expire one year from the date of issue, unless renewed upon such conditions as the city council may by ordinance direct. No charge shall be made for renewals of licenses. 
(b)	The license certificate of temporary permit shall be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the manufactured home park or the travel trailer park at all times. 
(Prior Code, §§ 4-66, 4-86; Code 1983, § 12-603)
 
Sec. 44-602. Inspection of manufactured home and travel trailer parks.
(a)	The inspection or health officers are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of manufactured home and travel trailer parks located within the city in order to perform their duty of safeguarding the health and safety of occupants of manufactured home parks and of the general public. 
(b)	The inspection officer and the health officer shall have the power to inspect the outside premises of private or public property for the purposes of inspecting and investigating conditions in relation to the enforcement of this chapter or of regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(c)	The inspection and the health officer shall have the power to inspect any register containing a record of all manufactured homes and occupants using the park. 
(d)	It is the duty of every occupant of a park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of the manufactured home park or travel trailer park or their premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article or with any lawful regulations adopted thereunder, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 4-67; Code 1983, § 12-604)
 
Sec. 44-603. Notice, hearings and orders.
(a)	Whenever the inspection or health officer determines violations of this article or pertinent laws or ordinances exist, he shall notify the owner or his agent of the alleged violation. The notice shall: 
(1)	Be in writing; 
(2)	Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)	Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with provisions of this article and other pertinent regulations; 
(4)	Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, for the performance of any act it requires; and 
(5)	Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require. The notice or order shall be deemed as properly served upon owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last known address. 
(b)	Any person affected by any notice issued under this article or resulting regulation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the mayor and city council. Such person shall file with the inspection officer or health officer a written request for such hearing and setting forth briefly the grounds for such request within ten days after the notice was served. When no request for such hearing shall have been filed within ten days following the day on which notice was served, a violation shall be deemed to have been automatically in existence at the expiration of the ten-day period. The filing of the request shall not stay the notice in cases of orders issued under this section. The hearing shall be held by the mayor and city council at the earliest possible time. 
(c)	After the hearing, the inspection officer or health officer shall compile the findings of the mayor and city council as to compliance with this article and pursuant regulations and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the prior notice which shall be served as provided in this section. Appeals from decisions of the mayor and city council shall be to the district court. 
(d)	Whenever the inspection officer or health officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, the inspection officer or health officer may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the city council, shall be afforded a hearing at the next regular meeting even if the agenda has been completed. 
(e)	Whenever the health officer in company of the inspection officer finds conditions existing in violation of this article, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the inspection officer shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was issued, that unless such conditions or practices be corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice, the license will be suspended. At the end of such period, not to exceed 90 days, the inspection officer or health officer shall reinspect such park, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the inspection officer shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license was issued. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease operation of such park except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 4-68; Code 1983, § 12-605)
 
Sec. 44-604. Freestanding manufactured homes, location.
(a)	No freestanding manufactured home or travel trailer shall be permitted in the city limits unless it is being offered for sale or parked for storage. Those freestanding manufactured homes which are nonconforming uses under the provisions of this article may continue as nonconforming uses; provided that they shall not be stored in front yards or on side yards abutting a street on corner lots. 
(b)	Except for manufactured homes or travel trailers within regular commercial mobile or travel trailer sales lots, each such freestanding manufactured home or travel trailer offered for sale must be clearly marked as such, and shall not be occupied for either living or sleeping purposes. Freestanding manufactured homes or travel trailers located within regular commercial manufactured home or travel trailer sales lots need be neither individually marked for sale nor removed within 120 days if not sold. A property owner shall not store, nor permit to be stored, more than one manufactured home or travel trailer on a residential lot. 
(c)	Freestanding manufactured homes are permitted in the city's rural area, but only in agricultural zoning districts. Permits for freestanding manufactured homes shall be issued by the inspection officer, but only when the applicant agrees, in writing, to remove the manufactured home within 120 days after either the manufactured home site is rezoned to a district other than agricultural or is abutted within 660 feet by districts other than agricultural. Such freestanding manufactured homes must comply with all city regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 4-69; Code 1983, § 12-606)
 
Sec. 44-605. Nonresidential mobile trailers.
(a)	No nonresidential mobile trailer shall be permitted in the city unless a license for its operation is issued by the inspection officer or health officer. Such license shall specify the permitted use of the nonresidential mobile trailer, the location of such operation and the termination date of the license. No license shall be issued for a use which would violate any city ordinance or state or federal law or regulation. 
(b)	A quarterly fee of $20.00 shall be charged for each nonresidential mobile trailer license, which shall expire on January 31, April 30, July 31 or October 31 of each year, and be renewable on the first day of each succeeding quarter thereafter. 
(c)	Operation of nonresidential trailers by contractors on construction projects for which building permits have been issued or which are otherwise approved by governmental units is permitted during the term of such construction project without issuance of a permit. 
(d)	This section is not to be construed as permitting or authorizing the permanent location of any nonresidential mobile trailer in the city. 
(Prior Code, § 4-70; Code 1983, § 12-607)
 
Sec. 44-606. Location, space and general layout of manufactured home parks and travel trailer parks.
(a)	Parks shall be of three types: 
(1)	Manufactured home parks; 
(2)	Travel trailer parks; and 
(3)	Mixed manufactured home and travel trailer parks. 
No dependent travel trailer shall be located in a manufactured home park and used for occupancy. In a mixed park, separate areas shall be reserved for manufactured homes and for travel trailers; no manufactured home shall be permitted in the travel trailer sector, and no travel trailer shall be permitted in the manufactured home sector. 
(b)	All manufactured home parks shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water; drainage shall not endanger any water supply. 
(c)	The minimum area of any park shall be two acres. However, parks in existence on the initial effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, may continue to operate with less than two acres, but if the park is to be expanded it must, at that time, have a minimum area of two acres. 
(d)	Intensity of development shall be limited to no more than ten manufactured homes per gross acre for a manufactured home park and no more than 15 travel trailers per gross acre for a travel trailer park. Area used for sewerage treatment facilities shall not be included in density computations. Manufactured home spaces shall be at least 30 feet wide where pads are closest to driveways. Travel trailer spaces shall be at least 25 feet wide where travel trailers are located closest to the driveway. 
(e)	Every manufactured home space and travel trailer space shall be clearly defined. Manufactured homes and travel trailers shall be parked in such spaces that at the nearest point they shall be 25 feet from the service road, ten feet from the rear lot line, and at least 20 feet from any other manufactured home or travel trailer. 
(f)	It is unlawful to locate a manufactured home or travel trailer less than 25 feet from any public street or highway right-of-way or so that any part of such manufactured home or travel trailer will obstruct any roadway or walkway of such park. 
(g)	It is unlawful to permit a manufactured home to occupy a travel trailer space, a travel trailer to occupy a manufactured home space, and for any manufactured home or travel trailer to be located in a park unless in a designated manufactured home space or travel trailer space. 
(h)	All manufactured home spaces shall abut upon a sealed-surface driveway of not less than 20 feet in width if on-street parking is prohibited, and 26 feet in width if on-street parking is permitted on one side of the street only. Driveways must have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(i)	In manufactured home parks or travel trailer parks existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, parking on or adjacent to the street within the park is permissible so long as it does not obstruct free movements of traffic. Whether or not a safety hazard exists is a question to be determined by the mayor and city council. If the city council determines that a safety hazard does in fact exist, the manufactured home park or travel trailer park concerned will be required to comply with subsection (j) of this section. 
(j)	In new manufactured home parks, at least two clearly defined parking spaces will be provided for each manufactured home space either on or adjacent to the manufactured home space. In new travel trailer parks, at least one parking space shall be provided for each space either on or adjacent to the space. 
(k)	Outside drying spaces or other clothes drying facilities shall be provided in every manufactured home park or travel trailer park. Manufactured home parks shall have at least 100 linear feet of clothes drying line or one mechanical clothes drying unit in good condition; mechanical units shall be located in a service building. Travel trailer parks and mixed parks shall have at least 25 linear feet of outdoor clothes drying line for each travel trailer space or one mechanical clothes drying unit for the first ten travel trailer spaces or any fraction thereof and an additional unit for each ten additional trailer spaces or fraction thereof. 
(l)	All driveways and walkways within a park shall be at least asphalt-oil-rock sealed surface. 
(m)	In the city limits area, new manufactured home parks should abut, and have their major means of ingress and egress on at least a secondary thoroughfare. Travel trailer parks and mixed parks in the city limits area should abut and have their major means of ingress and egress on at least a primary thoroughfare. 
(n)	All manufactured home parks shall provide a suitable screening of landscaping, and also opaque fencing shall be installed where abutting existing single-family residential areas. 
(Prior Code, § 4-71; Code 1983, § 12-608)
 
Sec. 44-607. Service building for travel trailer parks.
(a)	Each travel trailer park shall be provided with at least one service building adequately equipped with flush-type toilet fixtures and other sanitary facilities as required in this chapter. No service building shall contain less than one toilet for females, one toilet for males, one lavatory and shower or bathtub for each sex, and one laundry tray. All sanitary facilities required by section 44-451 shall be located in service buildings. 
(b)	Each park accommodating travel trailers shall provide the following: 
(1)	Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than two flush toilets and one urinal for the first ten travel trailers or fraction thereof, and for travel trailers in excess of ten, not less than one additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for every ten additional travel trailers or fractional number thereof; 
(2)	Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than two flush toilets for the first six travel trailer spaces or any less number thereof, and for travel trailer spaces in excess of six, not less than one additional flush toilet for every ten additional travel trailer spaces or fractional number thereof in excess of six; 
(3)	Each sex shall be provided with not less than two lavatories and two showers or bathtubs with individual dressing accommodations for the first ten travel trailer spaces or any less number thereof, and for travel trailer spaces in excess of ten, not less than one additional lavatory and one additional shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for every ten additional travel trailer spaces or fractional number thereof; 
(4)	Each toilet for females and each shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for females shall be in a private compartment or stall; 
(5)	The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall either be separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall; and 
(6)	There shall be provided in a separate compartment or stall not less than one flush toilet bowl receptacle for emptying bed pans and other containers of human excreta or a slop sink with at least a three-inch trap and an adequate supply of hot running water for cleansing such bed pans or containers; 
(c)	Travel trailer spaces shall not be more than 200 feet from a service building. 
(d)	Service buildings shall: 
(1)	Be located 25 feet or more from any travel trailer space; 
(2)	Be of permanent construction, and be adequately lighted; 
(3)	Be of moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent washing and cleansing; 
(4)	Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit during cold weather, and to supply adequate hot water during time of peak demands; and 
(5)	Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively screened. 
(e)	Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one laundry unit to every 30 travel trailer spaces and shall be in a separate soundproof room of a service building or in a separate building. Laundry facilities shall consist of not less than one clothes washing machine and one clothes drying machine. 
(f)	All service buildings and the grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a menace. 
(Prior Code, § 4-72; Code 1983, § 12-609)
 
Sec. 44-608. Sewage disposal for manufactured home parks.
(a)	Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service and other buildings within the park shall be discharged into a public sewer and disposal plant, septic tank system or private sewer and lagoon system of such construction and in such manner as approved by the state health department and in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(b)	Each manufactured home space shall be provided with at least a four-inch sewer connection at least four inches above the surface of the ground. The sewer connection should be protected by a concrete collar of at least four inches thick and have a minimum outside diameter of 24 inches. The sewer connection shall be fitted with a standard ferrule and close nipple and provided with a screw cap. Connection between the manufactured home drain and the sewer must be watertight and self-draining. Manufactured homes with fixtures from which back siphonage may occur shall not be connected to the park's water system until the defect has been corrected. 
(c)	In the event that a public sewer system is or becomes available within 300 feet of a manufactured home park or travel trailer park, connection must be made to the public system within 180 days. 
(d)	The design of private sewage treatment facilities shall be based on the maximum capacity of the park. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any watershed. The disposal facilities shall be located where they will not create a nuisance or health hazard to the manufactured home park or to the owner or occupants of any adjacent property. The state health department must approve the type of treatment proposed and the design of any disposal facilities and sewer systems prior to construction. 
(e)	Every manufactured home occupying a manufactured home park space shall tie into the park sewerage system and shall dump any accumulated waste into the system. Every dependent trailer shall dump all accumulated waste into a receptacle provided in the travel trailer park upon entering and upon leaving the park. Such receptacles must be approved by the state health department. Any other dump of accumulated waste within the city is prohibited. 
(f)	The monthly sewerage charge shall be based on the maximum manufactured home or travel trailer capacity of the park. The park operator shall, by the tenth of each month, notify the city clerk or the city's utility office of the maximum number of manufactured home spaces in use at any one time during the previous month. The city clerk shall then adjust the sewerage fee to the actual use of the park. Should the park operator fail to notify the city clerk of the prior month's actual usage of trailer or manufactured home spaces, the sewerage fee shall be levied on the maximum capacity of the park. 
(g)	Sewer connections shall be watertight. Park licensees shall maintain trailer and manufactured home connections to sewer and water systems in good condition and be responsible that there is no sewerage or water leakage on the park premises. 
(Prior Code, § 4-73; Code 1983, § 12-610)
 
Sec. 44-609. Water supply for manufactured home parks.
(a)	An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each park, capable of furnishing a minimum of 250 gallons per day per manufactured home space. Where a public supply of water of such quality is available within 300 feet or becomes available within 300 feet, connection shall be made thereto within 180 days, and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where private water supplies must be developed, the health officer must approve the location, construction, and development of both the water well and pipe system and connections. 
(b)	The water system of the manufactured home park shall be connected by pipes to all buildings and manufactured home spaces. Each manufactured home shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four inches above the ground. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities. 
(c)	All water piping shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local law; the water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or back-siphonage. All water connections shall be weathertight. 
(d)	Where drinking fountains are provided for public use, they shall be of a type and in locations approved by the health officer. 
(e)	Individual water service connections which are provided for direct use by manufactured homes or travel trailers shall be of such construction so that they will not be damaged by the parking of such manufactured homes or travel trailers. The park system shall be adequate to provide 20 pounds per square inch of pressure at all manufactured home or travel trailer connections. 
(f)	Provisions shall be made within 150 feet of such travel trailer space to supply water for travel trailer reservoirs. 
(g)	No well casing, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room or space above ground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below ground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface. All floors shall be watertight and sloped from the pump pedestal to the drain, and floors shall extend at least two feet from the well in all directions. The pedestal shall not be less than 12 inches above the floor. This shall not be construed as prohibiting submersible pumps. 
(h)	All water storage reservoirs shall be watertight and constructed of impervious material; all overflow and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated material. Overflow pipes from a reservoir shall not connect to any pipe in which sewage or polluted water may back up. 
(i)	Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be installed on any connections. 
(j)	No water well shall draw water from any sands reserved to the city for its use except as may be otherwise permitted by ordinances of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 4-74; Code 1983, § 12-611)
 
Sec. 44-610. Refuse disposal for manufactured home parks.
(a)	The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
(b)	All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be located within 150 feet of any manufactured home space or travel trailer space. Containers shall be so provided in sufficient numbers and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
(c)	Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. Lids for containers shall be permanently connected to racks or holders with chains or other flexible materials. 
(d)	All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly and as otherwise required by the health officer. Where municipal garbage collection is not available, the manufactured home park operator shall either employ a private agency or provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
(e)	Where municipal or other private disposal service is not available, the manufactured home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by burial, or transporting to an approved disposal site, as directed by the health officer. Refuse shall be buried only at locations and by methods approved by the inspection officer and in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(f)	When municipal refuse disposal service is available, it must be used. 
(Prior Code, § 4-75; Code 1983, § 12-612)
 
Sec. 44-611. Insect and rodent control.
(a)	Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health as required by the inspection officer or health officer shall be applied in the manufactured home park or travel trailer park. 
(b)	Effective larvicidal solutions may be required by the inspection officer or health officer for fly or mosquito breeding areas which cannot be controlled by other, more permanent measures. 
(c)	The inspection officer or health officer may require the park operator to take suitable measures to control other insects and obnoxious weeds. 
(d)	Accumulations of debris which may provide harborage for rodents shall not be permitted in the manufactured home park. 
(e)	When rats or other objectionable rodents are known to be in the park, the park operator shall take definite action, as directed by the inspection officer or health officer to exterminate them. 
(Prior Code, § 4-76; Code 1983, § 12-613)
 
Sec. 44-612. Electricity; exterior lighting.
(a)	An electrical outlet supplying at least 100 amperes shall be provided for each manufactured home space. The installation shall comply with all applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such electrical outlets and extension lines shall be grounded and weatherproofed. Plug receptacles shall also be grounded and weatherproofed. No power supply line shall be permitted to lie on the ground, and no main power line shall be suspended less than 18 feet above the ground, unless otherwise approved by the inspection officer. 
(b)	Streets and driveways within manufactured home and travel trailer parks shall be lighted with street lights meeting the current standards of the illuminating engineering society or one-half candlepower, whichever is higher. 
(Prior Code, § 4-77; Code 1983, § 12-614)
 
Sec. 44-613. Piping.
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to manufactured homes shall be of acceptable material as determined by the inspection officer and shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the manufactured home or less than five feet from any manufactured home exit. 
(Prior Code, § 4-78; Code 1983, § 12-615)
 
Sec. 44-614. Park areas; water; fires.
(a)	Park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(b)	Where the water supply system does not provide at least six-inch water mains, there shall be provided a two-inch frost protected water riser within 300 feet of each manufactured home or building. 
(c)	Fires shall be made only in stoves and other cooking and/or heating equipment intended for such purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 4-79; Code 1983, § 12-616)
 
Sec. 44-615. Alterations and additions.
(a)	All plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs in the park shall be made in accordance with the applicable regulations of the city. 
(b)	Skirting of manufactured homes is permissible but areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a harborage for rodents, or create a fire hazard. 
(c)	A permit issued by the inspection officer shall be required before any construction on a manufactured home space or any structural addition or alteration to the exterior of a manufactured home takes place. No construction or addition or alteration to the exterior of a manufactured home located in a manufactured home park shall be permitted unless of the same type of construction or materials as the manufactured home affected. All such construction, additions or alterations shall be in compliance with applicable local and state laws. No permit shall be required for the addition of steps, canopies, awning or antennas. 
(d)	No structure other than a manufactured home shall be permitted on a manufactured home space except that one structure of not to exceed 210 cubic feet to be used for storage on each space. 
(Prior Code, § 4-80; Code 1983, § 12-617)
 
Sec. 44-616. Registration of owners and occupants.
Each licensee or permittee shall keep a register containing a record of all manufactured home and travel trailer owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or occupant of each manufactured home and motor vehicle by which it is towed; 
(2)	The make, model, year and license of each manufactured home and motor vehicle; 
(3)	The state, territory or country issuing such license; 
(4)	The date of arrival and of departure of each manufactured home; 
(5)	Whether or not each manufactured home is a dependent or independent manufactured home; 
(6)	Each manufactured home or travel trailer shall be identified while in a park space by some clear, legible and orderly external method of identification or numbering system. 
(Prior Code, § 4-81; Code 1983, § 12-618)
 
Sec. 44-617. Wrecked or damaged homes, trailers.
Wrecked, damaged or dilapidated manufactured homes and travel trailers shall not be kept or stored in a manufactured home park or travel trailer park. The health officer shall determine if a manufactured home or travel trailer is damaged or dilapidated to a point which makes the manufactured home or travel trailer unfit for human occupancy on either a temporary or permanent basis. Whenever such a determination is made, the manufactured home or travel trailer shall be vacated and removed from the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 4-82; Code 1983, § 12-619)
 
Sec. 44-618. Minimum housing regulations for manufactured homes.
(a)	Every manufactured home located in either a manufactured home park, a manufactured home subdivision, or as a freestanding manufactured home, shall meet the provisions of the housing code of the city except as may be otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)	Dependent manufactured homes shall not be required to have a flush toilet or a bath or shower. 
(c)	The housing code shall not apply to travel trailers insofar as floor area, flush toilet, bath or shower, and ceiling height is concerned. 
(Prior Code, 4-83; Code 1983, § 12-620)
 
Sec. 44-619. Manufactured home subdivisions.
(a)	The minimum size of manufactured home subdivisions shall be ten acres. 
(b)	No residences except manufactured homes shall be permitted in a manufactured home subdivision. 
(c)	Minimum effective lot width in a manufactured home subdivision shall be 40 feet measured at the front building line and minimum lot areas shall be 4,000 square feet; provided that at least a five-foot side yard shall be provided on each lot beyond any manufactured home and additions thereto, and further provided that in areas not serviced by a public sewer, the minimum additional lot area shall be determined by the health officer on the basis of safe and sanitary sewer service. The effective lot width of a manufactured home shall be determined, for interior lots, by measuring at right angles across the lot from one diagonal side line to the other, and for corner lots, the measurements shall be made at right angles from the diagonal having the greatest divergence from perpendicular to the street, through the midpoint of the rear line of the required front yard, to the opposite lot line or an extension thereof. 
(d)	Side lines of lots in manufactured home subdivisions need not be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(e)	Regardless of the effective lot width, manufactured home subdivision lots must abut a public street for at least 25 feet. 
(f)	All manufactured home subdivisions shall have a greenbelt planting strip not less than 20 feet in width along all subdivision boundaries. Such greenbelt shall be composed of one row of deciduous and/or evergreen trees, spaced not more than 40 feet apart, and not less than three rows of shrubs spaced not more than eight feet apart and which grow to a height of five feet or more after one full growing season and which shrubs will eventually grow to a height of not less than 12 feet. 
(Prior Code, § 4-84; Code 1983, § 12-621)
 
Sec. 44-620. Supervision.
The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep the manufactured home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee or permittee, for the violation of any provision of this article to which the licensee or permittee is subject. 
(Prior Code, § 4-85; Code 1983, § 12-622)
 
Secs. 44-621—44-643. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XVIII. GOVERNMENTAL PROGRAMS
 
Sec. 44-644. Purpose.
(a)	Under a variety of programs created and administered by various federal and state agencies, local government is authorized, and in some cases required, to hold public hearings in order to make certain determinations necessary for the operation of the program. These public hearings shall be conducted by the city council in the following manner and under the specified procedures, unless the applicable federal and state agency, or the applicable program, has a requirement which preempts this article. In the event of a partial preemption, this article shall control to the maximum extent possible. An example of such hearings shall specifically include, but are not limited to United States Internal Revenue Service low income housing tax credit programs, as administered by the state housing finance agency, under OK Admin. Code Rule 330: 35-3-1 et seq. 
(b)	This article is intended to provide a procedural method for holding hearings so that the city may comment to the state housing agency regarding whether a proposed project seeking an allocation of tax credits under the low income tax credit program administered by the state housing finance agency promotes the city's best interests which include, but are not necessarily limited to, support of housing linked to economic development activity, mixed income housing, housing which addresses the special needs of the elderly, disabled and homeless; and rehabilitation of existing housing. Further, this article is intended to work in conjunction with the current, applicable housing and zoning codes as well as the city's comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1983, § 12-701; Ord. No. 355-7-96, 7-25-1996)
 
Sec. 44-645. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Allocation means a tax credit awarded by OHFA (Oklahoma Housing Finance Agency) to developers or owners of developments which are selected by OHFA pursuant to OHFA's low income housing tax credit program rules. 
Applicant means an individual, a nonprofit organization or a profit-motivated individual, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company or corporation, joint venture, or other legal entity and its successors in interest that submits an application to OHFA for an allocation pursuant to OHFA's low income housing tax credit program rules. 
Application means an application in the form prescribed by OHFA's low income housing tax credit program rules including all agreements, certificates, affidavits, exhibits or similar instruments and other supporting materials which is included in the OHFA notice. 
Contact person means the person designated and authorized by the applicant and developer to receive, on behalf of the applicant and developer, all communications, correspondence and notices required by, or authorized by, OHFA's low income housing tax credit program rules. 
Developer means the person or entity with the responsibility of ensuring the effective construction or rehabilitation of the development, which may also be the applicant or the owner of the development. 
Development means the residential rental property for which an application for an allocation is submitted to OHFA. 
OHFA means the Oklahoma Housing Finance Agency. 
OHFA notice means the notification by OHFA that an applicant has made application for an allocation. To be considered an OHFA notice, the notice must be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mayor within five business days of OHFA's receipt of the application, and not less than 55 days prior to the consideration of the application by the city council; and, the notice must contain at least: 
(1)	Name and legal description or street address of the development; 
(2)	Name and address of the contact person; 
(3)	Whether the development is new construction or substantial rehabilitation; 
(4)	The total number of units (and their characteristics (i.e. one-bedroom, two-bedroom, single room occupancy, etc.)); 
(5)	When appropriate, the date the application for a specified development may be considered by the council; 
(6)	One copy of the application; and 
Owner means the legal owner of record of the development. 
(Code 1983, § 12-702; Ord. No. 355-7-96, 7-25-1996)
 
Sec. 44-646. Notice requirements; publication.
(a)	Upon the receipt by the city council, mayor or city manager of notice of a proposal which requires or authorizes the city to comment on or evaluate the appropriateness of a proposal, or determine the existence of a need for a project, the city council shall proceed to make a determination on the desirability, appropriateness and need for the specific proposal or project under the following procedures. The resulting findings shall be reduced to written comments and filed with the appropriate agency in a timely manner, within the time specified by applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)	Upon receipt of notice from a state or federal agency of an application and the need for a public hearing under subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk shall give notice to any private person or entity determined to be the contact person for the applicant in the federal or state program, giving specific notice of the date, time and place of the proposed hearing by the city council to consider the project or development. The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail at a time calculated to provide the applicant or its contact person at least ten days' notice of the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall provide the applicant or its contact person by telephone or facsimile method the information or copy of the notice and other information contained in the notice given by certified mail. The notice will be deemed reasonable if it is received by the contact person at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing regardless of the method of the notice given. 
(c)	Notice to the applicant or the applicant's contact person shall further contain a statement of or reference to appropriate legal authorities for the procedures under which the hearing will be held, including a copy of this article, together with a concise and plain statement of all issues which are anticipated to be considered at the hearing. Such statement or reference shall specifically include all issues or assertions to be made by the city and any issues known by the city which are anticipated to be raised by others. 
(d)	The city clerk shall cause to be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing for consideration of the proposed project or development, together with a statement of the purpose of the hearing and the location of the proposed development. Provided further that the hearing is for consideration of approval, or disapproval of the proposed project and the name of the city's contact person. The publication shall occur at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(Code 1983, § 12-703; Ord. No. 355-7-96, 7-25-1996)
 
Sec. 44-647. Recordings of hearings.
The public hearing shall be electronically recorded in accordance with the requirements of the Oklahoma Open Meetings Act and made available in accordance with the requirements of the Oklahoma Open Records Act. In addition, should the applicant, a protestant, or another participant require transcription, the cost of such transcription shall be paid by the requesting party. 
(Code 1983, § 12-704; Ord. No. 355-7-96, 7-25-1996)
 
Sec. 44-648. Discovery process.
Copies of the documentary materials proposed to be used by the applicant or by the city shall be exchanged between the applicant and city at least two business days prior to the hearing. In the event additional documentary material is offered by the applicant or the city at this hearing, or other relevant information or issue raised at the hearing which could not be immediately resolved by the city or the applicant or its contact person, the city council may grant a recess or otherwise continue the hearing to a date certain in order to allow a response if the continuance will not delay the time in which the city has to submit its recommendations to the appropriate federal or state agency, or both. 
(Code 1983, § 12-705; Ord. No. 355-7-96, 7-25-1996)
 
Sec. 44-649. Findings of fact and recommendations.
At the conclusion of the presentation of evidence and arguments, the city council may debate the matter and shall thereafter announce its recommendation to OHFA as determined by a majority vote of council's total membership. Such recommendation regarding the proposal shall consider the following: 
(1)	Whether the proposal meets the adopted municipal code, and applicable policies of the city; 
(2)	Whether the maximum request for low income housing tax credits exceeds $300,000.00 per development or ten percent of the total allocation for the state, whichever is lower; 
(3)	Whether the proposal meets identified needs, priorities, policies and objectives found in the city's comprehensive plan; 
(4)	Whether the market study accompanying the application contains gross errors or omissions; 
(5)	Whether the applicant or developer has shown evidence of a commitment to use the tax credits, if allocated, through a syndication commitment, financing commitment or other similar agreement; 
(6)	Whether the applicant or developer has shown evidence of neighborhood and community involvement and participation in the planning of the project; 
(7)	Whether the applicant or developer has shown evidence of site control and appropriate zoning; 
(8)	Whether the applicant or developer has shown evidence of site plan approval if required; and 
(9)	Whether the applicant or developer has shown evidence of the availability of adequate public facilities/services for the development. 
(Code 1983, § 12-706; Ord. No. 355-7-96, 7-25-1996)
 
Sec. 44-650. Right of appeal.
Applicant and developer may appeal the determination of the city council to the district court of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 12-707; Ord. No. 355-7-96, 7-25-1996)
 
Sec. 44-651. Disposition of recommendation documents.
The recommendations shall be reduced to writing, which shall thereafter be formally submitted for adoption and approval by the council and, upon adoption and approval, shall be transmitted by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, to the developer, if the developer is someone other than the applicant, and to the OHFA by not later than the last day of the comment period on the application as set by the OHFA. A copy of this section shall be attached to the document containing the recommendations. 
(Code 1983, § 12-708; Ord. No. 355-7-96, 7-25-1996)
 
Secs. 44-652—44-675. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIX. CONTROL OF SURFACE WATER; NATURAL RESOURCE CONSERVATION
 
Sec. 44-676. Purpose and scope.
(a)	It is the intent of this article to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public from the dangers arising from improper drainage, unwise diversion, use and obstruction of drainage channels; to protect natural scenic areas; and to provide for the conservation of the natural resources of the area. All subdivisions of land and all developments or improvements of any character which affect drainage in any portion of the city shall be subject to the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)	The provisions of this article shall apply to and be binding upon every person and every entity which seeks to develop, redevelop, grade, regrade, excavate landfill, berm or dike land subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 12-801; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-677. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base flood or 100-year flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Detention means the temporary storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff. 
Detention facility means a facility that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff. 
Development.
(1)	The following activities shall constitute development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to: 
a.	Buildings or other structures. 
b.	Mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
(2)	The following activities shall not constitute development: 
a.	Lawn and yard care. 
b.	Gardening. 
c.	Tree care and maintenance. 
d.	Removal of trees or other vegetation damaged by natural forces. 
e.	Bona fide agricultural pursuits. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Historic means predevelopment or existing condition at time of development for all storm frequencies. 
(Code 1983, § 12-802; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-678. Spencer standard drainage policy.
Standard drainage policy as referenced in article XX is hereby adopted and made a part hereof and shall be used for all runoff flow and sizing for the regulations established herein. The current standard drawing and details shall be used. 
(Code 1983, § 12-803; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-679. Responsibility of developer/owner for storm drainage improvements.
(a)	It shall be the goal of the owner/developer to limit the storm runoff leaving his property to the so-called "historic value" (before development). To achieve this, the developer/owner shall provide storage for the increased stormwater runoff resulting from his development. 
(b)	Where a developer/owner proposes development or use of only a portion of the property, provision for storm runoff control shall be required for that portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use. 
(c)	The development shall provide a sufficient stormwater drainage system for the conveyance of existing stormwater runoff received from upstream and from the subject property with specific allowance for the continued conveyance of stormwater runoff from properties adjacent to the proposed development, which may develop in the future. 
(d)	All roofs, paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards, other than one-family or two-family residential structures, shall drain into an existing or improved storm sewer system or to an approved place of disposal, not generally including streets. 
(e)	Release of stormwater onto arterial/(section line) streets may be considered acceptable if present street flow does not exceed four inches in depth during a 50-year storm. Release of stormwater onto all other classifications of streets may be considered acceptable if the depth of flow does not exceed six inches in depth at the face of curb during a 100-year storm event. 
(f)	In the case of one-family and two-family residential structures, stormwater may be discharged onto flat areas such as streets or lawns if drainage is provided so that the stormwater will flow away from the building and if the requirements of the city drainage standards are met. 
(g)	The owner/developer shall remain responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of stormwater detention systems, except as provided in section 44-681. No conveyance of the responsibility of the detention system is allowed nor implied by the issuance of building permits. Stormwater detention systems shall be considered a priority during construction. All stormwater drainage systems, erosion control and sedimentation control shall be constructed as one of the first items of a development, and shall be constructed prior to any change in the stormwater runoff of the development. 
(Code 1983, § 12-804; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-680. Requirements relating to developments.
(a)	In any development or improvement of property, the developer/owner may be required to provide at his own expense a preliminary drainage study for the total area to be ultimately developed. It shall be the responsibility of the city engineer to determine whether the need exists for a preliminary drainage study, and if required, the study shall be submitted to the city engineer for review prior to his acceptance of any preliminary plat or construction plans for the development or any increment thereof. 
(b)	The city reserves the right to require improvements to preclude any backup of tailwater inundating any areas outside of the development as a result of the base flood. 
(c)	No excavating and/or grading and/or leveling and/or landfilling of any lot or tract of record for single-family residential developments, multifamily or nonresidential development, shall be commenced prior to the approval of the preliminary grading plan or building permit. 
(d)	All developments shall be designed, constructed and completed in a manner, which minimizes the removal of vegetation and existing tree cover. 
(e)	Development activities shall begin and continue only if appropriate sedimentation facilities are installed and maintained throughout the construction period. 
(Code 1983, § 12-805; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-681. Title ownership and maintenance.
Ownership and maintenance of detention storage facilities shall remain with the private sector unless such areas are in a development that has no neighborhood or homeowners association or the like to regulate such facilities. Other drainage facilities herein provided for may be dedicated to the public and maintained by the public unless such facilities are an integral usable part of the development, in which case the ownership and maintenance of said facilities shall remain with the private sector. Prior to the acceptance of any drainage or detention facility for maintenance by the city, the developer shall be in compliance with the following: 
(1)	Completed construction of all required facilities and erosion control as approved by the city engineer, or provide sufficient surety bond, cash escrow, or letter of credit approved by the city engineer and city attorney guaranteeing the construction of all required facilities, and erosion controls as approved by the city engineer, within one year. 
(2)	Pay a sum to the city equal to $700.00 multiplied by the number of acres decided for the detention facility multiplied by seven years to cover the cost of maintenance. All funds received shall be maintained in a separate account to be used for the maintenance of detention ponds only. 
(Code 1983, § 12-806; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-682. Administration.
(a)	Prior to approval of any plat or plan, the developer's consulting engineer shall submit backwater profiles and stream flow and runoff calculations as may be required by the city engineer under the terms of this article. 
(b)	A building permit or occupancy permit shall not be issued for any structure in the subject area until the required improvements have been completed and accepted by the city engineer or city code enforcement officer, with approved maintenance bonds on file; or as development bond or irrevocable letter of credit approved by the city attorney and accepted by the city council, guaranteeing the required improvements is on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1983, § 12-807; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-683. Compliance and interpretation.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenant, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1983, § 12-809; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Secs. 44-684—44-709. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XX. STANDARD DRAINAGE POLICY
 
Sec. 44-710. General policy.
(a)	Goal. It is the goal of this policy to attempt to hold stormwater runoff rates after development to their historic value as an aid in erosion control and to decrease the probability of downstream flooding. 
(b)	Purpose.
(1)	The purpose of this drainage policy is to establish standard principles and practices for the design and construction of surface drainage systems within the city. The design factors, formula, graphs and procedures are intended for use as an engineering guide in the solution of drainage problems involving determination of the quantity, rate of flow, method of collection, storage, conveyance and disposal of stormwater. 
(2)	Methods of design other than those indicated herein may be considered where experience clearly indicates they are preferable and they exceed the minimum requirements as listed herein. However, there should be no extensive variations from the practices established herein without the express approval of the city engineer. Runoff calculations must meet or exceed the maximum flow rates using the methods and procedures presented in this article. 
(c)	Minimum surface drainage requirements.
(1)	General design criteria.
a.	Drainage facilities shall be designed to transport runoff from the following frequency storms: 
1.	25-year storm. Streets, in residential districts. 
2.	50-year storm. Streets, bridges and culverts, open improved drainage channels, flood protection works and other facilities in commercial, institutional and other high value districts. 
b.	The drainage system shall be designed to carry and/or store the runoff from a 100-year frequency storm. The dedicated drainage easement shall encompass all land lying below the evaluation of the 100-year storm. 
c.	Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building pads to a minimum elevation of one foot above the base flood elevation. In single-family residential, duplex or manufactured home developments, surface water from each dwelling lot will flow directly to a storm sewer, channel sodded swale, or paved street without crossing more than four adjacent lots. 
d.	Erosion and sedimentation control facilities with specifications detailing all erosion and sedimentation control measures, which are established and maintained during all periods of development and construction, shall be provided. 
e.	No improvements shall be constructed which will increase the frequency of flooding or the depth of inundation of unprotected structures. 
(2)	Existing drainage structures. Existing structures within and adjoining a proposed development shall be evaluated in terms of capacity and structural soundness. Those structures found to be inadequate shall be completely removed by the developer and replaced with approved pipe and pipe arch, or a culvert of closed box design. Provisions for carrying or storing the increased flow and protecting property as a result of this flow shall be provided for by the developer. 
(3)	Utilities. All utilities located within the floodway shall be designed to prevent infiltration of floodwater and to protect against washouts. Location of the utilities shall not restrict flood flows. 
(4)	EPA and state regulations. The owner and his consulting engineer shall provide evidence that the improvement is in compliance with all applicable EPA and state permits and regulations. 
(5)	City standards. The current city standard details and requirements shall apply to all improvements. 
(d)	Drainage plan preparation.
(1)	Preparations.
a.	Plan and profile shall be drawn on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches to a horizontal scale of one inch equals 20 feet or one inch equals 40 feet and vertical scale of one inch equals two feet or one inch equals four feet (except that scales may vary on special projects, such as culverts and channel cross sections). 
b.	Stationing shall proceed upstream with the north arrow pointing to the top of the sheet, or to the left. 
c.	Plans for the proposed drainage system shall include property lines, lot and block numbers, dimensions, right-of-way and easement lines, floodplains, street names, paved surfaces (existing or proposed), contract limits, location, size and type of inlets, manholes, culverts, pipes, channels and related structures, outfall details, miscellaneous riprap placement, two-foot contour lines, title block. 
d.	Profiles shall indicate the proposed system (size and material) with elevations, flow lines, gradients, left and right bank channel profiles, station numbers, inlets, manholes, ground line and curbline elevations, typical sections, riprap construction, filling details, minimum permissible slab elevations adjacent to 100-year floodplains, open drainage features, pipe crossings, design flow capacities, and title block. 
e.	When official floodplain designations and designations of floodways denoting limits of permissible flood flow restricting developments exist, then they shall be shown on all preliminary plans and copies of final plats submitted for approval wherever such plans and plats contain floodplains and/or floodway segments. In any case in which official floodplains are not delineated they shall be determined on the basis of standard corps of engineers HEC 1 and HEC 2 or other methods approved by an engineer, and shall be shown on all preliminary plans and final plats submitted for approval. 
(2)	Submittals.
a.	Computations and plans to support all drainage designs shall be submitted to the city engineer for review. The computations and plans shall be in such form as to provide the basis for timely and consistent review and will be made a part of the permanent record for future evaluation. The computations and plans shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state. Before final approval, the submitting engineer shall provide an "as built" plan accompanied with a letter of certification stating that the submitted plan complies with all governing ordinances and adopted drainage standards of the city. 
b.	Specified drainage parameters for historic, developed or proposed conditions that must be shown prior to approval are as follows: 
1.	Drainage area. 
2.	Time of concentration (in minutes). 
3.	Intensity (in inches/hour) (for specified storm). 
4.	Runoff coefficients (C values for rational method, if used). 
5.	Design slope and length for all culverts. 
6.	Roughness coefficient for all channels and culverts. 
7.	Q flow rate (in cfs) for all channels and culverts. 
8.	Velocity (in ft/s) corresponding with each calculated Q. 
9.	Designation of material types for all channels and culverts. 
10.	Specific materials and/or methods for erosion and sedimentation control. 
11.	Detention pond volume calculations. 
12.	Detention pond depth versus discharge curve. 
13.	Detention pond location, elevations and dimensions. 
14.	Detention storage calculations with inflow and outflow hydrographs. 
(Code 1983, § 12-901; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-711. Determination of storm runoff.
(a)	General.
(1)	Numerous methods of runoff computation are available on which the design of storm drainage and flood control systems may be based. The rational method will be accepted as adequate for drainage areas up to 500 acres. For larger areas, other methods may be used. 
(2)	The methodology developed by the U.S. geological survey titled "Techniques for Estimating Flood Discharges for Oklahoma Streams" will be acceptable as adequate for drainage basins in excess of 500 acres. Other hydrographic models or methods suitable for this are also acceptable. Hydrographic techniques for determining the size of small detention facilities are included under section 44-716. 
(3)	The rational method is based on the following assumptions: 
a.	The peak rate of runoff at any point is a direct function of the average rainfall intensity during the time of concentration to that point. 
b.	The frequency of the peak discharge is the same as the frequency of the average rainfall intensity. 
c.	The time of concentration is the time required for the runoff to become established and flow from the most remote part of the drainage area to the point under design. 
The latter assumption applies to the part most remote in time, not necessarily in distance. In the rational method, average intensities have no time sequence relation to the actual rainfall pattern during the storm. The intensity-duration curve is not a time sequence. 
(b)	Rational method of runoff computation.
(1)	Runoff coefficient C.
a.	It should be noted that the runoff coefficient C is the variable of the rational method, which is least susceptible to precise determination. Its use in the formula implies a fixed ratio for any given drainage area, which in reality is not the case. A reasonable coefficient must be chosen to represent the integrated effects of infiltration, detention storage, evaporation, retention, flow routing, and interception. All of these affect the time distribution and peak rate of runoff. 
b.	Recommended ranges for C values are as follows: 
BASIN SLOPE 
	Less Than 
2 Percent 	More Than 
2 Percent 
Single-family residence 	0.70 	0.70 
Multi-family 	0.75 	0.75 
Apartments 	0.85 	0.85 
Commercial/industrial 	0.95 	0.95 
Parks - golf courses 	0.50 	0.50 
Undeveloped, pasture and cultivated 	0.50 	0.50 

(2)	Rainfall intensity.
a.	Rainfall intensity is the average rainfall rate in inches per hour, which is considered for a particular drainage basin or subbasin and is selected based on design rainfall duration and design frequency of occurrence. The design duration is equal to the time of concentration for the drainage area under consideration. Intensity duration curves for this region are shown on page 8-A of "Techniques for Estimating Flood Discharges for Oklahoma Streams." 
b.	The time of concentration used in the rational equation is the critical time of concentration for the point of interest. The critical time of concentration is the time associated with the peak runoff from the watershed to the point of interest. The time of concentration to any point in a storm drainage system is a combination of the "inlet time" and the "time of flow in the conduit." Street flow shall be considered as being in an open paved channel. Manning's equation is acceptable for determining open channel and free water surface flows. An acceptable formula for use in determining inlet time (sheet flow) is: 
Time = K0.37 /S0.2 ) 
L = Length of flow in feet 
S = Average slope in feet/foot 
K = Constant for character of surface 
Values of K: 
Pavement 	0.37 
Bare soil 	0.60 
Poor grass 	0.90 
Average grass 	1.00 
Dense grass 	1.13 

An acceptable formula for determining channel flow time is: 
Time = K (L2 /S0.385 ) 
Values of K: 
Curbed street 	0.0035 
Concrete lined channel 	0.006 
Sodded swale 	0.008 
Bar ditch 	0.012 

The time of flow in a closed conduit is the quotient of the length of the conduit and velocity of low as computed using the hydraulic factors of the conduit. The time required to fill the conduit shall be neglected even though it may represent an appreciable percentage of total time of concentration. 
(3)	Drainage area. The size and shape of the watershed must be determined. Drainage areas less than ten acres shall be determined through the use of planimetric topographic maps, supplemented by field surveys where topographic data has changed or where the contour interval is too great to distinguish the direction of flows. A drainage area shall be provided for each project. The drainage area contributing to the system being designed and drainage subarea contributing to each inlet point shall be identified. The outlines of the drainage divides must follow actual lines rather than artificial land divisions. 
(Code 1983, § 12-902; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-712. Flow in streets.
(a)	General. The location of inlets and permissible flow of water in the streets should be rated to the extent and frequency of interference to traffic and the likelihood of flood damage to surrounding property. Interference to traffic is regulated by design limits of the spread of water into traffic lanes, especially in regard to collector streets and arterial. 
(b)	Design criteria.
(1)	Flow in gutters on straight or parabolic crown pavements may be determined by using Manning's formula for channel flow. 
(2)	Minimum gutter slope on residential streets shall not be less than 0.004 ft/ft (0.4 percent). Maximum gutter slope should not be more than 0.08 ft/ft (8.0 percent). In a gutter which has a radius of 100 feet or less, the design flow depth shall not exceed 70 percent of the curb height. 
(3)	No lowering of the standard height of street crown or splitting of curb heights shall be allowed for the purpose of hydraulic design unless approved by the city engineer. In no case will it be allowed on collector streets or thoroughfares. 
(4)	All street sections shall have a positive crown except alleys. 
(5)	Residential streets: The flow depth at the gutters shall not exceed nine inches for a 100-year storm or six inches for the 25-year storm. The use of a cul-de-sac or dead end street as the terminal point of residential street flow shall not be allowed for drainage areas exceeding five acres. A minimum of 70 percent of the flow in a residential street shall be removed to a storm sewer or drainage system prior to reaching the point of curvature of a cul-de-sac or the end of the street for drainage areas exceeding five acres in size. 
(6)	Flow in any street shall not exceed 20 acres. 
(Code 1983, § 12-903; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-713. Enclosed storm sewers.
(a)	General.
(1)	All storm sewers shall be designed by the application of the Manning or Kutter's equations either directly or through appropriate charts or nomographs. In the preparation of hydraulic designs, investigations shall be made of all existing structures and their performance on the waterway in question. Sewer sizing based on storm frequency shall be as set forth in section 44-710(c). 
(2)	In addition, runoff from storms exceeding the design storm up to the 100-year storm should be anticipated and disposed of with minimum damages to surrounding property and the sewer must be accessible for maintenance. 
(3)	Drainage areas between lots shall be improved with pipes and paved swales. The pipe shall carry the 50-year flow and the paved swale above the pipe shall carry the difference between the 25- and 50-year flows. 
(4)	The 100-year flow shall be confined to the easement. 
(b)	Materials of construction.
(1)	Reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C76. Unless otherwise specified, all pipe shall be Class III for 24 inch and smaller and Class II for 27-inch and larger in accordance with ASTM C76, Wall B. If a closed box design is used in lieu of pipe, the design shall conform to the state department of transportation RCB standards in all improved areas or to be improved areas. 
(2)	Plain corrugated metal pipe conforming to the requirements of federal specification WW-P-405 shall not be placed under paved public streets unless approved by the city engineer. 
(c)	Design criteria.
(1)	Pipes which are a part of the storm sewer system shall have a minimum diameter of 18 inches. 
(2)	Enclosed storm drains will be designed for open channel flow to satisfy as well as possible the requirements for unsteady and nonuniform flow. Sealed joints are required for any pipe that can operate under head. 
(3)	The slope shall be such to maintain a minimum velocity of 2.5 fps flowing full. 
(4)	Flows may be computed by either the Kutter or Manning equation. Remember the Kutter and Manning equations are used for pipes and conduits of all shapes flowing either full or partly full. The graphs commonly available for their solution usually are compiled for pressure conduit flow only. See subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(5)	Roughness coefficient n for storm sewers: 
DESIGN COEFFICIENT 
Materials 
of Construction 	Manning's or Kutter's 
Box culverts 	0.013 
Concrete pipe 	0.013 
(Corrugations) 	2¾ ″ × ½″ 	3″ × 1″ 
Annular plain corrugated metal pipe 	0.024 	0.027 
Helical plain corrugated metal pipe 	0.012 	0.024 
Special cases 	As approved by city engineer 

(6)	General rules to be observed: 
a.	Pipe size and slope selected so that flow will not decrease at inlet, bends or other changes in geometry. 
b.	Do not discharge a larger pipe into a smaller one. 
c.	At change in pipe size match top of pipes. 
d.	A one-foot freeboard shall be maintained below the proposed finish grade through the storm sewer system. The submittal of energy calculations shall be required on any reach of a system which exceeds 500 linear feet; on the total system that exceeds 1,500 linear feet; on a reach of a system which has an elevation change exceeding ten feet. 
e.	Design capacity of the conduit shall not exceed the conduit capacity at critical slope. An acceptable critical slope formula is: 
S = 111 n2 /D1 /3 
S = critical slope C 
n = Manning's n 
D = circular pipe diameter feet 
(7)	Manholes shall be located at intervals not to exceed 350 feet for pipe sizes 42 inches or less. Above 42-inch manholes shall be located as determined by the city engineer. Manholes shall be located at conduit junctions, changes of grade, and changes of alignment. 
(8)	Manholes, junction boxes or inlets shall be used at all pipe connections and/or changes in pipe size. 
(9)	Minor energy head losses at structures shall be disregarded. Major losses shall be taken into account if they significantly affect the sewer performance. 
(10)	The use of one material to extend a sewer constructed of a different material shall not be allowed except at manholes, junction boxes or inlets. 
(11)	Degree of curvature shall be as per manufacturer's recommendations. 
(12)	All storm sewer outlets shall have erosion protection provided by headwalls, flared end sections, curtain walls, etc., as required by accepted engineering practices and approved by the city engineer. 
(d)	Inlet system.
(1)	Inlet design and location in street sections must be compatible with the allowable spread of water on the street section as established is section 44-652. They shall be placed such that they will not interfere with potential driveways. 
(2)	Inlet pipe design shall be designed for 25-year storm flow and 50 sump. An overflow flue shall be provided in sump. 
(3)	Inlet location shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(4)	Whenever possible inlets will intercept water before it reaches a pedestrian crosswalk. 
(5)	Inlets shall not be located in a curb radius. Where existing conditions exist that require an inlet in the radius, the radius shall not be less than 38 feet. 
(6)	Inlets shall be sized to prevent water from minor streets spilling over and flooding major streets. 
(7)	Where a curbed street crosses a bridge, gutter flow shall be intercepted and not allowed to flow into the bridge. 
(8)	Inlet capacities on a grade. See city standard detail sheets for acceptable inlet capacities. 
(9)	Any inlet grates over which a bicyclist can ride shall be of a design considered bicycle safe. 
(Code 1983, § 12-904; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-714. Open drainage channels.
(a)	Natural drainage flow.
(1)	Natural overland flows and open channel and/or swale routings are the preferred alignments of the components of residential drainage systems within the city. These drainage flow techniques assist in the control of stormwater runoff in that the time of concentration of runoff can be extended. Specific reduction in the amount of runoff contributed from each new development in the upper and middle reaches of a drainage basin can reduce the cumulative runoff impact of development thereby contributing to reduction of hazards and/or reduction in the need for costly supplemental systems in the downstream areas. Open channel flows are not necessarily natural systems, although they rely heavily on existing natural features and qualities of the development site. 
(2)	Virtually all development increases the amount of stormwater that becomes runoff during and after an event because of the impervious surfaces used in development. Increases in runoff which change the equilibrium of natural areas in the system mandate specific engineering solutions to conserve these natural systems and the predevelopment characteristics of the area. The creation of swales, alteration of small channel capacity or direction, changing of ground cover and the lining of existing channels with other materials, natural or man produced, may be necessary in some parts of the system to achieve the desired objectives. 
(b)	Open storm drainage requirements.
(1)	All land adjoining open natural or improved storm drainage channels having an elevation below the 100-year flood elevation of the channel shall be dedicated for the purpose of providing drainage, public park and/or utility easement. 
(2)	Any channel improvements shall be approved by the city engineer prior to the commencement of any work thereon. 
(3)	Whenever channel improvements are carried out, sodding, back sloping, cribbing and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed to control the situation and erosion for the anticipated conditions and flow resulting from a 50-year frequency rainfall. (See section 44-717.) 
(4)	Any channel grading shall be such that water will not gather in pools. 
(5)	Drainage easements of satisfactory width to provide working room for construction and access for channel maintenance shall be provided. An open drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement except under the following conditions: Where a paved street surface is least two lanes wide is provided on both sides of a channel so as to provide access; or where acreage or estate type development is proposed with a composite runoff coefficient not exceeding 0.50. 
(c)	Design considerations.
(1)	Grade. Channels should be as wide and shallow, and on as flat a grade as hydraulics, topography and economics will allow. 
(2)	Hydraulic characteristics. Hydraulic characteristics of channels shall be determined by Kutter's or Manning's equation. The n value(s) used for channels shall be based on the design engineer's experience and judgment in regard to the individual channel characteristics. When submitting calculations, include the source. A composite Manning's n value is included below and may be used if desired. 
(3)	Constructed channel geometry.
a.	Whenever a trapezoidal channel is constructed, the minimum bottom width shall be four feet with side slopes of not steeper than 4:1 for sodded sections and a minimum bottom width of three feet with side slopes of not steeper than 1:1 for paved or rock lined sections. 
b.	If R is less than 3 × B, additional outside bank height is required and may be determined by the following: 
H = 	V2 (T + B) 
  2gR 

H = Additional height on outside edge of channel (feet) 
V = Velocity of flow in channel (fps) 
T = Width of flow at water surface (feet) 
B = Bottom width of channel (feet) 
R = Centerline radius of turn (feet) 
g = Acceleration of gravity (32.3 fps) 
(4)	Flow velocities in channels. Velocities shall not exceed six fps for sections sodded in Bermuda grass and four fps in sections sodded with brome or blue grass. Velocities in concrete lined or paved sections shall not exceed 15 fps. Whenever improved conduits carrying water discharge into channels either natural or manmade scour protection shall be installed. 
(5)	Trickle channels. All channels altered or improved from the natural state will require a paved trickle channel. The paved trickle channel shall be designed in a manner that will minimize erosion or undermining of the improvement. Sodding, soil stabilization, or other methods of erosion control shall be required adjacent to the paved channel. 
(6)	Concrete flumes. Concrete flumes in lieu of enclosed pipe shall not be allowed except under the following conditions: 
a.	Drainage area shall not exceed five acres. 
b.	The structure shall extend to the rear of the adjacent lots and shall lie within the discharge into a park or common area maintained by the city or property owners' association. 
c.	A curtain wall shall be provided at the discharge end. 
d.	The entrance to the flume shall be as detailed as on city standard detail sheets and based on the Weir equation: 
Q = CLH3/2 
(7)	Exit provisions. Any paved channel more than three feet deep shall have recessed hand/toe pockets in the channel wall spaced vertically on 15 inch centers alternating on a 12-inch width. The pockets (steps) shall be located a minimum of 200 feet apart along the channel and alternate from side to side. 
(8)	Water surface. The water surface in the flume shall never be higher than the top of the curb at the entrance to the flume under any flow condition. 
(9)	Riprap outlet stabilization. Riprap outlet stabilization shall be constructed at the discharge end of the open drainage channel when the new channel discharges into an undeveloped channel or when the discharge velocities are erosive. 
(10)	Fences. Fences shall not be erected below the shoulder of the sodded section, and in no case shall fences be closer than six feet (measured horizontally to the edge of the paved section). 
(d)	Computation of composite roughness coefficient for excavated and natural channels.
n = n 0 +n 1 +n 2 +n 3 +n 4 )M 
	Channel 
Conditions 	Value 
Material involved (n 0 ) 	Earth 	0.020 
	Rockcut 	0.025 
	Fine gravel 	0.024 
	Coarse gravel 	0.028 
Degree of irregularity (n 1 ) 	Smooth 	0.000 
	Minor 	0.005 
	Moderate 	0.010 
	Severe 	0.020 
Variation of channel cross section (n 2 ) 	Gradual 	0.000 
	Alternating 
occasionally 	0.005 
	Alternating 
frequently 	0.010—0.015 
Relative effect of obstructions (n 3 ) 	Negligible 	0.000 
	Minor 	0.010—0.015 
	Appreciable 	0.020—0.030 
	Severe 	0.040—0.060 
Vegetation (n 4 ) 	Low 	0.005—0.010 
	Medium 	0.010—0.025 
	High 	0.025—0.050 
	Very high 	0.050—0.100 
Degree of meandering (M) 	Minor 	1.000 
	Appreciable 	1.200 
	Severe 	1.400 

Roughness coefficient for lined channels.
Concrete lined - n = 0.013 
Rubble riprap - n = 0.033 
(Code 1983, § 12-905; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-715. Bridges and culverts.
(a)	Materials and size.
(1)	Culverts under private drive approaches may be reinforced concrete pipe or corrugated metal pipe. Size shall be not less than 15 inches or 12-inch by 11-inch corrugated metal pipe arch. 
(2)	Culverts under public streets should be reinforced concrete pipe, corrugated metal pipe or closed box design conforming to state department of transportation standards. On corrugated metal pipe, the pipe gauge shall be one grade heavier than shown on the above standard. 
(b)	General design requirements.
(1)	Bridges and culverts shall be designed to pass the 50-year storm unless used as an outlet for a detention facility as outlined in section 44-716. Structures under residential streets shall be designed so that water overtopping the structure from a 100-year frequency storm shall not flood the street to a depth greater than 12 inches above the street crown. Structures crossing under arterial or collector streets shall be designed so that waters overtopping the structure from a 100-year frequency storm shall not flood the street to a depth greater than six inches above the street crown. Allowable spread of waters shall not exceed the adjacent floodway. 
(2)	Scour protection shall be provided to control downstream erosion. 
(3)	Flared end sections with curtain walls may be used in lieu of headwalls. Concrete flared end sections discharging water shall be tied back a minimum of three pipe lengths. 
(Code 1983, § 12-906; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-716. Stormwater storage.
(a)	General.
(1)	Retention and detention are two generalized types of storm runoff storage that can be used to control flooding. The term "retention storage" refers to storm runoff collected and stored for a significant period and released or used after the storm runoff has ended. The term "detention storage" consists of reducing the rate of runoff for a short period of time to reduce peak flows by controlling the discharge through an outlet structure and by extending the period of runoff. The purpose of storage of stormwater is to prevent excess runoff from attaining flow rates that exceed the capacities of downstream drainage systems. Unless every available location for stormwater storage is utilized, the management of stormwater runoff by means of storage will not be successful. The ideal design begins the storing of runoff as close as possible to the ridgelines that divide and subdivide the watershed. To extend the time of concentration, runoff storage may be accomplished by the storage of water in reservoirs, parks, side channels, detention ponds either on or off site. Detention facilities shall be provided prior to general earthwork on the site or construction of buildings and parking lots. 
(2)	Stormwater detention ponds shall be required where proposed development will be increasing the quantity of stormwater runoff. However, in the event a complete hydrology study by a licensed professional engineer indicates that less flooding damage will occur without stormwater detention and the floodwater elevations do not increase, the detention requirement may be waived. Possible areas where this waiver may apply are at lower areas of drainage basins or areas where the confluence of other streams are creating a rise in water elevation and the timing of an earlier release may be less detrimental to a flooding problem. 
(b)	Rainfall storage.
(1)	Rooftop storage will not be permitted. 
(2)	Parking lot storage, if used, may employ ponding areas with throttled drains or gravel filled pits with French drains. 
(3)	Property line swale ponding and small on site ponds, if used, shall be examined for possible adverse effects on building foundations due to saturation of the subsoil. 
(c)	Design considerations for rainfall and runoff storage.
(1)	Sizing of detention facilities shall be by approved methods such as APWA unit hydrograph, SCS method, etc. 
(2)	The storage facility shall be permitted to pass the historic runoff less any bypass and shall control the increased runoff due to the development under consideration. 
(3)	Release rates shall be based on head over the drain and shall not exceed the historic Q for all frequency storms. 
(4)	When a combination of storage facilities is used to control runoff, the system as a whole shall be designed with the capacity to detain the 100-year storm with discharge rates in accordance with subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(5)	All facilities shall be provided with an emergency spillway with scour protection. Earth embankments shall have side slopes not steeper than 3:1. Proper materials are to be specified with the corresponding optimum compaction to provide stability and minimum seepage. 
(6)	The storage volume of a detention facility shall be oversized ten percent to allow for sedimentation. 
(7)	All detention ponds shall be provided with a paved trickle channel from the inlet to the outlet structure to transmit low flows, except where it is not required by the design as approved by the city engineer. 
(8)	Erosion control for storage and/or detention facilities shall be in accordance with section 44-717. 
(9)	A paved access road shall be provided to all detention areas for maintenance purposes. For those owned and maintained by the city the access road shall be dedicated as part of the detention area. 
(10)	Earth dams and other earth embankments shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with the accepted engineering practices to ensure that dam failures will not occur. Design criteria used by the soil conservation service in the selection of materials and construction procedures will be accepted. 
(Code 1983, § 12-907; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)
 
Sec. 44-717. Erosion and sedimentation.
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide effective management for the control of erosion and sedimentation and to protect water quality and the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(b)	General requirements.
(1)	Construction activity on individual tracts or lots shall be conducted if appropriate erosion and sedimentation facilities are installed and maintained throughout the construction period. 
(2)	All erosion and sediment control methods necessary for land treatment measures which will effectively minimize and control erosion and sedimentation during and following any proposed construction activity shall be indicated on the final construction and/or building permit plans and be in place prior to building, parking or general earthwork. 
(3)	All earth slopes and earth berms new or existing subject to erosion, such as, adjacent to trickle channels, inlet structures, and outlet structures, within any area designated for detention or drainage shall be slab sodded with Bermuda sod or have permanent established growth of vegetation. All vegetation areas shall be fertilized, watered, and in an established growing condition prior to completion or acceptance of any drainage facility. 
(4)	Erosion and sediment control on urban areas established by the county conservation district shall be used to determine best practices, define terms and provide basic methodology. 
(c)	Design considerations.
(1)	General design principles. Practical combinations of the following principles shall be utilized, as a minimum, in planning measures to be installed for any land disturbing activity: 
a.	The land disturbing activity shall conform to existing topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential. 
b.	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum through construction scheduling and management. 
c.	Cut and fill operations should be kept to a minimum. 
d.	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
e.	Natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented whenever feasible. 
f.	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
g.	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(2)	General practice. Soil and water conservation measures include, but are not necessarily restricted to, vegetation, sediment basins, dikes, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, diversions, waterways or outlets, and riprap. Vegetative practices shall be applied to control erosion. The practice can be either temporary and/or permanent depending on the site specific needs. 
(d)	Erosion and sediment control criteria.
(1)	Long term permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting producing vegetative cover: Bermuda grass, Kentucky 31 tall fescue and weeping lovegrass are some of the types of permanent vegetation that shall be used to control erosion. 
(2)	Short term seeding, producing temporary vegetative cover. Small grains like oats, rye and wheat, and sudans and sorghums are the most feasible temporary vegetation and shall be used to control erosion. This practice is effective for areas where soil is left exposed for a period of six to 12 months. The time may be shorter during periods of erosive rainfall. 
(3)	Sodding. Covering areas with a turf of perennial sod forming grass. 
(4)	Dikes and swales. The design drainage areas for dikes and swales shall not exceed five acres. The minimum dimensions shall be in accordance with the EPA guidelines. 
a.	Diversion dike. 
b.	Interceptor dike or swale. 
c.	Perimeter dike or swale. 
d.	Straw bale dike. Where no other practice is feasible, a temporary barrier with a life expectancy of three months or less can be installed across or at the toe of a slope for the contributing drainage areas, in accordance with the EPA guidelines. 
(5)	A stabilized construction entrance shall be built in accordance with the adopted standards to reduced or eliminate the tracking or flowing of sediment onto public right-of-way. 
(6)	A concrete or stone outlet structure shall be constructed in areas where the entire drainage area to the structure is not stabilized or where there is a need to dispose of runoff at a protected outlet or where concentrated flow for the duration of the period of construction needs to be diffused. 
(7)	A grade stabilization structure in the form of a paved chute or flume shall be constructed to prevent erosion, where concentrated flow of surface runoffs is to be conveyed down a slope, in accordance with the adopted standards. The maximum allowable drainage area upstream of such a structure shall not exceed 36 acres. 
(8)	A grade stabilization structure in the form of a pipe slope drain shall be constructed to prevent erosion, where concentrated flow of surface runoff is to be conveyed down a slope, in accordance with the adopted standards. The maximum allowable drainage area upstream of such a structure shall not exceed five acres. 
(9)	Stormwater detention facilities may be used temporarily as sediment basins. A temporary outlet structure for the stormwater detention facility to work as a sediment pond shall be constructed. At the end of the construction activity, the developer shall make sure that the outlet structure shall meet the design requirements of a stormwater detention facility. 
(10)	Hay and sod mulching, as a temporary measure, may be used for embankment stabilization in areas where surface runoff is to be directed down a slope. 
(11)	Erosion matting may be used for embankment and slope stabilization where appropriate. The specified use must be recommended by the manufacturer for the proposed material. 
(12)	Silt fencing may be used for slope stabilization where appropriate. The specified use must be recommended by the manufacturer for the proposed material. 
(Code 1983, § 12-908; Ord. No. 436-03-04, 3-18-2004)

