CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SHAWNEE, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

SHAWNEE OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Richard Finley 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dub Bushong 
Ron Gillham 
James Harrod 
Darren Rutherford 
Lesa Shaw 
Ben Salter 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Justin Erickson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Joseph Vorndran 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Phyllis Loftis 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2002 Code, as supplemented through September 7, 2015, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2002 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Sandra S. Fox, Senior Code Attorney, and Kim Ryder, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Tony Morales, City Attorney, and Lisa Lasyone, CMC, Senior Deputy City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 2017. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2610 NS 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SHAWNEE, OK; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR CODIFICATION, REPEALER AND SEVERABILITY; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
    WHEREAS, the Code of Ordinances of the City of Shawnee must be amended from time to time to comply with the laws of the State of Oklahoma and the Charter of the City of Shawnee; and 
    WHEREAS, the Mayor and City Commission have determined that other amendments must be made for the more efficient and practical operations for the City of Shawnee: 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF SHAWNEE, OKLAHOMA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 28, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 16, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of up to the maximum amount permitted or required by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 16, 2017 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7: CODIFICATION . This Ordinance shall be codified in the Shawnee Municipal Code, and the codifier is authorized to set out the ordinance as appropriate. 
Section 8: REPEALER . All sections, subsections, clauses, and sentences of existing law in conflict with this ordinance, are repealed. 
Section 9: SEVERABILITY . The provisions of this ordinance are severable and, if any sentence, provision, or other part of this Ordinance shall be held invalid, the decision of the court so holding shall not affect or impair any of the remaining parts or provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 10: EMERGENCY . Because it is necessary for the protection of the public's health, safety, and welfare, an emergency is declared to exist. This ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its passage and publication. 
PASSED AND APPROVED this 19th day of June, 2017. 
      RICHARD FINLEY, MAYOR     
(SEAL) 
  
ATTEST: 
      PHYLLIS LOFTIS, CMC, CITY CLERK   Emergency separately approved this 19th day of June, 2017. 
  
      RICHARD FINLEY, MAYOR     
(SEAL) 
  
ATTEST: 
      PHYLLIS LOFTIS, CMC, CITY CLERK   Approved as to form and legality this 22 day of June, 2017. 
      JOSEPH M. VORNDRAN 
      CITY ATTORNEY   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Legislation Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 Ord. No. 2606NS  6-19-2017 Included Ord. No. 2607NS  6-19-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2608NS  6-19-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2609NS  6-19-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2610NS  6-19-2017 Included Ord. No. 2611NS  8- 8-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2612NS  8- 8-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2613NS  8- 7-2017 Included Ord. No. 2614NS  8-21-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2615NS  9-18-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2616NS 10-16-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2617NS 10-16-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2618NS 10-16-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2619NS 10-16-2017 Omitted Ord. No. 2620NS 12- 4-2017 Omitted Supp. No. 2 Ord. No. 2208NS  6-20-2005 Included Ord. No. 2621NS  1-16-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2622NS  1-16-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2623NS  1-16-2018 Included Ord. No. 2624NS  1-16-2018 Included Ord. No. 2625NS  1-16-2018 Included Ord. No. 2626NS  3- 4-2018 Included Ord. No. 2627NS  3- 4-2018 Included Ord. No. 2628NS  3- 7-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2629NS  3-19-2018 Included Ord. No. 2630NS  3-19-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2631NS  3-19-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2632NS  3-19-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2633NS  4- 2-2018 Included Ord. No. 2634NS  4- 2-2018 Omitted Res. No. 6560  4- 2-2018 Included Ord. No. 2635NS  4-16-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2636NS  5- 7-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2637NS  6-18-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2638NS  7-16-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2639NS  8- 6-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2640NS  9- 4-2018 Included Ord. No. 2641NS  9-17-2018 Included Ord. No. 2642NS  9-17-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2643NS 10- 1-2018 Included Ord. No. 2644NS 11- 5-2018 Included Ord. No. 2645NS 11- 5-2018 Omitted Ord. No. 2646NS 12-17-2018 Included Res. No. 6580 12-17-2018 Included  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- The Charter of the city was first enacted in 1908 and was subsequently accepted by the voters on March 18, 1930, and approved by the governor on April 18, 1930, as the amended Charter of the city. The Charter was revised in its entirety and approved again at the election held on April 1, 1986. Except for the use of a uniform system of capitalization and the addition or revision of catchlines where necessary, the amended Charter has been set out herein as enacted and amended. Amendments subsequent to April 1, 1986 will be indicated by history notes appearing at the end of the affected section. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Constitution reference- Municipal Charters, OK Const. Art. 18, § 3(a) et seq.; initiative and referendum, OK Const. Art. 18, § 4(a) et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal Carters, 11 O.S. § 13-101 et seq.; when Charter controls over conflicting laws, 11 O.S. § 13-109; initiative and referendum, 11 O.S. § 15-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - ORGANIZATION AND POWERS 

Section 1. - Name of city; succession to rights, powers and obligations; powers and duties generally. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Shawnee, within the boundaries as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate by name the City of Shawnee, and under that name and style shall have perpetual succession; and as such, they and their successors shall succeed to, own, and possess all the property, whether real, personal or mixed, and all the rights, privileges, franchises, powers, and immunities now belonging to, possessed, or enjoyed by the present corporation known as the City of Shawnee; that said municipal corporation shall be subject to and liable for all debts, judgments, bonds, notes, and other legal obligations for which the present corporation is now legally bound; that the said municipal corporation and its successors, in said corporate name of the City of Shawnee, shall have power to sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, complain, intervene, and defend in all courts; that it shall have the power to make contracts, to take and acquire property, by purchase or otherwise, and to hold, sell, lease, convey, or otherwise dispose of, any real or personal property within or without the limits of said city; that it shall also have, exercise, and enjoy such other and additional powers, rights, privileges, franchises, and immunities as are granted and conferred by any other part of this Charter; that it may make and use a corporate seal and alter the same at the pleasure of its board of commissioners. 
    The city shall have the power to engage directly or indirectly in advocacy calculated to influence legislative and administrative matters at all levels of government. 
State Law reference- Corporate powers of municipalities, 11 O.S. § 22-101. 
Section 2. - Enumeration of powers not exclusive. 
    The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated therein, implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise thereof, it is intended that the City of Shawnee shall have, and may exercise, all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred under the constitution and general law of the State of Oklahoma. All powers of the city, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or, if not prescribed therein, then in the manner provided by ordinance or resolution of the commission. Provisions of state law relating to matters which may be regulated by cities operating under charters shall be in effect only insofar as they are applicable and not superseded by this Charter or by ordinance. 
Section 3. - Intergovernmental relations. 
    The city may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any one or more states, civil divisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof. 
ARTICLE II. - WARDS AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 1. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of said City of Shawnee, shall, until altered as provided by law or ordinance, be the same as at the time of the adoption of this amended Charter. 
Section 2. - Wards. 
    The city is hereby divided into six (6) wards, being the same number now existing in the present corporation, with boundaries to each as heretofore established; but the board of commissioners shall have power by ordinance to change the boundaries of the present wards, and in doing so each ward shall contain as nearly the same number of inhabitants as in the judgment of said board can reasonably be done. 
State Law reference- Changing wards, 11 O.S. § 20-101 et seq. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS OF MUNICIPALITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officers generally, 11 O.S. § 8-101 et seq. 

Section 1. - Designation of board of commissioners. 
    Whenever in the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma, or the laws thereof, or in the present ordinances of the City of Shawnee, hereby continued in force, reference is made to the "mayor," or to the "chief executive officer," of the city, such reference shall be deemed made to the mayor under the form of government under this Charter; and whenever in the said Constitution, laws, or ordinances reference is made to the "city council," "mayor and council," "mayor and councilman," or to the "legislative body" of the city, such reference shall be deemed made to the board of commissioners of the city. 
Section 2. - Composition of board of commissioners; nomination and election of commissioners. 
    The board of commissioners shall constitute the governing body of the city. It shall consist of a mayor, who shall be nominated and elected from the city at large; and of six (6) other commissioners, each of whom shall file for office from the ward in which he resides, but shall be nominated and elected by vote of the city at large. 
Section 3. - Qualification of mayor and commissioners. 
    All members of the board of commissioners, including the mayor, shall have attained the age of twenty-five (25) years and each shall be a duly qualified elector within the city, and shall be a resident of the city; and, except the mayor, shall be a resident of the ward from which he files for office. 
State Law reference- Qualifications for elected office, 11 O.S. § 8-101. 
Section 4. - Terms of office of mayor and commissioners. 
    The mayor shall serve for four (4) years or until their successor is elected and qualified. The other commissioners shall serve for four (4) years or until their successors are elected and qualified. The terms of office of mayor and commissioners shall begin on the first Monday in the month following the general election, or runoff election as applicable. The terms of office of those commissioners or the mayor elected to fill vacancies at a special election, as provided in Article VIII hereof, shall begin with the next meeting of the board of commissioners following the official results of the special election. 
(Ord. No. 2465NS, § 1, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 2626NS, § 1, 3-4-2018) 
Section 5. - Compensation of mayor and commissioners. 
    The mayor and commissioners shall serve without compensation, but shall be paid their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The board of commissioners shall have authority to employ and provide for the expenses and compensation of accountants, engineers, attorneys, and other consultants for the purpose of investigating the affairs of the city in any and all particulars and such persons, when so directed by the board of commissioners, shall not be under the supervision or direction of the city manager, and the reports made by such person shall be made direct to the board of commissioners. 
Section 6. - Vice-mayor. 
    The council shall appoint one (1) of its members vice-mayor for a term of one (1) year on the first Monday in the month following the general election or after the runoff election if applicable that particular year, or on the first Commission meeting in July in years without an election. The vice-mayor shall act as mayor during the absence of the mayor. If the office of mayor becomes vacant, then the vice-mayor shall serve as mayor until the next general or special municipal election, and until a new mayor is elected and qualified. Provided, where the office of mayor becomes vacant and the vice-mayor serves as mayor until the next general or special municipal election, the commissioner's seat held by the vice-mayor shall not be deemed vacant. The vice-mayor shall have no authority to make appointments or remove officers appointed by the mayor, except where a vacancy exists in the office of mayor and the vice-mayor is serving as mayor until the election of a successor. 
(Ord. No. 2465NS, § 2, 12-5-2011; Ord. No. 2626NS, § 2, 3-4-2018) 
Section 7. - Vacancies in board of commissioners [or mayor]. 
    If after their election as commissioners or mayor and prior or subsequent to the qualification for office as herein provided, any of said commissioners ceases to be a resident of his ward, or if any of said commissioners or mayor dies or resigns, or otherwise becomes incapable of performing the duties of the office to which he has been elected, the other members of the board of commissioners shall nevertheless qualify for office and convene, as such board of commissioners, and fill the vacancy caused by such death, resignation, removal, or incapacity as provided in article III, section 8 hereof. The board of commissioners shall be the exclusive judges of the existence of any vacancies. 
Section 8. - Filling of vacancies; mayor and board of commissioners. 
    When a vacancy occurs in the office of commissioner, the board of commissioners, by a majority vote of the remaining commissioners, shall appoint a person meeting the qualifications for the vacant commissioner's seat to serve until the next general or special municipal election and until a successor is elected and qualified. Any such vacancy shall then be filled at the next general or special municipal election to complete the balance of any unexpired term. If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor then the vice-mayor shall serve as mayor, as provided in section 6 of this article, until his successor is qualified after election at the next general or special municipal election. The vacancy in the office of mayor shall then be filled at the next general or special municipal election to complete the balance of the mayor's unexpired term. Nothing herein shall require the board of commissioners to call a special municipal election to fill vacancies in the office of commissioner or mayor. 
State Law reference- Vacancies in office generally, 11 O.S. § 8-109. 
Section 9. - City treasurer and city attorney. 
    The city treasurer and the city attorney shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. The city treasurer shall execute to the City of Shawnee a bond with one (1) or more surety companies authorized to transact business in the State of Oklahoma, in such sum as may be fixed by the board of commissioners, but not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The city attorney shall execute such bond as may be required by the board of commissioners. The premium on all bonds required by this Charter shall be paid by the City of Shawnee. The city treasurer and city attorney shall be appointed and/or removed only by a majority vote of all members of the board of commissioners, not including vacant positions. 
Section 10. - Duty of city attorney. 
    It shall be the duty of the city attorney to represent the City of Shawnee in legal matters and proceedings, and he shall advise the heads of the various departments, upon request, upon all questions of law, provided this section shall not prohibit the hiring of outside counsel on specific legal problems. 
ARTICLE IV. - POWERS, DUTIES, AND MEETINGS OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Section 1. - Power of board to make ordinances; operative date of ordinances; emergency measures. 
    All legislative authority is hereby vested in the board of commissioners. The mayor and commissioners shall each have one (1) vote, and the mayor shall have no veto power, but shall forthwith, without discretion, approve all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the board of commissioners. The adoption of ordinances shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the board of commissioners, not including vacant positions. All ordinances and resolutions shall be entered in the minutes and no ordinances other than those related to zoning matters, shall become operative until thirty (30) days after final passage and approval, except in the case of emergency measures. Emergency measures so adopted and approved shall take effect and be in force from and after their passage and approval. No emergency measures shall become immediately operative unless it shall state in a separate section the reason why it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and the question of emergency shall be voted upon separately and shall require the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all commissioners present, but never less than four (4) votes. All ordinances relating to zoning decisions shall become operative immediately after their passage and approval without the necessity of an emergency measure. Except as may be required by this Charter for the publication of ordinances relating to particular matters, every ordinance shall be published one (1) time, by title, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1959NS, § 1, 2-7-2000) 
State Law reference- Ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-101 et seq.; effective date of ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-103; publication of ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-106. 
Section 2. - Scope of power of board of commissioners. 
    The legislative power of said board of commissioners shall extend to all rightful subjects of municipal legislation, subject only to the constitution and general laws of the state. The board of commissioners shall have, in addition to other powers herein granted, power to enact and provide such ordinances as are necessary to protect life, health, and property, to declare, prevent, abate, and remove nuisances, preserve and enforce good order, good government, and general welfare and security of the city and the inhabitants thereof; to promote the public health, public peace, public morals, public safety, trade and commerce, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the said city. 
    The said board shall have authority to pass ordinances, to impose fines and imprisonment, and to commit [to confinement] until such fine and costs are paid. 
Section 3. - Ordinances and resolutions to be complete in final form; approval of franchises by vote of people. 
    Every ordinance or resolution appropriating money or ordering any street or sewer improvement, or making or authorizing any contract, or granting any franchise or right to use the streets, bridges, or public places in the city, shall be complete in the form in which it is finally passed. No franchise or right to occupy or use the streets, bridges, or public places in said city shall be granted, renewed, or extended except in the manner provided by ordinances, and every grant or franchise for street, railway, gas, or waterworks, electric lights or pole franchise, telegraph, telephone system, or other public service utilities within said city, must be authorized or approved by a majority of the electors, voting thereon at a general or special election called for that purpose as provided by law. 
Section 4. - Meeting of board of commissioners; quorum; minutes; executive sessions. 
    The board of commissioners shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month at City Hall at a date and hour to be designated by resolution. The board of commissioners may hold such special and/or emergency meetings as may be called and as are authorized by the Oklahoma Open Meeting Law. Special and emergency meetings of the board of commissioners may be called by the mayor, any two (2) of the commissioners, or by the city manager by filing a written call of the meeting with the city clerk. The call shall state the business to be transacted at said meeting. Upon receipt of the call of a special or emergency meeting the city clerk shall give notice thereof by posting the call of special or emergency meeting at City Hall, and shall make a good-faith attempt to serve the mayor, each commissioner, and the city manager personally or by leaving the call at their usual place of residence. Failure of the mayor, city commissioner, or city manager to receive a copy of the call shall not invalidate an otherwise legal meeting of the board of commissioners. 
    All meetings of the board of commissioners of the City of Shawnee shall be public except the commission may hold executive sessions for the purpose of: (a) discussing the employment, hiring, firing, appointment, promotion, demotion, disciplining, or resignation of an individual salaried officer or employee; (b) discussion with legal counsel of contemplated, threatened, or pending investigation, litigation, claims, or proceedings; (c) for such other purposes as are now or may hereafter be permitted under the Oklahoma Open Meeting Law. Any vote or action on an item discussed in executive session shall be publicly cast and recorded. A journal of all proceedings of the board of commissioners shall be kept by the city clerk, and any citizen may examine the minutes of the meetings during normal working hours. Provided, no minutes shall be kept of discussions held in executive sessions as permitted herein. The city manager shall attend the meetings of the board of commissioners, and may take part in the discussions but shall have no vote. A majority of the board of commissioners, not including vacant positions, shall constitute a quorum. The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the board of commissioners provided, however, if the mayor is absent then the vice-mayor shall preside as provided in article III, section 6. 
State Law reference- Notice of meetings, 25 O.S. § 311; absence from meetings, 11 O.S. § 8-108. 
Section 5. - Appointment of city manager. 
    The board of commissioners, by a majority vote of all its members not including vacant positions, shall appoint a city manager who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government, and shall be appointed without regard to his political beliefs and may or may not be a resident of the City of Shawnee when appointed, but shall reside in the city during his term of office. The city manager shall be appointed and shall hold office at the discretion of the board of commissioners, and shall be subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of all the members of the board of commissioners, not including vacant positions. 
ARTICLE V. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER 

Section 1. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
    The powers and duties of the city manager shall be: 
(a)  To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  To appoint and remove all subordinate officers and employees of the city, all appointments to be upon merit and fitness alone, and to exercise control over all such subordinate officers and employees except as otherwise herein specifically provided. 
(c)  To attend the meetings of the board of commissioners, with the right to take part in the discussions, but having no vote. 
(d)  To recommend to the board of commissioners such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient, and which require action by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  To keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city, and to make and file such written statement thereof as the board of commissioners may require. 
(f)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or be required by [of] him by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(g)  He shall have power at any time to investigate the affairs of any department. He, or any person appointed by him for the purpose, shall have power to compel the attendance of witnesses, and the production of books, papers, and other evidence. 
(h)  He shall devote his entire time to the affairs of the city. 
Section 2. - Recommendations for appointments. 
    Neither the mayor nor any commissioner shall recommend any appointment to be made by the manager except upon request of the manager; provided, however, that the appointments of all heads of departments shall not become effective, until they have been approved by the board of commissioners. 
Section 3. - Salary of city manager. 
    The city manager shall receive such salary as may be agreed upon and fixed by the board of commissioners, and the same thereupon to be fixed and recited by ordinance or resolution. 
Section 4. - Bond of city manager and other appointive officers and employees. 
    The city manager shall, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, enter into an undertaking with the city, secured by some reliable surety company, in the penal sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), and in such additional sum and undertaking as the board of commissioners may, from time to time, in their discretion, require. Said undertaking or undertakings to be approved by the board of commissioners, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office and for faithfully accounting for and paying over to said City of Shawnee all city funds received or collected by him. The said city manager shall require any appointive officer or employee of the city, whose duties involve the handling of city money, to give bond to the city, secured by some reliable surety company, and approved by the board of commissioners, in such amount as it may deem necessary, for the faithful performance of all duties of, and the accounting for and payment by, such appointive officer or employee of all city funds received by him. The premium for all bonds required and authorized under this section shall be paid out of the funds of the city. 
Section 5. - City manager to make monthly reports. 
    The city manager shall make a monthly report in writing to the board of commissioners covering the receipts and disbursements and proceedings in the affairs of the city and condensed quarterly reports each three (3) months, which quarterly report shall be preserved among the records of said city and recorded in a book kept for that purpose, and said reports shall be published from time to time as may be provided by ordinance or resolution. 
Section 6. - Consolidation of services under city manager. 
    All affairs of the City of Shawnee, except those now under the supervision of the library board, and except as otherwise herein provided are hereby consolidated and placed under the control of the city manager, who shall employ, appoint, and discharge all subordinate officers and employees of the city necessary for its service and the conduct of its affairs, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Section 7. - City clerk, fire chief, chief of police, and other necessary officers and employees to be employed by the city manager; nepotism prohibited. 
    The city manager shall appoint and fix the compensation of a city clerk, fire chief, chief of police, a city physician, and all other necessary employees who shall perform under the direction and control of the city manager, and subject to removal by him, all the services and duties customary and incident to such office and employment and required by the city manager. The amount of compensation of all employees except day laborers shall be submitted to and approved by the board of commissioners before same shall become effective. No person shall hold an appointive position or employment in the pay of the city who is related by blood or marriage within the third degree to either the commissioners, mayor, city manager, or head of the department where employed. 
Section 8. - Qualifications for city employees. 
    The city manager and other officers and employees of the city having authority to employ workmen or laborers of any kind shall be restricted in such employment to citizens of the United States and such persons who shall have declared before a competent court their intention of becoming citizens of the United States. The city manager shall, insofar as in his judgment the same may be done without detriment or disadvantage to the good government of the city, select as superintendents or heads of departments and all other employees of the city, persons who have been residents of the City of Shawnee for at least one (1) year prior to their appointments, provided that in his judgment persons of the required capacity are available at rates of compensation which he shall consider reasonable. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, 11 O.S. § 27-101 et seq. 

Section 1. - Powers; jurisdiction; municipal judge, appointment and removal. 
    In the event that the municipal court now exercising jurisdiction for the punishment of offenders against ordinances of the City of Shawnee, shall at any time be abolished by law or declared not to possess jurisdiction to try and determine such offenses or shall be held unconstitutional; the board of commissioners shall, forthwith by proper ordinances, establish a municipal court in the City of Shawnee, and the board of commissioners shall appoint a municipal judge to preside over the same. The methods of procedure and practice before said court shall be fixed by ordinances of the City of Shawnee and appeals therefrom shall be in the manner and form provided by law. The municipal judge shall be appointed and/or removed only by a majority vote of all the members of the board of commissioners, not including any vacant positions. 
ARTICLE VII. - LIBRARY DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal libraries, 11 O.S. § 31-101 et seq. 

Section 1. - Composition; qualifications; appointment and terms of office of members. 
    The board of commissioners shall appoint a library board of six (6) members. The terms of the members shall be three (3) years. Appointments shall be made on the basis of ability, an understanding of the responsibilities and objectives of public libraries, and an active interest in the attainment of these goals. Appointed members shall be qualified electors and bona fide residents of the city. 
State Law reference- Library board, 11 O.S. § 31-102 et seq. 
Section 2. - Organization; powers and duties; appointment of librarian. 
    The board shall choose from among its membership a president and such other officers as it deems necessary. It shall adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations for its own proceedings and for the government of the libraries in the system as are expedient and consistent with this Charter. The board shall be in charge of all property belonging to such libraries acquired by purchase, loan, gift, devise, or otherwise. The board shall have supervision, care, and custody of the grounds, rooms or buildings constructed, leased, or set apart for library purposes. The library board may recommend for appointment as librarian any person whom it deems qualified. In the exercise of its powers the board shall carry out the spirit and intent of this Charter to provide an efficient and outstanding library system for the city. Provided, this section shall not prohibit the City of Shawnee from entering into intergovernmental agreements, upon approval of the library board. 
State Law reference- Organization of library board, 11 O.S. § 31-103. 
Section 3. - Rules and regulations for use of libraries. 
    Every library held or established under this Charter shall always be subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the library board may adopt in order to render the use of such libraries of the greatest benefit to the greatest number, and said board may exclude from the use of said libraries any and all persons who shall willfully violate such rules. 
Section 4. - Library board to file statement of affairs and estimate of expenses. 
    The said library board shall annually on or before the first day of April present to the board of commissioners a complete report and statement of its proceedings for the past fiscal year, containing an itemized account of all moneys received and expenses for library purposes, together with an estimate of the amount required to be raised by taxation for the maintenance of the library during the ensuing year. Said board shall also report all property received by said board for the library or libraries and the general condition of same. 
State Law reference- Annual report of board, 11 O.S. § 31-108; financial statement and estimate, 11 O.S. § 31-101. 
Section 5. - Maintenance and operation of library. 
    The board of commissioners shall, in the annual budget of the city, make such provisions as shall be necessary within the limitations prescribed by law for the maintenance and operation of the library. 
Section 6. - Donations, endowments, etc. 
    Any person desiring to make donations of any money, personal property, or real estate for the benefit of the library shall have the right to tender the title or ownership of the property so donated to be held, invested, appropriated, and disbursed by the City of Shawnee as directed by the library board, if accepted, according to the terms of the deed, gift, devise, or bequest of such property. 
State Law reference- Donations, 11 O.S. § 31-107. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LEASE OF PUBLIC UTILITIES OR OTHER REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY TO REGULARLY CONSTITUTED AUTHORITIES OF THE CITY OF SHAWNEE 

Section 1. - Authority of city. 
    Any other provision of this Charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the city may lease public utilities or other real or personal property to regularly constituted authorities of the city, and may operate and maintain the same and collect revenues thereof on behalf of said authorities and deposit such revenues to the account of said authorities for disposition in accordance with indentures securing indebtedness issued by such authorities. 
ARTICLE IX. - TWIN LAKES REGULATIONS 

Section 1. - Swimming, water skiing and surfboard riding in and on the Shawnee Twin Lakes. 
    Swimming, water skiing, surfboard riding and all water recreation sports are allowed in and on Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1. All swimming, water skiing and surfboard riding on Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 2 is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1689NS, § 1, 6-20-1994) 
ARTICLE X. - PLANNING AND ZONING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Buildings and zoning, 11 O.S. § 43-101 et seq.; city-county planning and zoning, 19 O.S. § 866.1 et seq. 

Section 1. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  The City of Shawnee shall have full power to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare by regulating the use of property and by controlling and directing the development of the city, through the complete exercise of the powers of planning and zoning and of all powers necessary and proper to carry these powers into full effect and to maintain them within the city limits to the fullest extent permissible under the constitution of the United States and the constitution of this state. The exercise of the powers of planning and zoning within the city always shall be in pursuance of this grant of authority and not under authority of state statutes or law, except with respect to such matters of general state concern as to which state law controls under the state constitution. The city also may exercise powers of planning and zoning granted by the State in respect to matters of general state concern, as aforesaid, and also in respect to property situated outside the city limits. 
(b)  The scope of the planning function shall include, but shall not be limited to, the development and administration of a comprehensive land-use plan which will provide for the careful and thoughtful integration of residential, commercial, industrial, public and other elements to achieve and preserve social purposes, economic values, and aesthetic quality of the neighborhoods and of other areas that compose the city. 
(c)  The City of Shawnee shall have full authority to regulate and restrict the location of mobile homes and manufactured housing within the City of Shawnee to the extent allowed a home rule city under the Oklahoma and the United States Constitutions. 
(d)  The City of Shawnee shall have full authority to regulate and restrict the location of oil, gas, and disposal wells and related appurtenances within the city, and to adopt regulations concerning oil, gas, and disposal wells and related appurtenances within the city for the general safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Shawnee insofar as is consistent with the Oklahoma and United States Constitutions. 
(e)  The City of Shawnee shall have the power to regulate, restrict, and/or prohibit the operation of disposal sites for hazardous and deleterious wastes within the City of Shawnee to the fullest extent possible under the Oklahoma and United States Constitutions. 
Section 2. - Continuation of existing legislation. 
    All ordinances and regulations of this city in respect to planning and zoning which are in operation at the effective date of this Charter hereby are adopted and continued in force, under and by virtue of the authority conferred by the preceding section of this Charter, until altered or repealed by the board of commissioners. 
ARTICLE XI. - PARK DEPARTMENT 

Section 1. - Parks under control of city manager. 
    All land belonging to or under the control of the city and used for park purposes, or which may be acquired for park purposes, within or without said city, shall be under the management and control of the city manager. 
Section 2. - Power to purchase parks. 
    The board of commissioners shall have power to acquire in the name of the city, land and other property for park purposes, and to maintain, improve, and beautify the public parks of the city. 
Section 3. - Donations for cemetery or park. 
    The mayor and commissioners provided for herein are authorized to accept on behalf of the city any donations, bequests, or gifts made by any person, firm, or corporation for cemetery or park purposes, by resolution or otherwise to make same effectual, and to carry same into execution in accordance with any condition imposed by the donor, if in their judgment such acceptance will result to the benefit of the City of Shawnee. 
Section 4. - How donations invested and expended. 
    Any money so received for parks or cemetery, the disposition of which is not provided for by the donor, shall be placed in a special fund or funds and invested as is provided for the funds of the city, and the funds and interest derived therefrom shall be expended on the cemetery or parks, as the case may be. 
Section 5. - Maintenance of parks. 
    The board of commissioners in the annual budget and estimate of the city shall make such provisions as shall be necessary and feasible within the limitation prescribed by law, to maintain and improve its parks. 
ARTICLE XII. - REVENUE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal budget act, 11 O.S. § 17-201 et seq.; application of act, 11 O.S. § 17-203; municipal finances generally, 11 O.S. § 17-101 et seq. 

Section 1. - Authority. 
    The City of Shawnee shall have the authority to raise revenue, make appropriations, issue bonds, regulate bond elections, the issuance of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, and all other fiscal affairs of the city subject to the provisions of this Charter, the Oklahoma Constitution, and State law applicable to cities operating under a charter. 
Section 2. - Taxes certified by clerk. 
    All taxes and special assessments provided for in this Charter or by law to be collected by the county treasurer, except license taxes shall be certified by the city clerk to the county treasurer of Pottawatomie County to be by said county treasurer placed on the county tax rolls for collection, subject to the same penalty, and collected by the county treasurer as other taxes are collected by the county treasurer, as is provided by law for the collection of taxes, and paid by the county treasurer to the city treasurer of the City of Shawnee, and such payment shall include all penalties collected on such city taxes. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxation, 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq. 
Section 3. - County treasurer to pay all taxes and penalties to city treasurer. 
    It shall be the duty of the city treasurer of the City of Shawnee to call upon the county treasurer of the County of Pottawatomie at least once each month for all money due the City of Shawnee; and the city treasurer shall carefully check all the books and records of the county treasurer and ascertain and see to it that all funds due the city collected by the county treasurer from all sources have been paid to the city. It shall be the further duty of the city treasurer upon receiving any funds from the county treasurer to execute and deliver to the county treasurer therefor duplicate receipts for same, one of which said receipts shall be filed with the city clerk of the City of Shawnee and the city clerk shall enter in the proper books kept for that purpose and under the proper head, all amounts of such funds so received and for which such receipts are given. 
Section 4. - Investment of funds. 
    The city treasurer, with the approval of the board of commissioners, may invest the funds of the city in United States bonds or other obligations of the United States, in the bonds and warrants of the State of Oklahoma, or of any County of Oklahoma, or in any bonds of a city of Oklahoma with a population of at least ten thousand (10,000) according to the last preceding federal census, or of a school district of Oklahoma with a population of at least five thousand (5,000) according to the last preceding federal census, in the legally issued warrants of the City of Shawnee or in judgments against the city, or in any other securities, not above enumerated, authorized by the statutes of Oklahoma for the investment of public funds. No securities shall be purchased for more than par and accrued interest. With the approval of the board of commissioners, the city treasurer also may buy and cancel outstanding bonds of the city with sinking fund moneys, whenever such bonds may be purchased for less than par and accrued interest. The board of commissioners may, by general resolution, authorize the investment of funds in investments complying with this section without necessity for a specific resolution for each investment. 
State Constitution reference- Sinking fund, OK Const. Art. 10, § 28. 
State Law reference- Certain bonds as legal investments, 11 O.S. § 24-111; authorized investments generally, 62 O.S. § 348.1; investment of sinking funds, 62 O.S. §§ 541, 562. 
Section 5. - Designation of city depositories. 
    All moneys collected or received by any officer or employee of the city, for fines, costs, taxes, assessments, water, or other public utility service, licenses, permits, and from all other sources shall be accounted for and paid daily to the city treasurer, who shall immediately deposit the same in the depository of the city and disburse same only upon warrants drawn by the city clerk and approved by the city manager. City depositories shall be all financial institutions qualified under the laws of the State of Oklahoma to be depositories for public funds. In making and changing deposits [depositories], the treasurer, with the approval of the board of commissioners, shall choose from among the qualified depositories those which grant to the city the most advantageous terms. 
Section 6. - Audits; maintenance of funds; limitations on use of certain funds. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall cause an annual, or at their discretion, a monthly audit to be made of the books and accounts, records, and transactions of the administrative departments of the city's affairs kept by the city manager and the officers and employees of the city employed by him. Such audit during each fiscal year shall be made by one or more certified public or municipal accountants, who hold a certificate issued under authority of the State of Oklahoma, or of some other state in the union. Such statements and audits shall include a general balance sheet exhibiting the assets and liabilities of the city supported by schedules and including schedules for each utility publicly owned or operated, summaries of income and expenditures supported by detailed schedule and also comparisons in proper classification with the last previous year. 
(b)  Twenty-five (25) percent of all revenue received from the sale of cemetery lots shall be placed in the cemetery perpetual care fund. Such fund shall be invested as provided by law and the interest thereon only shall be used in the improving, caring for, and embellishing the lots, walks, drives, parks, and other necessary improvements on the city cemeteries. 
(c)  All earnings of the water department of the city shall be segregated from all other city funds and used for the service of the water system. Suitable provisions shall be made for the upkeep of the water department with necessary improvements and extensions. The net balance after provision is made for the operation of said department shall be credited to the general revenue fund. 
(d)  All other necessary funds as it may be lawful to establish shall be established and maintained, in the discretion of the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the city manager. 
State Law reference- Perpetual care funds, 8 O.S. § 161 et seq.; annual audit of books and accounts, 11 O.S. § 17-105 et seq.; funds generally, 11 O.S. § 17-212; trusts for perpetual care, 11 O.S. § 26-201 et seq. 
Section 7. - Accurate books of account to be kept. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause accurate books of accounts and records of all the transactions of all departments of the city and all officers and employees appointed by him, to be kept so that the same shall present a complete and itemized statement of all the business and financial affairs of the city. 
Section 8. - Claims against the city. 
    All claims against the city must be filed with the city clerk in writing with a full account of all items thereof, and must be subscribed by the claimant, his agent, or attorney who on oath shall declare that the same is correct, just, due, and unpaid; and no claim or demand shall be allowed or suit filed thereon unless so prepared and filed. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Shawnee from operating under the Oklahoma purchase order law. 
Section 9. - No property exempt from assessments for local improvements. 
    No property of any kind, church, school, or otherwise shall be exempt from any of the special assessments authorized by this Charter or by state law for local improvements. 
Section 10. - Manufacturing enterprises and public utilities exempt from municipal taxation. 
    The board of commissioners by a majority vote of the electors of said city voting thereon are hereby authorized and empowered to exempt from municipal taxation for a period of not to exceed five (5) years, manufacturing establishments and public utilities as an inducement to their location in said city. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to manufacturing establishments and public utilities located in said city on the date of the approval of this Charter by the governor of the state. 
Section 11. - Public service corporation not to be relieved from taxes. 
    No Charter, ordinance, nor franchise hereafter granted, amended or modified granting to any public service corporations, corporation dealing in or handling public utilities authorized to do business within the city, shall ever contain or provide an express waiver or otherwise exempt such corporation or corporations from the provisions of any license tax, special, or franchise tax. 
Section 12. - Signing and attesting of warrants and bonds of city. 
    All bonds of the city shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. All warrants of the city shall be signed by the city manager and attested by the city clerk. 
State Law reference- Payment of invoice or account, petty cash accounts, 11 O.S. § 17-102. 
ARTICLE XIII. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Constitution reference- Franchises, OK Const. Art. 18, § 5 et seq. 

Section 1. - No franchise granted without approval of a majority of electors. 
    The city shall never grant, extend, or renew a franchise, without the approval of a majority of the qualified electors residing within its corporate limits, who shall vote thereon at a general or special election, and the board of commissioners may submit any such matter for approval or disapproval to such electors at any general municipal election, or call a special election for such purpose at any time upon thirty (30) days' notice; and no franchise shall be granted, extended, or renewed for a longer term than twenty-five (25) years. 
Section 2. - Franchise election to be called by mayor. 
    Whenever a petition signed by a number of qualified electors of said city equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of votes cast at the next preceding general municipal election, demanding that a franchise be granted or renewed, shall be filed with the mayor of said city, the mayor shall within ten (10) days thereafter call a special election, at which he shall submit the question whether or not such franchise shall be granted, extended, or renewed. If at such election a majority of the said electors voting thereon shall vote for the grant, extension, or renewal of such franchise the same shall be granted by the proper authorities at the next succeeding regular meeting of the board of commissioners. Provided, that the mayor shall not call any special election until the party or parties demanding such franchise shall deposit with the clerk of said city a sufficient amount of money to pay the expenses of such special election, which amount shall be used in paying the expenses of such election. 
Section 3. - City may engage in public utility business, power of eminent domain; issuance of bond. 
    The City of Shawnee shall have the right to engage in any business or enterprise which may be engaged in by a person, firm, or corporation by virtue of a franchise by said corporation; and shall have the right and power to acquire, own, and maintain within or without the corporate limits of such city, but not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) miles therefrom, all real estate for municipal purposes for sites and rights-of-way for public utility and park purposes, and for the location, erection, and maintenance thereon of waterworks, electric light, gas plant, aviation airport, hospitals, quarantine stations, telephone lines and telephone exchanges, garbage reduction plants, pipelines for the transportation and transmission of gas, water, and sewerage, and public markets, and for any plant for the manufacture of any material for public improvement purposes, public buildings, or other public utilities, works or ways local in use, and for all such purposes shall have the power to exercise the right of eminent domain, either within or without the corporate limits of the city, and to establish, lay, and operate any such plant or pipeline upon any land or right-of-way taken thereunder; the City of Shawnee shall have and exercise the right to manufacture any material for street paving or other public improvement purposes and public buildings, and to barter or exchange the same for other material to be used in public improvement in such city, or to sell the same to other cities for like purposes, and for any and all such purposes in order to raise means to carry out the same, shall have power to issue and sell bonds under and by virtue of the constitution of this state, and issued in manner and form provided by the laws of the State of Oklahoma; provided, that whenever it shall be found impracticable to issue bonds as above provided, for any improvement deemed by such city necessary for the public welfare, without increasing the total indebtedness of such city beyond the constitutional limit, it shall be lawful for such city to lease at a stipulated rental any public improvement or utility from any person, firm, or corporation which will contract to furnish the same; provided, further, that any such rental contract shall reserve to such city the option to purchase such improvement or utility in the future, on terms to be named in such rental contract. 
State Law reference- Issue and sale of bonds, 62 O.S. § 351 et seq. 
Section 4. - Sale or lease of public utilities. 
    The sale or lease of public utilities, the value of which is more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be made only by authority of a special ordinance other than an emergency ordinance. Such ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the city within ten (10) days after its passage and shall include a section reading substantially as follows: "Section ____________ . This ordinance shall be referred to a vote of the electors of the city if a proper referendum petition is properly filed within thirty (30) days after its passage; otherwise, it shall go into effect thirty (30) days after its passage." 
ARTICLE XIV. - ELECTIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal elections, 26 O.S. § 13-101 et seq. 

Section 1. - Conduct of elections generally. 
    All elections for municipal officers and on municipal questions in the City of Shawnee shall be conducted as herein provided. 
Section 2. - Time for holding general election. 
    During every even-numbered year there shall be held a general election in each of the voting precincts of the city at which time candidates for such offices as are to be elected shall stand for election. The general election shall be held on the same date as set for the statewide primary election held the same year. 
    If, on the date of closing for mayor only one (1) candidate has filed for mayor, such candidate shall be chosen mayor and no election for that office shall be held. If, on the date of closing for filing for candidacy for any office other than mayor, only one (1) candidate has filed for commissioner from any ward or wards, said candidate or candidates shall be chosen to their respective offices and no election shall be held. 
    On the date of the closing of the filing for mayor and/or commissioner from the wards, all candidates who have filed for each said office shall have their names placed on the ballot at the general election. 
    If three (3) or more persons file for the same office and no one candidate receives a majority of votes at the general election, the two (2) candidates receiving the largest number of votes shall be voted upon at the ensuing general runoff election, and the person receiving the largest number of votes shall be elected. 
(Ord. No. 1899NS, § 1, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2171NS, § 1, 8-2-2004) 
Section 3. - Nominees. 
    In the general election where three (3) or more candidates have filed for the same office, the two (2) candidates receiving the greatest number of votes for that office shall be nominated to stand in the general runoff election. If one (1) candidate receives a majority of all votes cast at the general election for that office that candidate is ipso facto elected thereto. He/she shall be issued a certificate of election and his name shall not appear upon the general runoff election ballot. In case of a tie at the general runoff election, the elected candidate shall be determined by the flip of a coin. If one (1) of the two (2) candidates nominated for the general runoff election dies, removes from the city or from the ward, or withdraws before the general runoff election, the remaining candidate is elected ipso facto. He/she shall be issued a certificate of election and his/her name shall not appear upon the general runoff election ballot. 
(Ord. No. 1899NS, § 2, 10-5-1998) 
Section 4. - Time for holding general runoff elections. 
    In every even-numbered year there shall be held a general runoff election conducted at the regular voting places within the city for the election of municipal officers, except where no general runoff election is required by reason of the results of the general election. This election shall be held on the same date as the statewide runoff primary election held that same year. 
(Ord. No. 1899NS, § 3, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2171NS, § 2, 8-2-2004) 
Section 5. - Qualification of voters. 
    In either the general or general runoff election provided for hereunder, only such persons shall be qualified to vote as electors therein as are qualified and registered under the general statutes of Oklahoma providing for qualification and registration of electors, and only such electors as are residents of the City of Shawnee. 
(Ord. No. 1899NS, § 4, 10-5-1998) 
State Law reference- Voter registration, 26 O.S. § 4-101 et seq. 
Section 6. - Voting places. 
    All elections within the City of Shawnee shall be held at the polling places designated by the board of commissioners; and, in the absence of such designation, at the polling places designated under the general election law. 
State Law reference- Polling places, 26 O.S. §§ 3-120, 3-123. 
Section 7. - Conduct of election period. 
    The Board of Commissioners of the City of Shawnee shall, by resolution, order the holding of all elections, except as otherwise provided in the Charter. All municipal elections in the City of Shawnee shall be conducted by the County Election Board of Pottawatomie County. The election shall be held at the same place and in the same manner as provided for conduct of state and county elections. Polling places shall be open from seven o'clock a.m. to seven o'clock p.m. The precinct election board shall be the same as for state and county elections, provided substitutions, if necessary, may be made by the Pottawatomie County Election Board. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter (Charter), the laws governing state and county runoff and general elections shall be applicable to municipal elections in the City of Shawnee. 
(Ord. No. 1899NS, § 5, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2627NS, § 1, 3-4-2018) 
Section 8. - Filing of candidates. 
    Any elector, qualified as provided by article III, section 3, of this Charter may become a candidate for any office in any general election by filing with the secretary of the county election board written notice setting forth his/her name, the ward from which he/she is a candidate and the street number of his/her address and shall give the name of the office for which he/she is a candidate and the date of the general election, provided that he/she can be a candidate for only one (1) office. The period of filing for city offices shall be identical to the filing period for the statewide elections to be held that same year. 
(Ord. No. 1899NS, § 6, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 2171NS, § 3, 8-2-2004) 
State Law reference- Filing, 26 O.S. § 5-101 et seq. 
Section 9. - Preparation and distribution of general election ballots. 
    The county election board shall arrange the name of candidates for each elective office without regard to the alphabet or the time of filing; but the same names shall be so arranged that each name shall appear at the head of the list of candidates for said office on the total number of ballots printed an equal number of times with each other name, and likewise second, third, fourth and so on, to the end that the name of each candidate shall appear on said ballot in such position as will insure said candidate an equal opportunity with each other candidate. Such ballots shall contain no emblem, device, mark, or sign of any kind indicating to which political party a candidate may belong but shall be strictly a non-partisan ballot. The county election board shall cause the ballots to be printed, arranged as provided herein, and shall cause the ballots so arranged and printed to be distributed among the various precincts of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1899NS, § 7, 10-5-1998) 
State Law reference- Ballots, 26 O.S. § 6-101 et seq. 
Section 10. - Ballots for general runoff election; names of candidates; waiver of general runoff election; compliance with state election laws; election of mayor. 
    The county election board shall prepare the ballots for the general runoff election which shall be in the same form as described for the general election ballots, except that they shall include only those offices to which no one has been elected as a result of the general election or of events subsequent thereto. Except as otherwise in this Charter specifically provided, the general and runoff election laws of this state applicable to municipal elections are adopted and put into effect hereby, and the results of elections shall be canvassed, published and declared as provided by law. Whenever one (1) or more measures or questions are to be voted upon at the same time that any general or general runoff election for city office is held, such measures or questions shall be submitted upon a ballot separate from that bearing the names of candidates for office. The candidate for each office receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected and shall receive a certificate of election. In the event of a tie vote, the successful candidate shall be determined by the flip of a coin. All declarations of candidacy, petitions and election ballots shall be non-partisan in form and shall bear no party designation of any kind and no sign, mark, symbol, or device of partisan character. 
(Ord. No. 1899NS, § 8, 10-5-1998) 
Section 11. - Violation of election laws. 
    All acts made offenses or crimes under the election laws of this state shall be, and are hereby made, offenses if committed in any election held hereunder, and for such offenses the offender shall be punished in the manner and form as provided by the statutes of Oklahoma, and as may be hereafter provided by ordinance. 
State Law reference- Penalties, 26 O.S. § 16-101 et seq. 
Section 12. - When state election laws in full operation. 
    In the event that the foregoing provisions or any of them should be for any reason held void, or for any reason shall become inoperative then the election laws of the state shall govern all elections within the City of Shawnee, insofar as the special provisions fail. 
Section 13. - Special election. 
    The board of commissioners shall have power to call special elections which shall be ordered held and conducted and the results thereof made known and declared in the same manner as herein provided for other elections. 
State Law reference- Notice of special election, 26 O.S. § 13-102. 
Section 14. - Constitution applied. 
    Article Eighteen of the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma, under the title "Municipal Corporations," and every section thereof, including the initiative and referendum, and all other provisions and sections of said article XVIII, are hereby adopted and made in full force and effect for the government of the City of Shawnee. 
Section 15. - The recall. 
    The holder of an elective office may be removed at any time by the electors qualified to vote for this successor. The procedure shall be: A petition signed by electors entitled to vote for a successor to the person sought to be removed, equal in number to at least sixty (60) percent of the entire vote cast at the last city general election and containing a general statement of the specific grounds upon which the removal is sought, which shall be based upon issues of policy or law as distinguished from personalities, shall be filed with the city clerk. The signatures need not all be appended to one (1) paper, but each signer shall add to his signature the place of his residence, specifying street and number. One (1) signer of each paper [page] shall state, under oath or affirmation before an officer authorized to administer oaths, that the statements therein are true as he believes, and that each signature to the paper [page] is the genuine signature of the person by whom it is purported to have been signed. Within ten (10) days from date of filing the city clerk shall examine the petition and shall determine, from the register of voters, whether said petition is signed by the required number of qualified electors, and shall attach to the petition his certificate, showing the result of said examination. The board of commissioners shall provide him any funds necessary to employ extra help for the examination. If the clerk's certificate shows the petition to have insufficient signatures, others may be added within ten (10) days after the date of certification. The clerk, within ten (10) days after such amendment, shall examine the amended petition. If he certifies that it still is insufficient, it shall be returned to the person who filed it, without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. If the petition is found sufficient as to signature and as to grounds, the clerk shall submit it without delay to the board of commissioners who shall order the election fixing the date for the same not less than thirty (30) days nor more than forty (40) days from the date of the clerk's certificate of sufficiency. Procedure to review a finding of insufficiency shall be the same as for petitions for the initiative or referendum under the laws of the state. 
    The commissioners shall publish notice of the election and cause to be made all arrangements necessary for holding and conducting the election. The election shall be conducted, returned, and the result declared in the same way as other special city elections. The successor of an officer recalled shall hold office for the unexpired term of his predecessor. The person sought to be removed may be a candidate to succeed himself, and his name shall be placed upon the official ballot unless he requests otherwise in writing. In a recall election the candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected. If the successful candidate is the incumbent, he retains his office; if he is other than the incumbent, the latter is removed from office upon qualification by his successor. If the successor fails to qualify within ten (10) days after he is notified of his election, the office becomes vacant. Removal by recall shall be cumulative and additional to other methods provided by law. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against any officer prior to the expiration of six (6) months after his qualification, and no new recall petition shall be filed against a successful incumbent until the expiration of six (6) months from the prior recall election. 
Editor's note- The reference to primary election has been changed to general election at the request of the city. 
Section 16. - Initiative and referendum-Reserved. 
    The powers of the initiative and referendum reserved by the constitution of the state to the people thereof, and the respective counties and districts therein, are hereby reserved to the people of this city and the same shall be held to apply to all legislative authority which the said board may exercise, and to amendments to this Charter. 
State Constitution reference- Initiative and referendum, OK Const. Art. 5, § 1 et seq.; municipal initiative and referendum, OK Const. Art. 18, § 4(a) et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal initiative and referendum, 11 O.S. § 15-101 et seq.; initiative and referendum generally, 34 O.S. § 1 et seq. 
Section 17. - Same-Petition. 
    Every petition for the initiative or referendum shall be signed by a number of qualified electors residing within the limits of said city equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of votes cast at the last city general election, and every such petition shall be filed with the mayor of the City of Shawnee. When such petition demands the enactment of an ordinance or other legal act other than a grant, renewal, or extension of a franchise, the mayor shall present the same to the board of commissioners at its next meeting. Unless the said petition shall be granted, the board of commissioners shall submit the said ordinance or act so petitioned for to the qualified voters at the next election at which city officers are to be elected; and if a majority of said electors voting thereof shall vote for same, it shall thereupon become in full force and effect. 
Editor's note- The reference to primary election has been changed to general election at the request of the city. 
Section 18. - Same-Election. 
    When such petition demands a referendum vote upon an ordinance or any other legal act other than the grant, extension, or renewal of a franchise, the mayor shall submit said ordinance or act to the qualified electors of said city at the next municipal election at which any municipal officers are to be elected; and if at said election a majority of the electors voting thereon shall not vote for the same, it shall thereupon stand repealed. 
Section 19. - Same-Charter amendments. 
    When such petition demands an amendment to this Charter the mayor shall submit such amendment to the qualified electors of said city at the next municipal election at which any municipal officers are to be elected; and if at said election a majority of said electors voting thereon shall vote for such amendment, the same shall thereupon become an amendment to and a part of this Charter when approved by the governor and filed in the same manner and form as an original Charter is required by the provisions of the constitution of the state, to be approved and filed. 
State Constitution reference- Municipal charters, OK Const. Art. 18, § 3(a) et seq. 
ARTICLE XV. - CONTRACTS AND IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1. - Contract procedure generally. 
    The city manager, subject to any regulations which the commission may prescribe, shall contract for and purchase, or issue purchase orders for, all supplies, materials, and equipment for the offices, departments, and agencies of the city government. Every such contract or purchase exceeding an amount to be established by ordinance shall require the prior approval of the commission. The city manager also may transfer to or between offices, departments, and agencies, or sell surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, and equipment subject to such regulations as the commission may prescribe. Before the purchase of or contract for any supplies, materials, or equipment, or the sale of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment, ample opportunity for competitive bidding under such regulations and with such exceptions as the commission may prescribe shall be given; but the commission shall not except a particular contract, purchase, or sale from the requirement of competitive bidding. 
State Law reference- Public competitive bidding act of 1974, 61 O.S. § 101 et seq. 
Section 2. - Bidding requirements. 
    All bids shall be sealed and filed with the city clerk under such regulations as the council may determine. Each bid shall be accompanied by a sworn statement that the bidder has not entered into any agreement, express or implied, with any other bidder or bidders for the purpose of limiting the amount of the bid or the number of bidders or of parcelling out to any bidder or bidders or to any other person any portion of the contract or of the subject matter of the bid. The announced award of a contract to the successful bidder shall give that bidder no right to action or claim against the city upon such bid or contract until the transaction shall be embodied in writing and shall be duly signed by the contracting parties. All bids shall be opened in the presence of a quorum of the commissioners, and may be referred to staff for tabulation, determination of compliance with specifications, and recommendations prior to award. The commissioners shall consider all properly filed bids, and may enter into a contract with the bidder offering the lowest and best bid, or they may reject any and all bids and readvertise for bids, or they may have the work done by [city work] force account[ed for and] under the supervision of the proper department of the city. Pending advertisement for bids, all plans, specifications, and profiles to be used in the proposed work or contract shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk, subject to the inspection of any person. The commissioners, in their discretion, may require all bidders to execute surety bonds or to make cash deposits to secure performance of the contract and payment of all claims for labor and material used in the performance of the work or contract. 
Section 3. - Public improvements. 
    Public improvements may be made by the city government itself or by contract. The commission shall award all contracts for such improvements; provided, that the commission may authorize the city manager to award such contracts not exceeding an amount to be determined by the commission, and subject to such regulations as the commission may prescribe. Every contract for public improvements of such amount as the commission may determine by ordinance, shall be awarded to the lowest and best responsible bidder after such notice and opportunity for competitive bidding as the commission may prescribe, or as is required by law. All bids may be rejected and further notice and opportunity for competitive bidding may be given. Such contracts may be altered by mutual consent of the parties. Public improvements means any beneficial or valuable change or addition, betterment, enhancement, or amelioration of or upon any real property, or interest therein, belonging to the city intended to enhance its value, beauty, or utility, or to adapt it to new or future purposes. The term does not include the direct purchase of materials, equipment, or supplies by the City of Shawnee. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from constructing public improvements by the force account method. 
Section 4. - Signing of contracts. 
    All contracts of the city shall be signed by the city manager and attested by the city clerk. 
ARTICLE XVI. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND OTHER PROHIBITED ACTS OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Section 1. - Commissioners not to hold public employment; city officer and employees not to be interested in city contracts. 
    No member of the board of commissioners shall hold any other office or employment within the municipal government of Shawnee, compensation for which is paid out of public moneys, nor be elected or appointed to any office, the compensation of which was increased or fixed by the board of commissioners, while he was a member thereof, until after the expiration of at least one (1) year after he has ceased to be a member of said board of commissioners. No member of the board of commissioners or any officer of said city shall be pecuniarily interested directly or indirectly in any contract, purchase, or sale made by or with said city, or by any contractor or subcontractor of said city, nor in any manner wherein the rights of [or] liabilities of said city are, or may be involved, and such party, firm, or corporation shall be prohibited from recovering any compensation therefor, nor shall any member of the board of commissioners, or any officer or employee of said city be interested directly or indirectly in any public work or contract or contract made, supervised, or controlled, or which shall be paid for wholly or in part by said city or by any contractor or subcontractor thereof. Any member of the board of commissioners or any officer or employee of said city becoming interested directly or indirectly as aforesaid, or by commission, retainer, fee, gift, or a loan given or received at the time of the transaction, or before or after the same in any contract, franchise, work, purchase, or at sale by or with any of the agencies aforesaid, or who shall hold stock in any corporation contracting with said city or any contractor or subcontractor of said city shall forfeit all right or claim of title to his office and to any emoluments in any office which he shall happen to hold in said city, and shall be expelled therefrom by the board of commissioners; or if they shall fail to remove said officer, member, or commissioners, or any other city officer guilty, as aforesaid, he shall nevertheless be subject to removal upon the action of any five (5) citizens taken in the district court of Pottawatomie County, in such proceedings as are appropriate and proper. 
Section 2. - Graft prohibited. 
    The receiving directly or indirectly by any officer of said city for his own use and benefit or any other use or purpose other than is authorized and provided in this Charter and the laws of the state, of any interest, profits, or perquisites arising from the use or loan of public funds in his hands, or to be raised through his agency for city purposes, shall be deemed sufficient cause to forfeit his office, and the person so receiving shall then and there forfeit his office and be disqualified to hold office. 
Section 3. - Offering compensation for election or appointment to office prohibited. 
    No officer or employee of said city shall give or promise to give to any other person any portion of his compensation or any money or valuable thing, or promise employment to any person in consideration of having been, or of being nominated, appointed, voted for, or elected to any office or employment; and if any such promise or gift be made, the person making or accepting such gift or promise shall forfeit his office or employment and be debarred and disqualified from being elected, appointed, or employed in the services of said city. 
Section 4. - City officers not to receive gratuity from subordinate officer or candidate. 
    Any officer of said city who shall, while in office, accept any donation or gratuity in money or other valuable thing, either directly or indirectly, from any subordinate or employee, or from any candidate or applicant for any position as employee or subordinate under him, shall forfeit his office and be forever disqualified from holding any position in the services of said city. 
Section 5. - Officers and bond liable for approving and paying unauthorized claims. 
    Every officer who shall approve, allow, or pay any demand on the treasury not authorized by law, ordinance, or this Charter shall be liable to said city individually and on his official bond for the payment of the demand so illegally approved, allowed, or paid. 
State Law reference- Liability for voting unlawful claims generally, 11 O.S. § 17-104. 
Section 6. - Duty of officers to report violations concerning city contracts. 
    It shall be the official duty of every officer or person in the employment or service of said city, when it shall come to his knowledge that any contract or agreement with said city or with any officer has been or is about to be violated by the other contracting party forthwith to report to the mayor and board of commissioners all facts and information within his possession concerning such matter, and upon a willful failure to do so the board of commissioners shall remove the officer and/or employee. 
ARTICLE XVII. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 1. - Oaths to be administered by certain city officers. 
    The mayor, vice-mayor, city clerk, judge of the municipal court, and a notary public shall be, and they are hereby, authorized to administer oaths in all municipal affairs and government of said city. 
State Constitution reference- Oath of office, OK Const. Art. 15, § 1. 
Section 2. - Elective and appointive officers to take oath; office vacated when officer ceases to possess qualifications. 
    Every person elected or appointed to any office in said city shall, before he enters upon his duties, take the official oath prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma, and such additional oaths as the board of commissioners may prescribe to secure a faithful performance of duty, and file same in the office of the city clerk. Any officer ceasing to possess any of the qualifications required of him at the time of his election shall instantly thereby forfeit his office and same shall be filled as herein provided. 
Section 3. - City books and records open for inspection; exceptions. 
    All records of the city and its departments which are required by law to be public records shall be open to public inspection at proper times and in proper manner during all regular business hours of each week; provided, however, that this shall not apply to any records required by law to be kept secret, nor shall it apply to records that if disclosed would defeat the purpose for which same are kept, including but not limited to criminal investigative records and personnel records, records prepared in anticipation or preparation of litigation, communications, memos, and opinions of the city attorney protected under the client-attorney privilege. 
Section 4. - No change in salaries of elective officers. 
    No salary of any elective officer of said city shall be increased or decreased during the term for which said officer was elected. 
Section 5. - Appointive officers; successor of officer holding under mayor and board of commissioners. 
    The mayor and board of commissioners elected under the provisions of this amended Charter and their successors in office shall be deemed in law and in fact the successors of the present mayor and board of commissioners, and all officers appointed by the board of commissioners, or otherwise as provided in this Charter, shall be deemed in law and in fact the successors of the present officers, whether elected or appointed. 
Section 6. - Ordinances and resolutions not in conflict with Charter continued. 
    All resolutions and ordinances not in conflict with or inapplicable under the provisions of this amended Charter which are in force and effect in said city, at the time of the approval and taking effect of this amended Charter, shall be and remain in full force and effect until the same shall expire by limitation, be repealed or amended; provided further, that all prosecutions of violations of ordinances of the city, whether begun, pending, or otherwise, shall be prosecuted to determination and effect as though this amended Charter had not been passed and approved. 
Section 7. - Abstaining votes. 
    If a member of the board of commissioners or a member of any board or agency of the city abstains from voting on an issue, said abstention shall not be recorded as a negative vote, but rather shall be reflected as an abstention and not counted in determining whether the item passed or failed. 
Section 8. - Repealer; construction of provisions. 
    All provisions of this Charter of the City of Shawnee as the same exists prior to the adoption of these amendments, which are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions hereof, shall be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Section 9. - Severability. 
    If any part, article, section, or subsection of this amended Charter shall be held invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, such holding shall not be construed to impair or invalidate the remainder of this amended Charter, notwithstanding such holding. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Charter Ord. No. 1689NS 6-20-1994 1 Art. IX, § 1 Ord. No. 1899NS 10-5-1998 1 Art. XIV, § 2 2 Art. XIV, § 3 3 Art. XIV, § 4 4 Art. XIV, § 5 5 Art. XIV, § 7 6 Art. XIV, § 8 7 Art. XIV, § 9 8 Art. XIV, § 10 Ord. No. 1959NS 2-7-2000 1 Art. IV, § 1 Ord. No. 2171NS 8-2-2004 1 Art. XIV, § 2 2 Art. XIV, § 4 3 Art. XIV, § 8 Ord. No. 2465NS 12-5-2011 1 Art. III, § 4 2 Art. III, § 6 Ord. No. 2626NS  3- 4-2018 1 Art. III, § 4 2 Art. III, § 6 Ord. No. 2627NS  3- 4-2018 1 Art. XIV, § 7  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ordinances, enactment, 11 O.S. § 14-102; ordinances, effective date, emergencies, 11 O.S. § 14-103. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Shawnee City Code." 
(Code 1986, § 1-1; Code 2002, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-108; mandatory compilation of penal ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-109; notice and filing of penal ordinance compilation, 11 O.S. § 14-110. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and all other city ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Annual, per annum. The term "annual" or "per annum" means that a license shall expire 12 months from the date of issue. 
    Bond schedule. The term "bond schedule" means a schedule compiled at the direction of, adopted by, and reviewable and amendable by the city commission, enumerating the amounts of bonds required by the city. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Shawnee, as ratified at the election on April 1, 1986, as amended. 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "of Shawnee, Oklahoma." 
    City commission, commission, board of commissioners. Whenever the term "commission," "city commission" or "board of commissioners" is used, it shall be construed to mean the board of commissioners of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
    Code. The term "the Code" or "this Code" means "The Code of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma." 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in the civil procedure statutes, is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day falls upon any legal holiday or on Saturday, in which case the last day is also excluded. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, 25 O.S. § 23. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" means Pottawatomie County, Oklahoma. 
    Day. A day is the period of time between any 12:00 midnight and the 12:00 midnight following. 
State Law reference- Fractions of a day, 25 O.S. § 23. 
    Daytime, nighttime. The term "daytime" means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. The term "nighttime" means the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever any authority, duty or other activity is charged to a city officer or employee, it may be done as well by such person's duly appointed agent, so long as not prohibited by ordinance or the laws or Constitution of the state, and so long as such officer or employee retains supervision over the discharge of the duly delegated authority, duty or activity. 
    Fee schedule. The term "fee schedule" means a schedule compiled at the direction of, adopted by, and reviewable and amendable by the city commission, enumerating fees and similar charges imposed by the city for various city licenses, permits and services. 
    Fine schedule. The term "fine schedule" means a schedule compiled at the direction of, adopted by, and reviewable and amendable by the city commission, enumerating specific fines for specific code violations. 
    Gender. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 24. 
    Health officer or health department. Wherever reference is made to the "health officer" or "health department," it shall be construed as meaning the Pottawatomie County Health Officer or the Pottawatomie County Health Department, respectively. 
State Law reference- Local health officer defined, 63 O.S. § 1-102. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    In the city. The phrase "in the city" means and includes all territory over which the city has or shall acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
    Insurance schedule. The term "insurance schedule" means a schedule compiled at the direction of, adopted by, and reviewable and amendable by the city commission, enumerating the amounts of insurance required by the city. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such public officers or other persons. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 31. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 23. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 25. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference- Affirmation, 12 O.S. § 72, 25 O.S. § 26. 
    Officer, employee, board, commission, department or office. Whenever any officer, employee, board, commission, department or office is referred to, it shall mean the respective officer, employee, board, commission, department or office of the city. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a formal legislative act of the city council that has the force and effect of a continuing regulation and a permanent rule of conduct or government for the city. 
    O.S. The abbreviation "O.S." means the Oklahoma Statutes, and such term or any other reference to the statutes of the state means such statutes as now or hereafter amended, supplemented or recodified. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land or vendee in possession under a land sale contract. 
    Person. The term "person" includes individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, joint stock companies or their agents, servants and employees, when acting for the principal or employer, respectively. 
State Law reference- Person defined, 25 O.S. § 16. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 26(3). 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 26(1). 
    Public grounds; public places; public buildings. The term "public grounds," "public places" or "public buildings" shall be construed to mean any park or open space adjacent thereto; any lake or stream; and any and every public ground, public square, public park, street or sidewalk or other public place within the city. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 26(3). 
    Resolution. The term "resolution" means a special or temporary act of the city council that is declaratory of the will or opinion of the city in a given matter and is in the nature of a ministerial or administrative act. A resolution is not a law and does not prescribe a permanent rule of conduct or government. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall, will and may. The terms "shall" and "will" are mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription by mark. The term "signature" or "subscription by mark" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when one witness shall sign his own name thereto. 
State Law reference- Signature or subscription defined, 25 O.S. § 26. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Oklahoma. 
    Statutory references. Reference to the statutes of the State of Oklahoma means the 1991 statutes, as amended. 
    Tenant; occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future, and words used in the future tense include the present. 
State Law reference- Tense, 25 O.S. § 26. 
    Time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing, in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2; Code 2002, § 1-2; Ord. No. 2532NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- Fractions of a year, 25 O.S. § 23. 
Sec. 1-3. - Jurisdiction on city-owned or city-operated property outside city. 
    This Code and ordinances contained in this Code, as well as subsequent amendments or other enactments, are effective outside of the city boundaries on property owned or operated by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1986, § 1-3; Code 2002, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes and references. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code and the references scattered throughout the Code shall not be considered as part of the Code but are mere aids for the benefit of the user of the Code. 
(Code 2002, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Special provisions to control over general provisions. 
    Any general provision of this Code which is of general application to the entire Code, in case of conflict with any provision of a special or limited application and which fully, adequately and effectively operates, shall be subordinate to such special provision insofar as is necessary to give full effect to the special provision. 
(Code 1986, § 1-4; Code 2002, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The sections appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1986, § 1-5; Code 2002, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising and guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget. 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory as a part of the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right. 
(5)  Any ordinance accepting the beneficial interest in any trust created by a trust indenture or a declaration of trust. 
(6)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument. 
(7)  The zoning code and amendments thereto. 
(8)  Any ordinance relating to specific paving and sewer districts and special assessments. 
(9)  Any subdivision regulations. 
(10)  Any standard specifications for construction of water distribution mains or public sanitary sewer lines, or plans for extension of water and sewer boundary mains. 
(11)  Any temporary or special ordinance, including but not limited to calling elections, and also any ordinance pertaining to specific locations or specific persons. 
(12)  Any ordinance pertaining to salaries of city employees. 
(b)  All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 1-8; Code 2002, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to omit certain provisions from Code, 11 O.S. § 14-108. 
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1986, § 1-9; Code 2002, § 1-9) 
State Law reference- Repeal does not revive statutes, 25 O.S. § 32. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in other ordinance of the city, or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him, or it, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, it shall be a misdemeanor unless otherwise specifically stated; and where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or such rule, regulation, or order, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  If the violation is a Class A offense, it shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and costs, and/or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; 
(2)  If the violation is a Class B offense, it shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and costs; 
(3)  If the violation is a Class C offense, it shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and costs; 
(4)  If the violation is a Class D offense, it shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and costs, and/or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or, by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  If any act or omission is declared to be a Class A, Class B, Class C, or Class D offense, it shall be punishable as indicated in subsection (a) of this section. In the absence of any other penalty, an offense shall be a Class C offense. 
(c)  Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(d)  Whenever a person either commits an act that is prohibited or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or fails to perform any required act, the failure of which is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor and that person is punished by a fine, there shall be added to each fine a technology fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. The fee will be deposited in a technology account. At the end of the fiscal year, the funds in this account will be moved to a designated fund balance account to be used solely and exclusively for the acquisition, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of data processing equipment and software related to the administration of the municipal criminal justice system and the costs of prosecution, as budgeted by the city commission. 
(e)  Whenever a person either commits an act that is prohibited or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or fails to perform any required act, the failure of which is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor and that person is punished by a fine, there shall be added to each fine a communications support fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. The fee will be deposited in a communications support account. At the end of the fiscal year, the funds in this account will be moved to a designated fund balance account to be used solely for police communications equipment and software, as budgeted by the where the funds can be spent only for police radio equipment as budgeted by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 1-7; Code 2002, § 1-10; Ord. No. 1948NS, § 1, 11-1-1999; Ord. No. 1997NS, § 1, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 2618NS, § 1, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 2394NS, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 2532NS, §§ 2, 3, 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 2574NS, § 1, 9-8-2015) 
State Law reference- Penalties generally, 11 O.S. §§ 14-111, 27-104, 27-119; misdemeanor punishment, 21 O.S. § 10. 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
    Amendments to any of the sections of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma (or Shawnee City Code), is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1986, § 1-10; Code 2002, § 1-11) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to amend and supplement Code, 11 O.S. § 14-108 et seq. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1986, § 1-11; Code 2002, § 1-12) 
State Law reference- Supplementation of Code, 11 O.S. § 14-108 et seq. 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    Each section of this Code and each numbered or lettered clause or paragraph within any such section is declared to be independent of every other section, and the invalidity of any section or part thereof shall not affect the validity, force or effect of the other sections or parts thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 1-6(a); Code 2002, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-14. - Sections, clauses and paragraphs declared separate and distinct units. 
    Each section, as set forth and clearly indicated in this Code, and each numbered or lettered clause or paragraph of each such section is declared to be an entire unit and shall constitute a section for any purpose of amendment or repeal as required by law. 
(Code 1986, § 1-6(b); Code 2002, § 1-14) 
Sec. 1-15. - Effect of section renumbering on city signs and forms. 
    Sections of this Code may be renumbered from time to time by amendments. Former section numbers appearing on city signs or included in various forms used by the city shall be deemed to refer to those sections as amended and renumbered from time to time. 
(Code 2002, § 1-15; Ord. No. 2532NS, § 4, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 1-16. - Altering Code. 
    It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to make electronic changes, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 2002, § 1-16; Ord. No. 2532NS, § 5, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 1-17. - Schedule of fees, fines, bonds, and insurance charges created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a schedule of fees, fines, bonds, and insurance charges, which shall contain those fees, fines, bonds, and insurance charges for the various licenses, permits and other fees and charges as designated by the council. Where a fee or charge is authorized to be collected by the city in any ordinance the amount of the fees, fines, bonds, and insurance charges shall be set by resolution and entered into the schedule of fees, fines, bonds, and insurance charges. The schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk, to whom all fees and charges shall be paid unless otherwise provided. A copy may be obtained upon payment of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(b)  The schedule of fees and charges hereby created shall also be known and may be cited as the "city fee schedule" or the "city fees, fines, bonds, and insurance schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2599NS, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cities and towns, 11 O.S. § 1-101 et seq.; territory included in a city, 11 O.S. §§ 2-101, 2-104; qualifications for elected officers, 11 O.S. § 8-101; removal of officers, 22 O.S. § 1181 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
(a)  The seal for the city shall be made of brass or other substantial metal, of circular form. The superscription shall be engraved thereon as follows: The words, "The City of Shawnee, Oklahoma" shall be engraved in a circular lane formed by two concentric circles, one of which is the circumference of the seal. The word "Seal" shall be engraved within the circular lane and inside the inner circle of the lane. The seal thus made and engraved shall be the corporate seal of the city and shall be used for the authentication of all documents required by law or the Charter to be sealed with the seal of the city. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be the lawful custodian of the corporate seal for the city, and he shall affix the seal to all documents requiring the seal. 
(c)  The use of the city seal to convey the appearance that the city has endorsed, supported, created, supervised, or provided any goods or services shall be an offense. 
(Code 1986, §§ 2-2, 2-126(16); Code 2002, § 2-2; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-2. - Hours of city offices. 
    The city manager is authorized to designate and determine the hours and times during which the city hall, city offices and departments shall remain open. 
(Code 1986, § 2-3; Code 2002, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-3. - Library. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the membership of and participation by the city in the Pioneer Multi-County Library and to define the relationship between the city's existing library system and the multi-county library system. 
(b)  The city accepts membership in the multi-county library system, subject expressly to the limitations and conditions set forth in this section. 
(c)  A member of the library board of the city's library system shall be appointed by the city commission as the member of the board of trustees of the multi-county library district representing the city. 
(d)  Until such time as the county shall establish the special, annually recurring, two-mill tax levy for libraries, provided by OK Const. Art. 10, § 10A, the city, upon the request of the state department of libraries board, shall provide its agreed share of funds or shall act as the agent of such board in disbursing such funds as may be made available by the board to maintain and operate those multi-county library activities arising from the participation of the county in the multi-county library system, subject to the limitation that at any time before the county does establish such special tax levy, the city shall have full right, without further obligation, to terminate its membership in the multi-county library system. Such termination may be accomplished by ordinance or resolution, at the option of the city commission. The city clerk shall forward promptly to the state department of libraries board a certified copy of such ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4; Code 2002, § 2-4) 
State Law reference- Municipal libraries, 11 O.S. § 31-101 et seq.; public libraries generally, 65 O.S. § 1-101 et seq.; library system governing boards, 65 O.S. § 4-103 et seq. 
Sec. 2-4. - Sale of real property. 
(a)  Any real property owned by the city which has been determined by the city commission to no longer be needed for public purposes may be sold by the city by public auction, sealed bids or on the open market. 
(b)  Before sale, the commission must obtain an appraisal of the property, with the appraised amount confidential. The appraisal will be kept in the office of the city manager. 
(c)  If the property is to be sold at public auction, notice of the sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the auction. 
(d)  If the property is to be sold pursuant to sealed bids, notice to prospective bidders shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the opening of bids. All bids shall be filed in duplicate, one with the city clerk and one with the city manager, and such bids shall be accompanied by a noncollusion affidavit. The city commission, in its discretion, may require a bid bond to accompany such bids. 
(e)  If the property is to be sold on the open market, notice that the property is available for purchase shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 60 days prior to the time the city will consider offers. No real estate or other sales commission will be paid by the city. The city commission, in its discretion, may require earnest money to accompany an offer. 
(f)  At the end of the auction, upon the opening of bids, or upon receipt of an offer, the city manager shall open the appraisal. If the price offered is not at least 80 percent of the appraised price of the property, the property will not be sold and the appraisal will remain confidential. If the property is sold by sealed bid or on the open market, the commission must review all bids and offers to determine the highest and best bid or offer. The commission may accept or reject any bid or offer for any reason. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5; Code 2002, § 2-5; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 3, 4-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority regarding property generally, 11 O.S. § 22-101. 
Sec. 2-5. - Sale of nonreal-estate property. 
    Any nonreal-estate property owned by the city that has been determined by the city commission to no longer be needed for public purposes may be sold by the city at either public auction, by sealed bids or through the use of an on-line auction service as the city commission may direct. If such sale is to be made at public auction, notice of the sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the sale. If such sale is to be made pursuant to sealed bids, notice to prospective bidders shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the opening of bids. All such bids shall be filed in duplicate. One shall be filed with the city clerk and the other filed with the city manager, and such bids shall be accompanied by a noncollusion affidavit. If such sale is to be made through the use of an on-line auction service, notice of the beginning of the sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the sale. Said notice shall describe the length of time that said on-line auction shall last, with such duration to be determined by the city manager. 
(Code 2002, § 2-6; Ord. No. 2105NS, § 1, 10-6-2003) 
Secs. 2-6-2-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-29. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members elected to the city commission shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 2-21; Code 2002, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-30. - Preparation of agenda. 
    An agenda shall be prepared by the city manager. The city manager or any commissioner can place an item on the agenda. Once the agenda has been prepared, it shall be forwarded to the city clerk, who shall prepare and post the official agenda. If the item is to reconsider a previous vote of the city commission, the item to reconsider may only be placed on the agenda by commissioners who voted in the majority on the vote sought to be reconsidered. 
(Code 1986, § 2-21.1; Code 2002, § 2-32; Ord. No. 2311NS, § 1, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 4, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-31. - Presiding officer; calling meetings to order; reading of minutes. 
    The mayor shall act as presiding officer of the city commission at all meetings. He shall take the chair at the prescribed hour and shall call the city commission to order, order the calling of the roll by the clerk and determine whether a quorum exists. 
(Code 1986, § 2-22; Code 2002, § 2-33; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 5, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-32. - Rules of procedure at meetings. 
(a)  The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the city commission in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the ordinances, standing rules and orders of the commission. 
(b)  When any member speaks or otherwise presents any matter to the city commission, he shall confine himself to the matter under consideration and avoid personalities. 
(c)  When the mayor is putting any question or addressing the commission, no member thereof shall walk out or across the hall, nor, in such case or when a member is speaking, shall any other member entertain any private discourse. If any member leaves the room after an item has been called, he may not participate in debate or vote on that matter. 
(d)  No member shall text, e-mail, telephone or privately communicate with any other person, including any other member, during a commission meeting. 
(e)  Every member who shall be in the meeting when a question is put shall give his vote of aye, nay or abstain, unless the commission for special reasons shall excuse him. All motions to excuse a member from voting shall be made before the commission and before the call of the ayes and nays is commenced. Any member requesting to be excused from voting may make a brief verbal statement of the reason for making such request, and the question shall then be taken without further debate. An excused commissioner, or one who intends to abstain at the time of the vote, shall not participate in debate on the question. 
(f)  When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the mayor or, being in writing, it shall be handed to the chair and read aloud by the clerk before debate. 
(g)  Every motion shall be reduced to writing, if the mayor or any member shall request it. 
(h)  After a motion is stated by the mayor or read by the clerk, it shall be deemed to be in the possession of the commission, but it may be withdrawn at any time before a decision or amendment. 
(i)  When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received, but to adjourn, to lay on the table, for the previous question or to amend, which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are named in this subsection. 
(j)  A motion to adjourn and a motion to fix a day to which the commission shall adjourn shall always be in order. These motions and the motion to lay on the table shall be decided without debate. 
(k)  No motion or proposition on a subject different from that under consideration shall be admitted under color of amendment. No bill or resolution shall at any time be amended by annexing thereto or incorporating therewith any other bill or resolution pending before the commission. 
(l)  When a motion has once been made and carried in the affirmative or negative, it shall be in order for any member of the majority to move for the reconsideration thereof, at the same or the succeeding session, and each motion shall take precedence over all other questions, except a motion to adjourn. The motion to reconsider shall require for its adoption the same vote as was required on the vote reconsidered. 
(m)  Upon roll calls of the city commission or in taking the ayes and nays upon any question, the names of the members shall be called by the clerk or votes may be cast and shown by other means, so long as the vote of each commissioner is individually cast and recorded. 
(Code 1986, § 2-23; Code 2002, § 2-34; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 6, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-33. - Procedure for passage of ordinances, resolutions and other acts. 
    Every proposed ordinance, resolution and other act shall be presented to the city commission by the mayor, a member of the city commission or the city manager, and none other. Upon being presented to the city commission, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to at once enroll the proposed ordinance, resolution or other act, whereupon it shall be before the city commission and cannot be withdrawn without the consent of the commission. After reading the proposed ordinance, resolution or other act by title and consideration by the commission, a vote shall be taken, upon the motion of any member of the commission that the proposed ordinance, resolution or other act be passed and approved. Prior to a final vote, the proposed ordinance, resolution or other act shall be subject to amendment by any member of the commission or the mayor. Such amendments shall be in writing. When a proposed ordinance, resolution or other act is amended in any manner, it shall be the duty of the clerk to prepare the proposed ordinance, resolution or other act in its amended form before the final vote is taken. The vote shall be on the proposed ordinance, resolution or other act together with any amendments made thereto and shall be on the question "Shall the proposed ordinance, resolution or other act be passed and approved?" Proposed ordinances, resolutions and other acts that fail passage shall be filed by the city clerk in the archives of his office. Proposed ordinances, resolutions and other acts that are passed and approved shall be engrossed by the city clerk and presented to the mayor or acting mayor, as the case may be, for his signature and shall be attested by the city clerk, after which they shall be published as required by law or the Charter and the original engrossed copy filed in the archives of the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 2-24; Code 2002, § 2-35) 
State Law reference- Municipal ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-101 et seq.; publication of ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-106. 
Sec. 2-34. - Duties of mayor at meetings. 
    At meetings of the city commission, the mayor shall preserve order and decorum and may speak on points of order in preference to other members. He shall decide all questions of order, subject to appeal to the commission by any member. 
(Code 1986, § 2-25; Code 2002, § 2-36; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 7, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-35. - Appointment of committees. 
    All committees of the city commission shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city commission, unless otherwise specifically directed by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-26; Code 2002, § 2-37; Ord. No. 2248NS, § 1, 4-17-2006) 
Sec. 2-36. - Signing and attesting of ordinances, resolutions or other acts. 
    All ordinances, resolutions or other acts of the city commission shall be signed by the mayor or acting mayor, as the case may be, and attested by the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 2-27; Code 2002, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-37. - Duties of chief of police; sergeant at arms. 
    The chief of police shall be ex officio sergeant at arms, and it shall be his duty to attend the city commission during its sessions, to execute the commands of the commission from time to time, together with all such process, issued by authority thereof, as shall be directed to him by the mayor. 
(Code 1986, § 2-28; Code 2002, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-38. - Executive sessions. 
    The city commission may at any time go into executive session by a vote of a majority of the commission in favor thereof, at which session only those subjects shall be considered that are mentioned in the motion for the session, and no ordinances shall be passed, claims allowed, or any other action taken at the session. In all respects the conduct of an executive session shall be in conformance with the laws of the State of Oklahoma. 
(Code 1986, § 2-29; Code 2002, § 2-40; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 8, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-39. - Record of proceedings. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to attend every meeting of the city commission and to keep a journal of all the proceedings taken by the city commission. He shall enter every motion with its second in such journal, together with the action taken thereon by the city commission. The journal shall show when and by whom each proposed ordinance was introduced and the action taken thereon by the city commission. Such journal shall further show the action taken by the commission in every matter by which the city may be bound in law. 
(Code 1986, § 2-30; Code 2002, § 2-41) 
State Law reference- Ordinance book, 11 O.S. § 14-105. 
Sec. 2-40. - Mayor as official representative of city. 
    The mayor, in addition to the duties imposed upon him by the Charter, shall be the official representative of the city in all matters of state, public ceremony and public gatherings. As such, he shall address formal gatherings in an appropriate manner and in the city's behalf. 
(Code 1986, § 2-31; Code 2002, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-41. - Citizen participation at city commission meetings. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of the City of Shawnee by adoption of the ordinance codified in this section to ensure that persons desiring to address the city commission on matters pertaining to public business are afforded an opportunity to do so. 
(b)  At every regular city commission meeting, a time for citizen participation shall be placed on the agenda before commissioners comments and before the commission takes up its regular business. Citizen participation shall be limited to that portion of the meeting except when related to public hearings. 
(c)  Citizen comments are limited to three minutes per individual, 12 minutes per topic and 24 minutes per meeting unless an extension is proposed by a commission member and approved by a majority of commission members. 
(d)  Citizens wishing to address the city commission in accordance with this section shall abide by the following rules: 
(1)  Stand and be recognized by the mayor or presiding officer. 
(2)  Approach the podium, state name, and sign the sign-in sheet. 
(3)  Distribute any handouts to the city commission and city clerk. 
(4)  Restrict comments to city business, whether or not on the agenda. Speaking for or against candidates for public office, issues on a ballot pending an election, personnel issues, and city business involving arbitration or litigation are prohibited. 
(5)  State whether speaking as an individual or for a group or organization. 
(6)  Address comments to the commission as a body, not to any member thereof. 
(7)  Address questions to the mayor or presiding officer. 
(8)  Speak respectfully. Profanity and personal attacks will not be tolerated. 
(e)  City commission members shall not enter into a dialogue with the speaker during the speaker's allotted time except to ask for clarification. After the speaker leaves the podium and before the next speaker is called, commissioners may respond to speaker's comments, subject to rules of the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act. 
(f)  The city commission will take no action on matters presented during citizens participation. If the item is elsewhere on the agenda, it will be addressed by the commission at that time. Questions may be referred to the city manager for an answer, or the matter may be placed on a future meeting agenda. 
(g)  Speakers may not speak with commission members after leaving the podium and may not speak from their seat unless called upon by the mayor or presiding officer. 
(h)  If any citizen violates these rules, the mayor may declare the speaker out of order and retake the floor. If the speaker does not comply, they may be asked to leave or if necessary, escorted from the meeting. 
(Code 2002, § 2-43; Ord. No. 2558NS, § 1, 2-17-2015) 
Secs. 2-42-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VICE-MAYOR 

Sec. 2-71. - Office created. 
    The office of vice-mayor of the city is created. 
(Code 1986, § 2-46; Code 2002, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-72. - Member of city commission; election; term. 
    The vice-mayor shall be one of the members of the city commission. The vice-mayor shall be elected by the city commission and shall serve for a term of 12 months from the date of election by the city commission or until his successor has been named by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-47; Code 2002, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-73. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The duties of the vice-mayor shall be to act in the absence or incapacity of the mayor in connection with an emergency situation that requires immediate action and that would result in irreparable damage to persons or property if such action were delayed. The vice-mayor shall, in such emergency situations, have the power to act and do any and all things reasonable and necessary that the mayor could do if personally present. 
(Code 1986, § 2-48; Code 2002, § 2-73) 
Sec. 2-74. - Emergency appointment or removal of officers. 
    The vice-mayor shall have no power to make appointments or remove officers appointed by the mayor, and his power shall be limited to such emergency situations as are normally arising out of natural disasters, fires, acts of violence and similar occurrences. 
(Code 1986, § 2-49; Code 2002, § 2-74) 
Secs. 2-75-2-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-92. - Control of administrative work. 
    All administrative work of the city government shall be under the control of the city manager, except such functions as are by the Charter and appropriate sections of this Code or any other city ordinances in accordance therewith assigned otherwise. 
(Code 1986, § 2-66; Code 2002, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-93. - Appointment and dismissal of officers and employees. 
(a)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided in the Charter, shall appoint all employees in the administrative service under his control. 
(b)  The city manager shall have power to transfer employees from one department to another and to remove and discharge the employees at his pleasure. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by the Charter, the city manager may, in his discretion, dismiss the head of any department or any employees therein. He shall have the power to set aside the action taken by any official or employee working under his supervision and may supersede him in the functions of his office or employment. Where no provision is made by the Charter, this Code or any other city ordinance authorizing a subordinate official to act as department head if a vacancy occurs, the city manager may designate an interim acting head or perform personally the functions of the office. 
(Code 1986, § 2-67; Code 2002, § 2-102) 
Sec. 2-94. - Investigation and survey of departments, bureaus, divisions, offices and employees. 
    The city manager shall have power to investigate and make a survey of any city department, bureau, division, office or employee and, with the approval of the city commission, may employ experts, legal counsel or consultants to aid him in such investigation or survey. 
(Code 1986, § 2-68; Code 2002, § 2-103) 
Sec. 2-95. - Rules and regulations for conduct of departments. 
    The city manager may prescribe such general rules and regulations as he may deem necessary or expedient for the general conduct of the administrative departments. The director or head of each department shall in like manner prescribe such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary and expedient for the proper conduct of his department, not inconsistent with the general rules and regulations made by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 2-69; Code 2002, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-96. - Preparation and coordination of budget. 
    The city manager, as the city's chief budget officer, shall be held responsible for planning the activities of the city government and for adjusting such activities to the finances available. To this end, he shall prepare annually a complete financial plan for the ensuing year and shall be responsible for the administration of such plan when adopted by the city commission. He shall be charged with the bringing together of estimates covering the city's financial needs, with the checking of these estimates against the information relative to past expenditures and income, with the preparation of the budget document and supporting schedules and with the presentation of the budget to the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-70; Code 2002, § 2-105) 
State Law reference- Municipal finances, 11 O.S. § 17-101 et seq.; Municipal Budget Act, 11 O.S. § 17-201 et seq.; application of act, 11 O.S. § 17-203. 
Sec. 2-97. - Approval of vouchers and requisitions. 
    The city manager shall approve all requisitions and vouchers for the administrative departments in person or through such assistants as he may designate for the purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 2-71; Code 2002, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-98. - Purchases of supplies and equipment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by applicable law or ordinance, all city purchases shall be made by the city purchasing agent. The city manager shall act as purchasing agent until otherwise provided by this Code or any other city ordinance consistent with applicable law and the Charter. To this end, he shall prepare suitable forms for the estimated needs of the several departments and determine the time and the manner of filing the forms in his office. He is authorized to make any purchases that he deems necessary for the proper functioning of the city government, provided that all purchases shall conform strictly to the conditions of the budget and the Charter. 
(b)  Pursuant to article XV, section 1 of the Charter, the city manager shall contract for and purchase or shall issue purchase orders for all services, supplies, materials and equipment for the offices, departments and agencies of the city government in an amount not exceeding $25,000.00, if budgeted, without prior approval of the city commissioners. If the city manager contracts for or issues purchase orders for services, supplies, materials or equipment with funds not previously budgeted, he may only expend up to $10,000.00 without prior approval of the city commission. The commission shall invite competitive written bids upon all contracts or purchases involving expenditures over $25,000.00. However, nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the expenditure of funds, the making of purchases or the letting of contracts without competitive bidding in an emergency. 
(Code 1986, § 2-72; Code 2002, § 2-107; Ord. No. 2315NS, § 1, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 2340NS, § 1, 3-10-2008; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 9, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-99. - Purchase of personal property by negotiation. 
    Whenever the city shall have advertised for bids to purchase supplies, goods, products, equipment, machinery or any other tangible personal property and either no bid is received or the lowest bid received is unacceptable to the city, the city commission may authorize the city manager to make such purchases on the open market by negotiation. If such purchases are to be made after an unacceptable bid has been received, the price paid by the city shall not exceed the lowest bid received. 
(Code 1986, § 2-73; Code 2002, § 2-108) 
State Law reference- Negotiation of certain construction contracts, 61 O.S. § 119.1. 
Sec. 2-100. - Airport manager. 
    The city manager shall serve as airport manager. 
(Code 1986, § 2-74; Code 2002, § 2-109) 
Sec. 2-101. - Department reports; annual report. 
    The city manager shall determine the nature, quantity and frequency of information to be presented to him in the form of periodic or special reports by the heads of the several departments. Such information shall include the services rendered by the department, projects under way, general conditions in the department, comparative unit cost and proposals of the department head for increasing the efficiency of such department and the service rendered by it to the public. The city manager shall prepare and present to the city commission an annual report of the city's affairs. 
(Code 1986, § 2-75; Code 2002, § 2-110) 
Sec. 2-102. - Police powers. 
    The city manager shall have power to take personal charge over the police in times of an emergency for the protection of persons and property. He shall have power, in times of emergencies, to deputize or otherwise employ such other persons as he may consider necessary for the purpose of protecting the city and its residents. 
(Code 1986, § 2-76; Code 2002, § 2-111) 
Sec. 2-103. - Enforcement of franchises. 
    The city manager shall be charged with the enforcement of all obligations resting upon the holder of any franchise granted by the city and to impose such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary in the interest of the city and as provided by the terms of the franchise. 
(Code 1986, § 2-77; Code 2002, § 2-112) 
Sec. 2-104. - Responsibility for public utilities. 
    The city manager shall secure and keep the necessary data and shall be responsible for the proper determination of public utility rates and charges. He shall see that the city is adequately represented in all controversies to which the city is a party before any utility commission or lawfully constituted board of any character. 
(Code 1986, § 2-78; Code 2002, § 2-113) 
State Law reference- Corporation Commission of Oklahoma, 17 O.S. § 1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-105-2-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officers, 11 O.S. § 8-101 et seq.; certain officers to give bond, 11 O.S. § 8-105. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-122. - Compliance with orders and rules. 
    It shall be the duty of the head of each department, together with every employee thereof, to be governed by the orders, rules and regulations established and promulgated by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 2-91; Code 2002, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-123. - Political activities. 
(a)  City employees may attend and express their views at city commission meetings or any other public meetings of municipal entities. 
(b)  Any city employee may actively participate in partisan and nonpartisan political activities, provided the political activity in which the employee participates shall be exercised only during off-duty hours and while not in uniform. Any federal statutes restricting the political activities of certain city employees shall supersede this section as to such employees. 
(c)  No city employee shall file as a candidate for public office of the city while employed by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-93; Code 2002, § 2-143) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-101.1. 
Sec. 2-124. - Surrender of property to successor. 
    No person having been a city officer shall wrongfully refuse to surrender all books, papers or other property coming into his possession as such officer, when so requested to do so by his successor in office or upon the written order of the city manager or city commission or other duly authorized city official. 
(Code 1986, § 2-94; Code 2002, § 2-144) 
Secs. 2-125-2-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ATTORNEY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Prosecuting officer in municipal court, 11 O.S. § 27-108; legal advisor of police pension board, 11 O.S. § 50-108; use of city attorney's name in municipal action or proceeding, 21 O.S. § 577; enforcement of liquor laws by city attorney, 37 O.S. § 569; procedures as to sinking funds, 62 O.S. § 541. 

Sec. 2-147. - Department of law. 
    The department of law shall consist of the city attorney and such assistants of a special or general nature as the city commission shall approve. The employees of the department of law shall be governed by all city personnel policies and general directives of the city manager; however, they shall be under the daily control of the city attorney, including, for purposes of recommending to the commission or initial employment, discipline and termination. 
(Code 1986, § 2-106; Code 2002, § 2-171; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 11, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-148. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The city attorney shall be the legal adviser of the city government and of all its departments, and he shall represent the city as attorney and counsel in all proceedings in which the city is a party before any court or any governmental commission with judicial power. 
(Code 1986, § 2-107; Code 2002, § 2-172) 
Sec. 2-149. - Employment of special investigators. 
    With the approval of the city manager, the city attorney shall have authority to employ competent persons to investigate cases and other matters in his charge and to perform further necessary services in connection therewith. The city attorney shall have authority to require such persons to gather and preserve the evidence in any case in which the city may be a party. All costs arising on account of such services or by virtue of any investigation authorized in this section shall be paid out of the city's general fund. 
(Code 1986, § 2-108; Code 2002, § 2-173) 
Sec. 2-150. - Records. 
    The city attorney shall preserve in his office a record of all cases in which the city is interested in any of the courts and shall enter or cause to be entered therein abstracts of all proceedings of such cases. He shall also preserve in his office copies of all written opinions furnished by him to the city commission, city manager or any city officer or employee. Any docket, copies and papers kept by the city attorney under this section shall be the city's property, and the city attorney shall, on retiring from office, deliver the docket, copies and papers, together with all accounts, vouchers and necessary information related thereto, to his successor in office. 
(Code 1986, § 2-109; Code 2002, § 2-174) 
Sec. 2-151. - Custody of papers; use of documents. 
    The city attorney shall have charge of all legal papers, books and dockets belonging to the city and, upon leaving a receipt therefor, may demand and receive from any city officer or employee any book, paper or document necessary to be used in any suit or required for the purposes of his office. 
(Code 1986, § 2-110; Code 2002, § 2-175) 
Sec. 2-152. - Furnishing of opinions. 
    Whenever the city manager, the head of any department, the city commission, a member of the commission or other responsible city officer may desire the city attorney's opinion on any matter affecting his official capacity, he shall clearly state to the city attorney in writing the question on which the opinion is desired. Within a reasonable time the city attorney shall reply orally or in writing, as requested, to such inquiry. 
(Code 1986, § 2-111; Code 2002, § 2-176) 
Sec. 2-153. - Preparation of ordinances, bonds, contracts, bonds and other instruments. 
    The city attorney shall prepare, when requested to do so, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts, bonds and other instruments in writing in which the city is concerned. 
(Code 1986, § 2-112; Code 2002, § 2-177) 
Sec. 2-154. - Attendance at meetings. 
    The city attorney shall be present at all meetings of the city commission and upon invitation in writing at any committee meeting of the commission or any meeting of city officials. 
(Code 1986, § 2-113; Code 2002, § 2-178) 
Sec. 2-155. - Examination of records of officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the city attorney, acting upon the request of the city commission or the city manager, to examine the records of the different city officers, to give legal advice in connection with the records and to make reports to the city manager or to the commission as the conditions may justify. 
(Code 1986, § 2-114; Code 2002, § 2-179) 
Sec. 2-156. - Enforcement of obligations and contracts. 
    When an obligation or contract made on behalf of the city, granting a right or easement or creating a public duty, is being evaded or violated, the city attorney shall apply for and seek to obtain such legal relief as the case may warrant. 
(Code 1986, § 2-115; Code 2002, § 2-180) 
Secs. 2-157-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Commission on training municipal clerks, treasurers and finance officers, 11 O.S. § 52-101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-181. - Powers and duties. 
    The city clerk shall, in addition to the duties imposed on him by general law, perform such duties as are set forth by this Code or any other city ordinances, including the following: 
(1)  Custody of papers. The city clerk, after being duly qualified and sworn, shall take possession of all books, papers and all other property of the nature of records belonging to the city and pertaining to his office, and he shall keep the books, papers and records safe and in a convenient place, subject to the inspection of any member of the city commission within the established office hours. 
(2)  Attendance at meetings. The city clerk shall attend the meetings of the city commission and shall keep a correct and complete record of the proceedings at every meeting of the commission. 
(3)  Removal of records. The city clerk shall permit no city records, public papers or other city documents, kept and preserved in his office, to be taken therefrom, except by such city officers as may be entitled to the use of the records, papers or documents, and then only upon their leaving a receipt therefor. 
(4)  Preparation of commissions. The city clerk shall prepare all commissions of officers that the mayor or city manager is required to sign and shall countersign the commissions and affix the seal of the city thereto. He shall keep a complete record of all commissions issued and of the official oaths and bonds of all city officers. 
(5)  Drawing of warrants. It shall be the duty of the city clerk, after any claim has been allowed by the city commission, to draw a warrant in settlement of the claim. After such warrant has been examined and compared with the fund on which it is drawn and approved and signed by the city manager, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to attest the warrant with the official seal. All warrants shall be charged on the appropriation book before they are attested. 
(6)  Ordinance record. The city clerk shall keep all ordinances passed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, in their original form, in a manner required by the city commission. In a separate book, to be kept for that purpose, he shall keep printed copies of all ordinances, notices and other publications required by law, passed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, with the printer's certificate of publication attached thereto. He shall index the ordinances under the respective heads or titles. All old ordinances, records or other documents shall be carefully preserved in a manner approved by the city manager. 
(7)  Notice record. The city clerk shall procure a blank book with proper index in which he shall keep a copy of all notices required to be published or posted by order of the city commission or under this Code or any other city ordinances. Such notices shall have attached the printer's affidavit of publication, when notices are required to be published, or the city clerk's certificate under seal of the city, when the notices are required to be posted, mailed or served in any other manner. Such certificate shall show that such notice is a true and correct copy of the notices so posted, published or delivered by him; the number of the notices issued and the date of issuance; and whether done by special order of the city commission or by general ordinance, and the fact of publication shall be a matter of record. 
(8)  License record. The city clerk shall procure a blank book with proper index in which he shall keep a record of all licenses issued by him under this Code or any other city ordinances, showing the date of the issuance of the licenses, to whom issued, the time for which the licenses are issued, the amount paid to the city treasurer-finance director for the licenses, the city treasurer-finance director's receipt number and the nature of the license. The entries therein contained shall be competent evidence of the facts so set forth and shall be sufficient proof thereof. He shall issue all licenses authorized by this Code or any other city ordinance upon compliance with all provisions relating thereto. 
(9)  Permit record. The city clerk shall procure a blank book with proper index in which he shall keep a record of all permits issued, showing the date of issuing the permits, to whom issued, the amount paid, the nature of the privilege granted and the city treasurer-finance director's receipt number. 
(10)  Petition record. The city clerk shall keep in a suitable file a complete record of all petitions and communications under which the city commission shall order public work to be done at the expense of property fronting thereon, together with all resolutions relating to such. The petition file shall include all memorials or petitions and other communications addressed to the city commission for its action as a body. 
(11)  Correspondence file. The city clerk shall keep a suitable file for all correspondence and communications on matters pertaining to the city affairs coming into his possession. 
(12)  Delivery of communications. The city clerk shall, without unnecessary delay, deliver to the city officers and to all committees of the city commission all resolutions and communications referred to those officers or committees by that body. He shall also, in the same manner, deliver to the mayor all ordinances or resolutions which may require his approval or other action to be taken by him. 
(13)  Copies of ordinances. The city clerk shall furnish copies of all ordinances passed by the city commission and shall preserve the original in his office. He shall be obligated to furnish written copies of ordinances or other papers for the use of any city officer without charge; attest any copy of a paper, document or record presented to him; and affix the seal of the city thereto. A charge in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per page shall be made for every photocopy made for individual use or a charge in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per page for certifying all ordinances, papers, records or commission proceedings desired for individual use, to be paid by the person ordering the photocopy. 
(14)  Filing date; indexing. The city clerk shall endorse the date of filing upon every paper or document filed in his office. All books and records kept by him shall be fully and properly indexed. 
(15)  Insurance file. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep and carefully preserve a file of all insurance policies in which the city has any interest. A suitable record shall be prepared of the insurance file showing the name of the insurer, the insured, the nature of the policy, the date and expiration of the policy, the amount of insurance and the amount of premium paid on each policy. It shall be his further duty to call the city commission's attention to the approaching maturity of any policy within such time as is reasonably necessary to provide for the renewal or extension of the policy. 
(16)  Bond file. The city clerk shall prepare and keep a file for all surety bonds, to be kept in an approved manner. A suitable record shall be kept of every surety bond in which the city shall be interested, in which shall be entered the date of the beginning of the undertaking and the date of the terminations of the liability on such bond; the names of the principals, sureties, cosureties and other parties to the bond; and the nature and the amount of the obligation. 
(17)  Issuance of notices. Wherever by this Code, any city ordinance or otherwise a notice is required for any obligation due the city, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue the notice. 
(Code 1986, § 2-126; Code 2002, § 2-206) 
State Law reference- Ordinance book, 11 O.S. § 14-105; warrants, 11 O.S. § 17-102, 62 O.S. § 551 et seq.; report of statistics as to fire department, 11 O.S. § 49-124; furnishing minutes to legal newspapers, 25 O.S. § 115; administration of oaths, 51 O.S. § 21; reports under workers' compensation law, 85 O.S. § 24.1. 
Sec. 2-182. - Employment of deputy city clerks. 
    The city manager shall appoint such deputy city clerks as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the duties of such office, such appointments being made with the approval of the city commission. Such deputy clerks shall perform the duties assigned to them respectively by the city manager and the city clerk. They shall have power to perform any duties authorized by the city manager or city clerk to exercise the general powers of the city clerk insofar as necessary in the performance of the specific duties assigned them respectively. 
(Code 1986, § 2-127; Code 2002, § 2-207) 
Secs. 2-183-2-202. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RETIREMENT PLAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Retirement and pensions, 11 O.S. § 48-101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-203. - Control and management of retirement system. 
    The control and management of the retirement system, the qualifications of the persons eligible for retirement benefits, the minimum age for retirement of employees and the limitations of the amounts to be paid to persons eligible for retirement benefits shall be as provided in this division and in state law. 
(Code 2002, § 2-236) 
Sec. 2-204. - Adopted; purpose. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the State of Oklahoma, and for the purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby authorized created, established, and approved and adopted, effective as of January 1, 2011, the amended and restated plan designated "Employee Retirement System of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma, Defined Benefit Plan," (hereinafter called system), an executed counterpart of which is marked Exhibit "A" (joinder agreement) and Exhibit "B" (amended and restated plan) which are on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and which are made a part of this division by reference. 
(Code 1986, § 2-141; Code 2002, § 2-237; Ord. No. 2448NS, § 1, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 2509NS, § 1, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 2554NS, § 1, 11-17-2014) 
Sec. 2-205. - Board of trustees. 
    For the purpose of administration of the employee retirement system, there is established a board of trustees, which shall be composed of the members of the city commission. The powers and duties of the board of trustees shall be as set forth in such system. 
(Code 1986, § 2-142; Code 2002, § 2-238) 
State Law reference- Control and management of system, 11 O.S. § 48-102. 
Sec. 2-206. - Establishment and use of fund. 
    A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the persons entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the city. Such fund shall be pooled for purposes of management and investment with similar funds of other incorporated cities, towns, and municipal trusts in the state as a part of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund in accordance with the trust agreement of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, a public trust. The city shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from time to time pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund, as duly authorized and directed by the board of trustees. The fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is made to the county excise board. 
(Code 1986, § 2-143; Code 2002, § 2-239; Ord. No. 2448NS, § 2, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 2-207. - Appropriations by city. 
    The city is hereby authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the establishment, operation, and administration of the system, and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the city is hereby authorized to appropriate annually such amounts as are required in addition to employee contributions to maintain the system and the fund in accordance with the provisions of the defined benefit plan. Any appropriation so made to maintain the system and fund shall be for deferred wages or salaries, and for the payment of necessary expenses of operation and administration to be transferred to the trustees of the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund for such purposes and shall be paid into the fund when available, to be duly transferred to the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund. 
(Code 1986, § 2-144; Code 2002, § 2-240; Ord. No. 2448NS, § 3, 12-6-2010) 
State Law reference- Annual appropriations, 11 O.S. § 48-104. 
Sec. 2-208. - Execution of instruments; contract with other municipalities. 
(a)  The mayor and city clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original) the system instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable, and proper to put said system and related trust into full force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States. The counterpart marked as Exhibit "A" and Exhibit "B", which has been duly executed as aforesaid simultaneously with the passage of the ordinance from which this division derives and made a part hereof, is hereby ratified and confirmed in all respects and are on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection and which are made a part of this division by reference. 
(b)  This committee is hereby authorized and directed to proceed immediately on behalf of the city to pool and combine the fund into the Oklahoma Municipal Retirement Fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and investment. 
(Code 1986, § 2-145; Code 2002, § 2-241; Ord. No. 2448NS, § 4, 12-6-2010) 
Sec. 2-209. - Defined contribution plan. 
    The City of Shawnee Employee Retirement System Defined Contribution Plan is amended as shown on Ordinance No. 2643NS and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 2002, § 2-242; Ord. No. 2086NS, § 1, 3-3-2003; Ord. No. 2243NS, § 1, 3-22-2006; Ord. No. 2351NS, §§ 1-6, 5-5-2008; Ord. No. 2397NS, §§ 1-4, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 2448NS, §§ 1-4, 12-6-2010; Ord. No. 2507NS, § 1, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 2508NS, § 1, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 2510NS, § 1, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 2555NS, § 1, 11-17-2014; Ord. No. 2556NS, § 1, 11-17-2014; Ord. No. 2566NS, § 1, 6-15-2015; Ord. No. 2567NS, § 1, 6-15-2015; Ord. No. 2568NS, § 1, 6-15-2015; Ord. No. 2643NS, § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Secs. 2-210-2-226. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finances, 11 O.S. § 17-101 et seq.; purchases and sales generally, 11 O.S. §§ 22-101, 22-104; supplies furnished by members of council, 21 O.S. § 355 et seq.; sale to city by person with criminal background, 51 O.S. § 24.3; competitive bids, 61 O.S. § 101 et seq.; contracts and expenditures, 62 O.S. § 310.1 et seq.; central purchasing, 74 O.S. § 85.1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-227. - Composition of treasury department. 
    The treasury department shall consist of the city treasurer-finance director and such subordinate officers as may be authorized from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 2-161; Code 2002, § 2-271) 
Sec. 2-228. - Ex officio treasurers for certain purposes. 
    For the purpose of convenience in the enforcement of this Code and any other city ordinances relating to taxes, fees, licenses, certificates and other revenue sources, the city treasurer-finance director shall designate an official in each department or institution receiving money on any account for the city to act ex officio as deputy treasurer. Such deputy treasurer shall have the power and it shall be his duty to issue a treasurer's receipt for all money received by him on account of the performance of any duty lying within his department. 
(Code 1986, § 2-163; Code 2002, § 2-273) 
Sec. 2-229. - Obligations paid to treasury. 
    Every person indebted to the city shall pay such obligation in lawful money directly into the city treasury. 
(Code 1986, § 2-164; Code 2002, § 2-274) 
Sec. 2-230. - Collection of claims and money due to city. 
    The city treasurer-finance director shall make demand and receive from the county treasurer or other source all money received by him for the use of the city. Whenever any person is indebted to the city in any manner and the means of collection of such debt are not otherwise provided for by law or ordinance, the city treasurer-finance director shall be authorized and it shall be his duty to demand and receive the money. When any claim shall not be collectable by other methods, the city treasurer-finance director shall report the failure to collect the claim to the city manager. He shall maintain a continuous inspection of such taxes, licenses and privilege charges in order to effectuate their collection. 
(Code 1986, § 2-165; Code 2002, § 2-275) 
Sec. 2-231. - Receipts. 
    The city treasurer-finance director shall give a receipt for all money coming into his possession, to the payee of the money, showing from whom received, on what account the money was paid, the date of payment, the name of the payee and the amount actually paid. He shall supply each ex officio deputy treasurer with suitable blank receipt books to be used for the purposes provided in this section. It shall be the duty of the city treasurer-finance director and of each ex officio deputy treasurer to keep duplicate copies of every receipt issued by him, and each ex officio deputy treasurer shall make a daily settlement in full with the city treasurer-finance director for all money received by him as shown by his duplicate receipts. 
(Code 1986, § 2-166; Code 2002, § 2-276) 
Sec. 2-232. - Issuance of receipts to deputy treasurers. 
    The city treasurer-finance director shall issue a general receipt to each ex officio deputy treasurer at the time money is received from him by the city treasurer-finance director. Such receipt shall be issued for the exact amount of money received, showing the date, the amount and the department in which the money was collected. Such payments of money shall be accompanied by duplicate receipts of the ex officio deputy treasurer showing the sources of such money, and they shall balance with the money paid in. 
(Code 1986, § 2-167; Code 2002, § 2-277) 
Sec. 2-233. - Records of receipts; accounts. 
    The city treasurer-finance director shall keep such books of record as will show the full amount of money received, the source from which it was obtained, the nature or occasion for the payment of the money, the date and the person paying the money. He shall establish an account for each fund provided by the Charter, this Code, city ordinance or state law, charging himself with all money going into such funds and crediting himself for such amounts as he may lawfully pay out of each of such funds. 
(Code 1986, § 2-168; Code 2002, § 2-278) 
State Law reference- Deposits by treasurers, 62 O.S. § 516.5. 
Sec. 2-234. - Maintenance of revolving funds. 
    With the approval of the city manager, the city treasurer-finance director may establish and maintain a revolving fund in the office of any ex officio deputy treasurer sufficient for the needs of such office, provided that such amount shall be approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 2-169; Code 2002, § 2-279) 
Sec. 2-235. - Keeping of cash accounts. 
    The city treasurer-finance director shall keep the city's cash accounts, which accounts shall clearly and fully show all money received and disbursed by him in behalf of the city, setting forth the date of receipt, from whom received, the date of disbursement, to whom disbursed, the amount of such disbursement and for what or on what account the money was received or disbursed. His accounts shall provide for all special funds provided by ordinance or funds of a general or special nature required by the Charter or state law. 
(Code 1986, § 2-170; Code 2002, § 2-280) 
Sec. 2-236. - Payment of money. 
    The city treasurer-finance director shall pay out money only on warrant drawn, signed and attested as required by the Charter, provided that he shall make such investments, purchases and payments out of the sinking fund as are authorized by the Charter and state law, and such payments shall be in the manner provided by the Charter and state law. Further, special funds may be disbursed by the treasurer-finance director by the issuance of treasurer's checks. 
(Code 1986, § 2-171; Code 2002, § 2-281) 
State Law reference- Payment of invoice or account, 11 O.S. § 17-102; authorized investments generally, 62 O.S. § 348.1; sinking fund, 62 O.S. § 431 et seq.; warrants, 62 O.S. §§ 471 et seq., 551 et seq.; investment of sinking funds, 62 O.S. §§ 541, 562. 
Sec. 2-237. - Records and cancellation of warrants and bonds. 
(a)  The city treasurer-finance director shall keep a register of all warrants paid by him and shall describe each warrant by date, number and amount and the name of the payee. All warrants so paid shall be cancelled. Warrants cancelled by paying banking institutions shall be considered as cancelled, as required by this section. 
(b)  The city treasurer-finance director shall keep a book, in which shall be kept for that purpose a complete list of every bond and coupon outstanding against the city, showing the date of maturity, to whom sold and the amount of the payment falling due, whether principal or interest. Such book shall also show the date of payment of any outstanding bond or interest coupon, the amount thereof actually paid and the number of the bond or interest coupon retired. 
(c)  The city treasurer-finance director shall cancel all bonds, coupons, warrants and other evidences of debt against the city, unless cancelled by the paying banking institution, whenever paid by him, by writing or stamping across the face thereof the word "paid," with the date of payment written or stamped thereon. 
(Code 1986, § 2-172; Code 2002, § 2-282) 
State Law reference- Record of warrants issued, 62 O.S. §§ 472, 475; marking of warrants when paid, 62 O.S. § 551. 
Sec. 2-238. - Receipts and warrants to indicate affected fund. 
    All receipts for money received shall show, on their face, the particular account or fund to which the money shall be applied. Every warrant which the city treasurer-finance director shall pay shall show on its face the particular account or fund out of which the warrant shall be paid. 
(Code 1986, § 2-173; Code 2002, § 2-283) 
State Law reference- Warrants recorded in the numerical order issued on each fund, 62 O.S. § 472. 
Sec. 2-239. - Monthly report. 
    It shall be the duty of the city treasurer-finance director at the end of each month to report to the city manager a statement of the financial transactions of his office for the month ending, which statement shall be in writing and under his oath. 
(Code 1986, § 2-174; Code 2002, § 2-284) 
Sec. 2-240. - Investments; disposition of income. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the city treasurer-finance director is authorized to invest any monies in his custody in the following: 
(1)  Direct obligations of the federal government to the payment of which the full faith and credit of the Government of the United States or of the state is pledged; 
(2)  Certificates of deposits of savings and loan associations, banks and trust companies when such certificates of deposits are secured by acceptable collateral as in the deposit of other public monies; or 
(3)  Savings accounts or savings certificates of savings and loan associations, banks and trust companies, to the extent that such accounts or certificates are fully insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
(b)  The investment may be made whenever the city commission shall determine by resolution that such monies cannot then be used for the purpose for which they are to be expended, provided that the income received from such investment may be placed in the general fund to be used for general governmental operations or in the sinking fund or the fund from which the investment was made. 
(Code 1986, § 2-175; Code 2002, § 2-285) 
State Law reference- Authorized investments generally, 62 O.S. § 348.1. 
Sec. 2-241. - Payment of judgments against city. 
    Any judgment rendered by any court of competent jurisdiction against the city may be paid by the city from currently available funds or pursuant to the provisions of state statutes regarding payment from the sinking fund. 
(Code 1986, § 2-176; Code 2002, § 2-286; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 13, 4-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Judgments against municipalities, 62 O.S. § 361 et seq. 
Sec. 2-242. - Purchases of goods, services and capital. 
(a)  All department heads are designated as purchasing officers and are authorized to make purchases against budget appropriation accounts under their direct control. Each department head may also designate one or more employees who are authorized to make purchases on his behalf. A written authorization form must be filed with and approved by the city treasurer-finance director for all employees authorized to make purchases in this manner. The city shall maintain an approved vendor listing for all purchases of goods and services by the city. It shall be the responsibility of the accounting department to establish procedures for an approved vendor. All purchases are to be made from the approved vendor list. 
(b)  Blanket purchase orders may be issued to vendors for recurring purchases of goods and services for up to $1,000.00. Only persons authorized in subsection (a) of this section shall be authorized to make such purchases. The authorization of blanket purchase orders shall only be issued to vendors on the approved vendor list. 
(c)  Except as exempted in this section, for purchases of goods, services or capital a requisition must be prepared providing information about the requested purchase including vendor name, description, quantity, and unit price. The requisition may be an electronic or paper document. Requisition procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  It is the responsibility of the employee requesting the purchase to obtain the goods, services or capital at the lowest price possible to the city for comparable goods, services or capital. For large purchases, this responsibility includes adherence to the requirements for city commission approval and competitive bidding as described in section 2-98. For all purchases, the requisition should include documentation of bids or catalog prices from other vendors. If a purchase is requested that is not the lowest price available, justification must be included with the requisition. 
(2)  The requisition must be approved according to the routing schedule for each department. The approval routing process shall be reviewed by the accounting department to provide assurance that internal controls are maintained. If the requisition is a paper document, the department head must initial the requisition to document the department head's approval. If the requisition is an electronic document, the department head's approval must also be electronic. The electronic approval process must be under adequate computer security. 
(3)  After approval, the requisition is routed to the encumbering clerk who shall verify that there exist available unencumbered appropriations in the accounts to be charged. Upon such verification, the encumbering clerk shall attest to that fact by approving the requisition either through a manual or electronic approval process. If appropriations are not available for the proposed purchase or commitment, the purchase or commitment shall not proceed until budget amendments are authorized to provide sufficient appropriations. 
(4)  After the encumbering clerk has approved the requisition, it is routed to the city treasurer-finance director for final approval either through a manual or electronic approval process. Upon approval by the city treasurer-finance director, an encumbrance shall be recorded against the appropriation and expenditure records in the amount or estimated amount of the commitment, and the purchase order is issued. The purchase order will be signed by the city treasurer-finance director either through facsimile or manual signature. Appropriate computer and physical security must be maintained over the facsimile signature of the city treasurer-finance director. 
(5)  These encumbering requirements shall not apply to the following type of purchases or commitments: 
a.  Payroll disbursements. 
b.  Debt service payments. 
c.  Interfund transfers. 
d.  Workers' compensation claims. 
e.  Contractual agreements. 
f.  Utility and telephone services. 
(d)  Each city department shall have designated employees as "receiving clerks." A form shall be on file in the accounting department disclosing the receiving clerks with each clerk's signature on file. The persons assigned shall be independent of any authority to make purchases. 
(e)  After satisfactory delivery of the merchandise or completion of contract provisions, an invoice shall be obtained adequately documenting the request for payment. The employee receiving satisfactory delivery of the merchandise or contract service shall acknowledge such fact by signing the bill of lading and/or receipt and forwarding these documents to the accounting department. The invoice shall be forwarded to the employee responsible for processing accounts payable who shall review the invoice for accuracy and propriety, including comparison to the authorized requisition, purchase order or contract, if applicable. After completion of the accounts payable review, all invoices ready for payment shall be listed on an accounts payable register. This register shall be submitted to the city treasurer-finance director for review and written approval. 
(f)  Upon approval of the accounts payable register, checks shall be prepared and submitted to the city treasurer-finance director, along with a copy of the accounts payable register. The treasurer-finance director shall compare the checks to the accounts payable register and verify their accuracy. Upon verification, the treasurer-finance director and the city manager shall sign the checks. The city clerk shall attest the city manager's signature. Facsimile signatures shall be used on these checks under appropriate computer and physical security. In addition, the city treasurer-finance director shall prepare or cause to be prepared a check register. 
(g)  The city treasurer-finance director shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers the purchases and cash disbursements incurred and paid. 
(h)  A copy of the approved accounts payable register must be provided to the mayor and city commission for informational purposes each week prior to any payments; however, city commission approval is not required prior to the payment of the invoices, if incurred and paid in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1986, § 2-178; Code 2002, § 2-288) 
Sec. 2-243. - Debt service. 
(a)  All long-term city indebtedness, in the form of bonds, notes or lease purchase obligations, shall only be incurred in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  Once lawfully incurred, payments of principal and interest on the bonds or notes and payments on the lease purchase obligations shall be paid in accordance with the terms as specified in the bond indenture, note agreement or lease purchase contract by the city treasurer-finance director without further approval of the city commission. 
(c)  The manner of payment shall be consistent with the manner used for the payment of purchases of goods, services or capital as described in section 2-242. 
(d)  The city treasurer-finance director shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers all debt service payments. 
(Code 1986, § 2-179; Code 2002, § 2-289) 
Sec. 2-244. - Interfund transfers. 
(a)  All transfers of resources between funds, both operating and residual equity transfers, shall only be made in accordance with city commission appropriations. Such appropriations shall be contained in the original or amended city budget. 
(b)  Once lawfully appropriated, interfund transfer payments may be made by the city treasurer-finance director without further city commission approval. Such transfers, however, may not exceed the amount lawfully appropriated. 
(c)  The manner of payment shall be consistent with the manner used for payment of purchases of goods, services and capital as described in section 2-242. 
(d)  The treasurer-finance director shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers all interfund transfers. 
(Code 1986, § 2-180; Code 2002, § 2-290) 
Sec. 2-245. - Petty cash. 
(a)  As provided for in 11 O.S. § 17-102(D), the city may have petty cash accounts for use in making certain small payments for costs incurred in operating the city. 
(b)  Each petty cash account established shall require city commission approval, including the amount of the petty cash imprest balances. However, in no case shall the imprest balance exceed $1,000.00. 
(c)  The petty cash accounts shall be reimbursed by utilizing properly itemized invoices or petty cash voucher slips and by then processing the reimbursement in the manner used for payment of purchases of goods, services and capital as described in section 2-242. 
(Code 1986, § 2-181; Code 2002, § 2-291; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 15, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-246. - Workers' compensation claims. 
(a)  For workers' compensation claims, the city shall designate a service agent and retain a licensed adjuster, as required. The personnel director shall act as service agent unless otherwise designated by the city manager. The adjuster is responsible to review all claims to determine that they are valid and meet all requirements of the state statutes. The adjuster will recommend to the service agent the appropriate disposition of each claim. The service agent shall approve the disposition of these claims. 
(b)  After the claims are approved by the service agent, checks shall be prepared in payment of the claims. At the discretion of the city treasurer-finance director, these checks may be prepared in a manner consistent with the payment of purchases of goods, services and capital, as described in section 2-242, or may be prepared by the licensed adjuster and drawn against a special city bank account established for the payment of workers' compensation claims. The checks shall be forwarded to the city treasurer-finance director along with a check register and other reports providing appropriate information about each claim. The treasurer-finance director will review the checks and accompanying reports for accuracy and verify that appropriations are available to pay the claims. After this review, the treasurer-finance director will sign the checks and release them for distribution. 
(c)  The city treasurer-finance director shall record or cause to be recorded in the appropriate journals and ledgers all workers' compensation disbursements. 
(Code 1986, § 2-182; Code 2002, § 2-292) 
Sec. 2-247. - Financial reporting. 
    The city treasurer-finance director shall prepare a monthly budget status report. The report shall be placed on the agenda for city commission acknowledgment at the second meeting following the close of the previous month. At a minimum, the report shall include the following information for each budgetary account within each fund included in the annual budget: 
(1)  Total budget. 
(2)  Year-to-date expenditures. 
(3)  Remaining budget. 
(4)  Outstanding encumbrances. 
(Code 1986, § 2-183; Code 2002, § 2-293) 
Sec. 2-248. - Applicability to public trusts. 
(a)  For all public trusts created pursuant to 60 O.S. §§ 176-180 for which the city is beneficiary and for which the trust's governing body (trustees) is comprised entirely of members of the city commission, the requirements of sections 2-242 through 2-247 shall apply. 
(b)  For the purposes of the public trusts, as used in subsection (a) of this section, the term "governing body" shall mean board of trustees of the trust, the term "chief executive officer" shall mean the trust manager as appointed by the trustees, and the term "city treasurer" shall mean the trust treasurer as appointed by the trustees or required by the trust indenture. 
(Code 1986, § 2-184; Code 2002, § 2-294) 
Secs. 2-249-2-274. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AUDITOR[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Annual audit of books and accounts, 11 O.S. § 17-105 et seq. 

Sec. 2-275. - Employment; qualifications; duties. 
    The city commission shall appoint an independent auditor for the city. Such auditor shall be a certified public accountant. It shall be his duty to keep and maintain a continuous current audit of the city's fiscal affairs to the end that all money received and disbursed shall be received in the manner provided by law, by the Charter or by ordinance and shall be disposed of strictly as provided by law, by the Charter or by ordinance. Audits and financial reports prepared by the auditor shall be directed to the city commission, and copies thereof shall be distributed to other persons as may be required by the city commission. The city auditor shall so perform the duties set forth in this division and such others as are generally accepted as in line with his duty so that he shall be in a position to give, on demand at any time by the city manager or the city commission, a report on the city's financial affairs or of any city officer or employee in full and complete form. 
(Code 1986, § 2-186; Code 2002, § 2-321) 
Sec. 2-276. - Advising board and manager. 
    The city auditor shall advise the city manager and the city commission of any occurrences which in his opinion need to be corrected. 
(Code 1986, § 2-187; Code 2002, § 2-322) 
Sec. 2-277. - Financial advice to employees. 
    It shall be the duty of the city auditor to advise every city official and employee receiving or paying out any money on the city's behalf as to the manner, propriety and the procedure for all acts of a fiscal nature. 
(Code 1986, § 2-188; Code 2002, § 2-323) 
Sec. 2-278. - Checking of accounts. 
    It shall be the duty of the city auditor to check each account of every city official from time to time as may be required by the city manager or the city commission. Such checking of the account shall include a complete examination of the money on hand or deposit, the receipts issued by such official, the balance on hand and the true and correct amount which should be in the possession of such official at the time of such examination. 
(Code 1986, § 2-189; Code 2002, § 2-324) 
Sec. 2-279. - Examination of relationships between accounts. 
    It shall be the duty of the auditor to examine into the relations of the financial affairs between different city officials who are required to receive or pay over money to one another to determine if the books and accounts of the one balance properly with the other. 
(Code 1986, § 2-190; Code 2002, § 2-325) 
Sec. 2-280. - Examination of receipts, warrants, drafts. 
    The auditor shall examine a sufficient sampling, according to established auditing standards, of all receipts, warrants and drafts drawn or issued by the city to determine if the receipts, warrants and drafts have been properly issued and applied. 
(Code 1986, § 2-191; Code 2002, § 2-326) 
Sec. 2-281. - Examination and report of deposits. 
    The auditor shall examine the condition of the accounts in any depository, the standing of such depository, the collateral deposited against deposits on hand and shall report whether or not they conform in all respects with the law, the Charter, this Code or any other city ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 2-192; Code 2002, § 2-327) 
State Law reference- Deposits by treasurers, 62 O.S. § 516.5. 
Sec. 2-282. - Reporting of irregularities. 
    The auditor shall report at once to the city manager any irregularities that he may discover in the books of account or financial procedure of any city official or employee. 
(Code 1986, § 2-193; Code 2002, § 2-328) 
Sec. 2-283. - Study and recommendations as to fiscal affairs and procedure. 
    It shall be the duty of the auditor to make constant study of the methods employed in the city's fiscal affairs, with the view of simplifying and improving the methods, and he shall make such recommendations as his experience and study shall suggest. 
(Code 1986, § 2-194; Code 2002, § 2-329) 
Secs. 2-284-2-314. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HUMAN RIGHTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-315. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Place of public accommodation means and includes any place, store or other establishment, either licensed or unlicensed, which supplies goods or services to the general public or which solicits or accepts the patronage or trade of the general public or which is supported directly or indirectly by government funds, except that a private club is not a place of public accommodation, if its policies are determined by its members and its facilities or services are available only to its members and their bona fide guests. The term "place of public accommodation" does not include barbershops or beauty shops or privately owned resort or amusement establishments or an establishment located within a building which contains not more than five rooms for rent or hire and which is actually occupied by the proprietor of the establishment as his residence. 
(Code 1986, § 2-206; Code 2002, § 2-356; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 16(a), 4-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Definitions, 25 O.S. §§ 1201, 1401. 
Sec. 2-316. - Violations. 
    No person shall violate any of the sections of this article. Any person violating any section of this article, upon being found guilty thereof by the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, for each offense. Each day that any offense is continued in violation of this article is to be construed as a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 2-207; Code 2002, § 2-358; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 16(b), 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-317. - Limitation on rights granted. 
(a)  No section of this article is intended nor should any section of this article be construed to grant to any person a right of entry upon the premises of a place of public accommodation for any purpose other than the express and obvious purposes for which a place of public accommodation is open to the general public, and only during its normal hours of operation. 
(b)  No section of this article is intended nor should any section of this article be construed to grant a right of entry upon the premises of a place of public accommodation to any person who is drunk, disorderly, vagrant, loitering, begging, disturbing the peace, soliciting, selling, advertising, vending goods or presenting himself for entry in any manner, state of dress, demeanor or condition for which the general public, regardless of race, religion, color, creed, ancestry, sex, age, handicap or national origin, would be excluded by such place of public accommodation. 
(Code 1986, § 2-218; Code 2002, § 2-360; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 16(c), 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-318. - Discriminatory practices. 
    No person who is the owner, lessee, manager, proprietor, concessionaire, custodian, agent or employee of a place of public accommodation within the city shall, because of any person's race, religion, color, creed, ancestry, sex, age, handicap or national origin: 
(1)  Deny or refuse any privilege, facility, goods, merchandise, commodity, service or accommodation. 
(2)  Segregate or require the placing of any person in any separate section or area of the premises or facilities of such place of public accommodation. 
(3)  Place, post, maintain or display any written or printed advertisement, notice or sign to the effect that any of the accommodations, facilities, privileges, goods or merchandise of such place of public accommodation will be or may be refused, withheld from or denied to any person. 
(Code 1986, § 2-214; Code 2002, § 2-362; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 16(d), 4-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Discrimination in public accommodations generally, 25 O.S. § 1401 et seq. 
Secs. 2-319-2-339. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Human Rights Commission, 74 O.S. § 951 et seq.; local commissions, 25 O.S. § 1701 et seq. 

Sec. 2-340. - Established; purpose. 
    For the purpose of administering this article, there is established the human relations commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-210; Code 2002, § 2-391) 
Sec. 2-341. - Composition; appointment; qualifications. 
    The human relations commission shall be composed of from seven to 11 members, serving without compensation. The individual members of the human relations commission shall be representative of the various racial, religious, business and other groups in the city. All members of the human relations commission, including the chairman, shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-211; Code 2002, § 2-392) 
Sec. 2-342. - Terms of office. 
    The term of office of each member of the human relations commission shall end on December 31 of each year, but all members shall hold office until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1986, § 2-220; Code 2002, § 2-393) 
Sec. 2-343. - Vacancies. 
    If at any time a vacancy occurs in the human relations commission, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner that the office was previously filled. 
(Code 1986, § 2-219; Code 2002, § 2-394) 
Sec. 2-344. - Appointment, duties of antidiscrimination committee. 
    An antidiscrimination committee shall be appointed by the human relations commission, with the approval of the city commission, and shall have full operating responsibility, under the supervision of the human relations commission, for carrying out this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2-213; Code 2002, § 2-395) 
Sec. 2-345. - Powers and duties. 
    The human relations commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Initiate on its own or receive, investigate and seek to adjust all complaints of discriminatory practices prohibited by this article. 
(2)  By itself or through the antidiscrimination committee, hold public hearings, subpoena witnesses and require their attendance, administer oaths and take the testimony of any person under oath relating to any matter under investigation or in question. 
(3)  Make rules as to the procedure for the issuance of subpoenas by the antidiscrimination committee. Contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena pursuant to this section may be certified to the municipal court for appropriate action. 
(Code 1986, § 2-212; Code 2002, § 2-396) 
State Law reference- Powers of local commissions, 25 O.S. § 1704. 
Sec. 2-346. - Annual reports; recommendations. 
    The human relations commission shall report to the city commission annually the disposition of all complaints referred to it and any matters which it deems appropriate to be brought to the attention of the city commission, including any recommendations it deems desirable and necessary to the accomplishment of the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2-217; Code 2002, § 2-397) 
Secs. 2-347-2-365. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ANNEXATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Annexation and detachment, 11 O.S. § 21-101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-366. - Map adopted; maintenance; changes. 
(a)  There is established an official map showing the city limits and boundaries of the city, which map is designated as the "City Limit Map." Such map is made a part of this section by reference as if the map were set forth in full in this section. It shall be the duty of the director of planning to keep such map on public display in his office. 
(b)  It shall be the further duty of the director of planning that, if the boundaries of the city are changed by ordinance, he shall modify such map showing such changes. 
(Code 1986, § 2-236; Code 2002, § 2-426) 
Sec. 2-367. - Detachment of territory. 
(a)  Territory may be detached from the corporate limits of the city by the city commission when: 
(1)  An ordinance of the city commission so directs; or 
(2)  A petition requesting detachment, signed by at least three-fourths of the registered voters and by the owners of at least three-fourths (in value) of the property to be detached, is filed with the city commission. 
(b)  Only land which is within the city limits and upon its border and not laid out in lots and blocks or land which had been annexed to the city may be detached by petition. Notice of any city commission action on a petition requesting detachment and appeal to the district court shall be in the same manner provided for petitions requesting annexation. 
(Code 1986, § 2-238; Code 2002, § 2-427) 
Sec. 2-368. - Publication of notice. 
    No final action shall be taken by the city commission upon any petition presented in pursuance of section 2-367 until notice of the presentation of such petition has been given by the petitioners, by publication at least once in each week for two successive weeks, in some newspaper published in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-239; Code 2002, § 2-428) 
Sec. 2-369. - Appeal. 
    Upon the failure of the city commission to grant the request contained in a petition presented in accordance with this article and for 30 days after the last publication of the notice provided for in section 2-368 or upon a refusal to grant such request, the petitioners may present their petition to the district court of the county by filing such petition with the clerk of such court. Notice of such filing shall be served by the petitioners upon the mayor, together with a notice of the time and place when and where a hearing shall be had upon such petition, at least ten days before the date of such hearing. The hearing on the petition may be had at a regular or special term of the district court or by the court in vacation. 
(Code 1986, § 2-240; Code 2002, § 2-429) 
Sec. 2-370. - Action of district court. 
    If, upon the hearing held pursuant to section 2-369, the court shall find that the request of the petitioners ought to be granted and can be so granted without injustice to the inhabitants or persons interested, the court shall so order. If the court shall find against the petitioners, the petition shall be dismissed at the cost of the petitioners. 
(Code 1986, § 2-241; Code 2002, § 2-430) 
Sec. 2-371. - Recordation of maps. 
    When any territory is annexed by ordinance or by a decree or order of the court to the city, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to cause an accurate map of such added territory, together with a copy of the ordinance for the annexation or a copy of the decree or order of the court therefor, duly certified, to be filed and recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county in which such added territory or the greater portion of it is situated. If territory is disconnected or excluded from the city, a copy of the ordinance or decree therefor shall be so filed and recorded at the expense of the petitioners therefor. Failure to file such ordinance, map or decree in the office of the register of deeds shall not invalidate such annexation or deannexation. 
(Code 1986, § 2-242; Code 2002, § 2-431) 
Secs. 2-372-2-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Open Records Act, 51 O.S. § 24A.1 et seq.; Records Management Act, 67 O.S. § 203 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-401. - Definitions. 
    The definitions in 68 O.S. § 202(d)-(i), as amended, are adopted by reference in this section as if set forth in full. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Active records means those records in current use which must be retained in offices because frequent reference is necessary in the conduct of day-to-day operations. 
    Appraisal means the process of determining the value and, thus, the disposition of records based upon their legal, fiscal, administrative and archival requirements. 
    Disposition means actions taken with regard to records and nonrecords following their appraisal. These actions include the transfer of inactive records to the records center or the destruction of records or nonrecords no longer required in the course of the city's business. 
    Duplicate records means copies or reproductions of original records, whether or not the same physical form as the original, which are retained for personal reference or for operational requirements. 
    Inactive records means those records which are seldom referred to, but which must be retained, temporarily or permanently, because of legal, fiscal, administrative or archival value. 
    Maintenance of public records means the creation, maintenance, protection, use and disposition of all public records of the city, including the establishment and maintenance of a system of filing and indexing public records. 
    Municipal records means all records, whether of public or private origin, housed and administered by the city. 
    Nonrecord means material which is not retained in the regular course of business or which is a temporary aid, not created for the purpose of preserving its own documentary or informational content for future reference. This includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Transmittal letters and acknowledgments which do not add any information to the material transmitted. 
(2)  Requests for printed material after the requests have been filled. 
(3)  Informal notes, work sheets and rough drafts of letters, memoranda or reports that do not represent basic steps in the preparation of documents. 
(4)  Shorthand notes, including stenographic notebooks and stenotype tapes, and dictating media that have been transcribed. 
(5)  Miscellaneous notices of community affairs, employee meetings or holidays. Notices required under the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act do not fall into this category; they are considered official records. 
(6)  Stocks of publications or unused blank forms that are kept for supply purposes only. 
(7)  Tickler, followup or suspense copies of correspondence. 
(8)  Extra copies of documents already in an official file. 
(9)  Publications or reference materials received or acquired from outside sources such as professional organizations, conferences, seminars or workshops. 
(10)  Library and museum materials made or acquired and preserved solely for reference or exhibition purposes. 
    Original records means the first or initial documentation, of which anything else is a copy or reproduction, or a duplicate record with any original documentation. 
    Public or official records means all documents, papers, letters, maps, books, tapes, photographs, films, sound recordings or other materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of official business by any city officer or employee. However, the term "public records" shall not be construed to mean those public records that are deemed by law to be confidential or that are prohibited from being inspected by the public or that shall be exempt from this article or from the provisions of the Oklahoma Preservation of Essential Records Act. 
    Record copy means a reproduction of an original record which is retained in lieu of the original record as the official city record. 
    Record series means file units or documents arranged in accordance with a filing system or maintained as a unit because they relate to a particular subject or function, because they result from the same activity, because they have a particular form or because of some other relationship arising out of their creation, receipt or use. A record series may consist of records of a single type or format and can be described, handled and disposed of or retained as a unit. 
    Records disposition schedule means a listing of record series by department, indicating for each series the length of time it is to be maintained in office areas and in the records center. The schedule constitutes authority for the destruction of records listed thereon, after required retention periods have lapsed. 
    Records management officer means the city clerk or appointed designee. 
    Records management program means a formulated plan to establish a citywide system that achieves integrated control of all departmental subsystems so than an orderly and efficient flow of paperwork is provided from creation to ultimate disposition. 
    Writing means handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating, photographing and every other means of recording upon any form of communication or representation, including letters, words, pictures, sounds or symbols or a combination thereof, and all papers, maps, magnetic or paper tapes, photographic films and prints, magnetic or punched cards, discs, drums and other documents, retained in the ordinary course of business. Writings are record or nonrecord material. 
(Code 1986, § 2-251; Code 2002, § 2-461) 
Sec. 2-402. - Purpose and intent. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Records Management Program of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma," providing for the proper and efficient management of the city's records. 
(Code 1986, § 2-252; Code 2002, § 2-462) 
Sec. 2-403. - Authority to establish program; goals; records management officer. 
(a)  The office of city clerk is authorized to establish and administer the records management program for the city pursuant to legal, fiscal, administrative and archival requirements. To this end, the city clerk will implement, but not be limited to, a program to encompass such areas of records management as are required to preserve and keep in order all books, papers, documents, records, and files of the city to achieve the following goals: 
(1)  Release space and reduce the need for storage and filing equipment. 
(2)  Establish an efficient retrieval operation for both active and inactive municipal records. 
(3)  Provide for routine disposition of paperwork. 
(4)  Maintain total security over municipal records. 
(5)  Communicate the need of an effective records management program. 
(b)  The city clerk is authorized to appoint a records management officer to assist in carrying out the goals in subsection (a) of this section. The city manager shall be responsible for ensuring proper management of records in city government. 
(Code 1986, § 2-253; Code 2002, § 2-463) 
Sec. 2-404. - Records disposition schedule. 
(a)  The records disposition schedule will serve as the basis for the city's records management program. The head of each department shall prepare a records disposition schedule for the department and any subsequent proposed amendments thereto. With the assistance of the records management officer, this preparation shall include the following: 
(1)  A physical inventory and appraisal of all records to determine their legal, fiscal, administrative and archival value. 
(2)  Identification of an official record series title for all department records and specific and accurate descriptions of records listed thereunder in accordance with guidelines developed by the city clerk. Terms used as record series titles or as a description of files on the records disposition schedule or any revision thereto shall be descriptive. They shall not include the use of the words "miscellaneous" or "various," or words of similar connotation, nor shall any such schedule or request bearing such nomenclature be submitted to the city clerk and the city attorney for their consideration and approval. 
(3)  A periodic review or audit of records to make sure they are properly covered by the records disposition schedule. 
(b)  Following the review or audit, the city clerk will be notified of any proposed amendments to the records disposition schedule that are needed. Such amendments may include the addition of new record series titles to the records disposition schedule or requests to have superseded record series titles removed from the records disposition schedule. 
(c)  Final approval of the records disposition schedule shall require the written consent of the department head, the city attorney and the city clerk. The records disposition schedule must then be approved by the city commission by resolution. Amendments and revisions thereto shall require the written consent of the department head, the city attorney and the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 2-254; Code 2002, § 2-464) 
Sec. 2-405. - Responsibilities of certain city officers. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the city clerk shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for the maintenance of all official records with the following exceptions: 
a.  Records identified pursuant to this article in the records disposition schedule, which are entrusted to the custody of other city officers or departments. 
b.  Newly created or unidentified record series, which shall be the responsibility of the originating department, until properly identified within the records disposition schedule. 
c.  Inactive records which have been transferred to noncity organizations. 
d.  Records which are legally maintained by other government agencies. 
(2)  Be responsible for the administration of a uniform records management program assisting all city departments and for the development, administration and coordination of procedures thereunder. 
(3)  Administer a records center for the efficient and economical storage, maintenance and servicing of inactive city records. 
(4)  Appoint a records management officer who shall serve in the office of the city clerk as the head of the records management program. 
(5)  Develop and implement a confidentiality policy for all inactive records designated "confidential" and in the physical custody of the city clerk's office, providing such policy does not conflict with any federal law or state statutes. 
(6)  Develop and institute a vital records program to ensure the safety of essential records if a disaster occurs. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, the records management officer, under the direction of the city clerk, shall: 
(1)  Provide effective control over the identification, appraisal, maintenance, protection, preservation, transfer, retention and disposition of all city records. This shall include: 
a.  Providing assistance and guidelines to departments in the preparation of their records disposition schedules and amendments thereto. 
b.  Establishing proper procedures for securing necessary revisions to the records disposition schedule, with the approval of the city attorney. 
c.  Providing direct technical assistance and guidance to departments that will aid in resolving specific files and related records problems. 
(2)  Operate the records center in an orderly and efficient manner. This operation shall include: 
a.  Providing information, assistance and records to using departments to ensure optimum utilization of the records center. 
b.  Notifying using departments periodically when records held by the records center are eligible for destruction. 
c.  Causing to be destroyed records held by the records center only after receiving proper authorization from the responsible department head. 
(c)  For the purposes of this article, each department head shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the city clerk to ensure proper administration and implementation of the city's records management program. 
(2)  Ensure the proper application of the records disposition schedule to the department's records. 
(3)  Ensure that records are transferred to the records center for storage at the end of the office retention period listed in the records disposition schedule. 
(4)  Review the records disposition schedule and recommend to the city clerk any amendments thereto which are necessary due to changing requirements. 
(5)  Comply with procedures mentioned in this article regarding the destruction of records and nonrecords. 
(6)  Appoint a records coordinator to serve as liaison between the records management officer and the department and to assist in the implementation of the records management program. 
(Code 1986, § 2-255; Code 2002, § 2-465) 
Sec. 2-406. - Ownership of municipal records; custodianship responsibilities. 
(a)  All records created or received by a department shall remain the property of the city. The city clerk is the legal custodian of the city's records. The records management division of the city clerk's office is the physical custodian of all records transferred to the Shawnee Municipal Records Center (SMRC), microfilm center or Shawnee Archives. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each city officer and employee to protect, preserve, store and transfer municipal records in accordance with state and federal statutes, the Charter and ordinances or rules promulgated and approved by the city commission or city manager. The records shall be delivered by outgoing officials and employees to their successors or the officials and employees shall surrender the records upon the written order of the city commission, city manager or other duly authorized city official. 
(Code 1986, § 2-257; Code 2002, § 2-466) 
Sec. 2-407. - Destruction of records. 
(a)  Eligibility. Municipal records defined in this article as original public records may be destroyed as directed by the city commission or city manager with the advice and consent of the city attorney, unless otherwise required by federal or state law, in accordance with the records disposition schedule set out in the city's records management manual. No record shall be destroyed until it has been properly inventoried, appraised, entered in the records disposition schedule and duly audited. Furthermore, before a record is eligible for destruction, the department head must first make the following determinations: 
(1)  Required retention periods listed in the records disposition schedule have lapsed. 
(2)  The record is maintained by the department. 
(3)  The record is no longer required to fulfill any legal, fiscal, administrative or archival interests of the city or the public. 
(4)  The record series title is descriptive and does not include the use of the words "miscellaneous" or "various" or words of similar connotation. 
(5)  A notice of proposed destruction of all municipal records, including records series titles, descriptions, inclusive dates and volumes, shall first be given to the records management officer of the city clerk's office for permanent keeping. 
(6)  Any original municipal public record, the subject matter of which is in litigation, may not be destroyed until such litigation is finally terminated. 
(7)  Any testing laboratory results or the inspection records of public improvements of the city may not be destroyed. 
(b)  Procedures. Before records are destroyed, the department head shall: 
(1)  In compliance with the records disposition schedule, exercise a final review over all records eligible for destruction for the purpose of determining any further legal, fiscal, administrative or archival needs. 
(2)  Ensure that, if the records disposition schedule does not specify records for transfer to the records center, the records shall be destroyed at the end of the listed office retention period in compliance with the records disposition schedule. 
(3)  Ensure that, if the records disposition schedule does specify records for transfer to the records center and this has not occurred, the records shall be destroyed, providing they have exceeded their total retention requirement (office plus records center). 
(4)  Destroy duplicate records and nonrecords when they are no longer needed in the course of the city's business. 
(c)  Method of destruction. The method of destruction for all records identified in this article shall be by a paper shredder, with the shred cut size to be at least one-fourth inch, with the exception of those records which may be determined by the city clerk to be disposed of in a different manner, notwithstanding that records of confidentiality may be destroyed in a manner prescribed by law. 
(d)  Destruction of all other municipal records. Municipal records other than those records defined in this article as original public records may be disposed of upon approval of the city clerk and the departmental custodian. 
(Code 1986, § 2-256; Code 2002, § 2-467) 
Sec. 2-408. - Storage of records. 
(a)  All records may be photographed, micro-photographed, photostated, reproduced on film, or stored on optical, digital or other electronic media. Such film or reproducing media shall be of durable material and the device used to reproduce such records on film or other media shall be such as to accurately reproduce and perpetuate the original records in all details. 
(b)  The photostatic copy, photograph, microphotograph, photographic film or optical, digital or electronic version of the original records shall be deemed to be an original record for all purposes, and shall be admissible in evidence in all courts or administrative agencies and available to the public in the same manner as the original record. A facsimile, exemplification or certified copy thereof shall, for all purposes recited herein, be deemed to be a transcript, exemplification or certified copy of the original. Such records may be disposed of in accordance with the policy of this article for the destruction and disposal of the original record. 
(c)  All versions of a record as authorized herein shall be placed in conveniently accessible files and provisions made for indexing, preserving, examining and using same shall be the same as for the original records. Once such procedures have been followed, the city manager may certify to that fact. Following such certification, the governing body may, by resolution, authorize the disposal, archival storage or destruction of the original records and papers before the expiration of the retention period established by statute, local ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 2002, § 2-468; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 17, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-409. - Identity theft prevention program (red flag policy). 
    For purposes of complying with 16 CFR § 681.2, and in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft, the identity theft prevention program and policy of the City of Shawnee is incorporated by reference in this section as though fully set forth herein. 
(Code 2002, § 2-469; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 19, 4-7-2014) 
Secs. 2-410-2-431. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MICROGRAPHICS 

Sec. 2-432. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Index means a list describing the items of a collection and where they may be found; a catalog. 
    Microfilm means a film containing photographic records or images considerably reduced in size from the original material filmed. 
    Microform means a generic name for any medium containing micro-images, i.e., reduced images. 
    Microform record means any record preserved in one of the various formats of microfilm. 
(Code 1986, § 2-261; Code 2002, § 2-496; Ord. No. 2541NS, § 18, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-433. - Authorized. 
    The office of the city clerk is authorized to provide a micrographics operation which accurately and permanently copies, reproduces or originates on microform media any municipal record of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-262; Code 2002, § 2-497) 
Sec. 2-434. - Types of records to be filmed. 
    The micrographics operation under the administration of the records management division of the office of the city clerk may be applied to any municipal record of the city, including, but not limited to, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, deeds, conveyances, minutes, notices, correspondence, memoranda, any writing or communication or any record of any city department. 
(Code 1986, § 2-263; Code 2002, § 2-498) 
Sec. 2-435. - Standards. 
    The first generation microform medium shall meet the requirements of the United States of America Standards Institute for archival quality, density, resolution and definition, except that microform media which is intended only for shortterm use, as determined by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-264; Code 2002, § 2-499) 
Sec. 2-436. - Certification of records. 
    The city clerk shall check and certify that each microform record is a true and correct duplication of the original municipal record. 
(Code 1986, § 2-265; Code 2002, § 2-500) 
Sec. 2-437. - Indices to records. 
    The records management division of the office of the city clerk shall index the microform records. 
(Code 1986, § 2-266; Code 2002, § 2-501) 
Sec. 2-438. - Public access. 
    The public shall have free access to information in microform records to which the public is entitled under law, just as if the microform record were the original record. 
(Code 1986, § 2-267; Code 2002, § 2-502) 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING AND SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    Any terms not contained within this section shall be construed to be used in this chapter as defined in the latest edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory sign means any advertising device which identifies or displays information concerning the proprietor of the business conducted on the premises. 
    A-frame sign, sandwich sign or swinger sign means an advertising device which is ordinarily in the shape of an "A," spring mounted on a fixed base, or some variation thereof, located on the ground, but not otherwise attached thereto, and which is usually two-sided. 
    Aggregate use means a group of primary uses integrated in a single development not separated by an opened public street, under common ownership, and sharing private parking facilities and other services in common. 
    Animation means any visible mechanical movement in any sign, or apparent movement achieved by electrical pulsations or by other means, such as sequential light phasing. 
    Architectural projection means any projection, excluding signs, which is not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, including but not limited to roof overhangings, wing walls, mansards, unenclosed exterior balconies, marquees, canopies, pilasters, fascias and awnings. 
    Attached sign means an accessory sign attached to, painted on or in any other way represented on a building or the structural element of a building. An attached sign includes a canopy sign, combination sign, fascia sign, marquee sign, module sign, parapet wall sign, projecting sign, roof sign and wall sign. 
    Awning means a fixed, backlit or movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building, which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. 
    Banner means any pennant, streamer, flag, sign, picture, figure or other object, regardless of the materials of which it is made, which is suspended or otherwise designed for decoration or advertisement or to attract the attention of passersby; excepting, however, official warning devices, public service facilities, streetlights and similar safety devices. 
    Billboard, including poster and panel types, means a nonaccessory sign or sign structure upon which advertising may be posted, painted or affixed and which is primarily designed for the rental or lease of the sign space for advertising not related to the use of the property upon which the sign is located. 
    Building code means the latest building code as amended and adopted by the city. 
    Canopy means a permanently roofed shelter covering over a sidewalk, service station, driveway or other similar area, which is supported by posts or by the building to which it is attached. 
    Canopy sign means an attached accessory sign painted on or attached to the vertical side of or erected on the roof surface of a canopy. 
    Chief code enforcement official means the person charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter or the chief code enforcement official's duly authorized representative. 
    Combination sign means any single attached accessory sign incorporating any combination of the features of the projecting, parapet wall, canopy, marquee, wall and fascia signs. 
    Decoration means illustrations, symbols, flags, streamers, bunting, wreaths, figures, insignias and other devices employed to express and illustrate a message of patriotic, holiday or seasonal character and are not considered signs for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Directional and information sign, accessory means signs which direct attention to the location of a facility or group of facilities on the same property on which the sign is located or which display brand name information as provided in this chapter. Such signs may include entrance and exit signs, restroom signs, handicapped parking signs, license or permit information signs and other similar groups. This also includes the following specific signs: telephone booths or service signs, brand name on petroleum products pumps or other dispensing apparatus located outside of a building, identification and informational signs on public utility apparatus and U.S. Post Office signs on postal apparatus. 
    Display surface means the surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated. 
    Display surface area means the net geometrical area enclosed by the display surface of the sign including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters and delineations; provided, however, the term "display surface area" does not include the structural supports for freestanding signs if the structural supports are so arranged as not to become a part of the attention attracting aspect of the sign. Unless specifically provided in this chapter, the display area to be computed shall be based on the following standards: 
(1)  For signs of irregular design, the display surface area shall be determined by computing the area formed by an envelope of rectangles and triangles which shall be formed by drawing straight lines which connect the adjacent extreme points of the display surface of adjacent panels, figures, characters or delineations. 
(2)  Where a sign has two faces which are joined in a "V" shape forming an angle not to exceed 60 degrees or where such a sign contains three or more faces which are joined to form a polygon shape when viewed from above, the total display surface area of the sign may be increased by 150 percent of the allowable maximums as outlined in this definition, provided that no one side of the sign exceeds 75 percent of the normal maximum size as set forth. 
(3)  The maximum display surface area of a double-faced sign as defined in this section shall be calculated on the basis of only one sign face. 
(4)  The display surface area of a double-surface sign, when the two surfaces are greater than 36 inches apart and not joined to form a "V," as permitted in this definition, shall be computed by adding together the square footage of each display surface. 
(5)  The space between modules in a module sign as defined in this section shall not be counted. 
(6)  The display surface area of a fascia sign shall be calculated by adding together the individual display surface areas of the front and the larger size of the fascia sign. 
    Double-faced sign means any sign which has two display surface faces, each of which is parallel to the other and not more than 36 inches apart. 
    Electric sign means any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated solely by exterior light sources such as floodlights. 
    Electrical code means the latest electrical code as amended and adopted by the city. 
    Electronic reader board means a changeable message sign consisting of an LED matrix which is computer-controlled. 
    Erect means to build, construct, place, locate, relocate or structurally alter any sign or other advertising device upon the site where it is to be utilized, whether permanent or temporary. 
    Fascia means a continuous translucent panel illuminated from within which may extend around one or more corners and which is attached to and designed as a part of a building. 
    Fascia sign means a wall, canopy, marquee or parapet wall sign attached to or printed on a fascia surface. Unless specifically provided in this section, a fascia sign shall be subject to the standards covering the sign it represents. 
    Flare means any torch, fusee, wick or other illuminating device utilizing open names to attract attention to an establishment. 
    Flashing sign means an illuminated sign on which the artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in light intensity as a part of the building. 
    Foot-lambert means the average brightness of any surface, or the uniform brightness of a perfectly diffusing surface, emitting or reflecting one lumen per square foot. Foot-lamberts are measured with an exposure meter equipped with a foot-lambert scale. 
    Frontage, building, means the horizontal, lineal dimension of that side of a building which abuts a street, a parking area, a mall or other circulation area open to the general public and having either a main window display of the enterprise or a public entrance to the building. (In industrial districts, a building side with an entrance open to industrial employees shall also qualify as a building frontage.) Where more than one use occupies a building, each such use having a public entrance or main window display for its exclusive use shall be considered to have its own building frontage, which shall be the front width of the portion of the building occupied by that use. 
    Frontage, street, means the lineal frontage of a lot or parcel abutting on a private or public street which provides principal access to or visibility of the premises. 
    Grade level means the average level of the finished or natural surface of the ground area adjacent to the exterior walls of a building or adjacent to the supports of a sign structure. In this instance, adjacent shall be limited to a radius of 25 feet from the center of the sign structure. 
    Ground sign means a freestanding accessory sign of limited height which is secured to a fixed base, usually at ground level or at a slight elevation above ground, rather than being pole mounted. A sign attached to a wall or fence which serves as the boundary of a parcel shall be considered a ground sign. 
    Height means the vertical distance measured from the elevation of the nearest sidewalk (or, in the absence of a sidewalk within 25 feet, then from the lowest point of the finished grade on the lot upon which the sign is located and within 25 feet of the sign) to the uppermost point on the sign or sign structure. 
    Identification nameplate means an accessory sign as permitted in this chapter which is attached to and flat against the wall of a building or suspended from a canopy or marquee. 
    Illuminated sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes, whether such sources of illumination are a part of a sign or not. 
    Illumination, direct, means illumination which is performed by electrical apparatus from within the sign structure or which is otherwise a part of the sign structure. 
    Illumination, indirect, means illumination which is performed by spotlights or other lighting devices and which is not a part of the sign proper. 
    Lighting. There are three basic methods of lighting signs: internal lighting that shines through a plastic or other translucent covering; direct external lighting, such as flood or spotlights; and lighting that is external but integral to the sign, such as bulbs that spell out the sign message. 
    Marquee means a permanent, fixed roof attached to, wholly supported by and projecting from a building. 
    Marquee sign means an attached accessory sign painted on or attached to the vertical side of, or erected on the roof surface of, a marquee. 
    Module means a separate unit of a sign which consists of an individual letter or an individual metal, plastic, masonry or wood unit upon which no more than one letter or message, as permitted in the definition of module sign, is mounted or printed. Modules shall be open on three sides or mounted on a building with no visible interconnections between modules. 
    Module sign means an accessory sign other than an identification sign or identification nameplate which is formed of individual modules which spell out only the name or nature of a business or the occupant of the premises. A module sign shall be erected so that there is a space between modules, and no more than one module shall contain information relating to the use of the property other than spelling out the business or occupant. This sign shall be governed by the regulations applicable to the type of accessory sign which the module sign represents. Any sign not meeting this definition shall be subject to the regular accessory sign regulations. 
    Moving sign means any sign or device which has any visible moving part, visible revolving part, or visible mechanical movement. 
    Nonaccessory sign means a sign or advertising device which directs attention to an activity, service or product sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Parapet wall sign means an attached accessory sign erected on the top surface of a parapet. 
    Portable sign means a transportable sign designed for temporary use in compliance with the structural requirements of this chapter. 
    Primary use means the single dominant use of any piece of property or lot. 
    Projecting sign means an attached accessory sign which projects from and which has one end attached to a building, and which does not employ ground support in any manner. 
    Roof sign. Types of roof signs shall be as follows: 
(1)  Type A means an attached accessory sign designed to permit, but not necessarily be limited to, the erection of a shield, symbol or similar trademark or brand name. Such sign shall be located immediately and entirely over the roof of a building and attached to a wall or pylon or similar physical support that is part of the physical and architectural design of the building. This definition shall apply only to a building which is four stories or less in height. 
(2)  Type B means an attached accessory sign erected on a vertical framework supported by and located immediately and entirely over the roof of a building which is five stories or more in height. 
    Sight triangle means an area which is clear of all structures or other sight impediments formed by measuring back equal distances along two intersecting lines of street curblines or driveway lines a distance of 30 feet, and connecting such points to form a triangle. 
    Sign means any structure or part thereof or any device permanently or temporarily attached to, painted on, supported by or represented on a building, fence, post or other structure, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention. The term "sign" does not include a flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, association of nations, state, city or other political unit. 
    Sign location means the site where one or more freestanding sign structures may be erected. Where more than one structure is placed on either a permanent or temporary basis, there shall be no more than a 12-inch separation between structures at the same sign location. 
    Structure means anything built or constructed, whether or not permanently attached to the ground. 
    Temporary sign means any sign or advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, portable cardboard, wood, wallboard, metal or other light materials, with or without frames, which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only and which is portable. 
    Wall sign means an attached accessory sign painted on or attached to the wall or surface of a building or display surface which is parallel to the supporting surface. A sign attached to a wall or fence located on the boundary of a parcel shall be regulated as a ground sign. 
    Window sign means any accessory sign painted on the surface of, located on the interior of or flashing through a display window. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1; Code 2002, § 3-1; Ord. No. 2169NS, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 3-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish effective sign regulations which recognize the public as well as private interest and investment in the city's environment and which regulate the number, size and location of signs; regulate signs to the individual use, the site and nonconforming signs; and promote and protect the health, safety and welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the city for its residents and the general public. 
(b)  It is the intent of this chapter to: 
(1)  Promote more effective signing practices which will be compatible with their surroundings and appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain; 
(2)  Encourage greater consideration of influencing factors and thoughtful design of signs; 
(3)  Promote economic and business development; 
(4)  Protect property values; 
(5)  Reduce distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents; and 
(6)  Enhance and protect the physical appearance and natural beauty of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 3-55; Code 2002, § 3-2) 
Sec. 3-3. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to the display, construction, erection, alteration, use, location and maintenance of all signs within the city, including any sign erected or constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1986, § 3-56; Code 2002, § 3-3) 
Sec. 3-4. - Exemptions; standards for exempted signs. 
    Except as specifically provided, the signs listed in this section shall be exempt from this chapter. All of the following signs shall be securely attached to a structure or to stakes or posts that are firmly embedded in the ground; they shall not be illuminated: 
(1)  Real estate signs, residential. Standards for exempted residential real estate signs shall be as follows: 
a.  The sign shall advertise only the sale or lease of premises on which the sign is placed. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed 12 square feet of display surface area and four feet in height. 
c.  One sign shall be permitted per street frontage. 
d.  The sign shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, lease or rental of the property. 
e.  For a special event such as an annual or semiannual "parade of homes" or a neighborhood association or civic organization housing tour, a single sign for the event may be placed on a property included in the event, provided the sign shall not exceed 30 square feet of display surface area and shall not remain on the property longer than 21 days. 
(2)  Real estate signs, commercial or industrial. Standards for an exempted commercial or industrial real estate sign shall be as follows: 
a.  The sign shall advertise only the sale or lease of premises on which the sign is placed. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed 60 square feet of display surface area and 14 feet in height. 
c.  The sign shall be limited to property zoned for an office, commercial or industrial district, provided that property in the A-1 district may be advertised for commercial use if the sign shall have placed on it letters of at least six inches in height which state "Presently Zoned A-1." 
d.  One sign shall be permitted per street frontage. 
e.  The sign shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, lease or rental of the property. 
(3)  Subdivision signs. Standards for exempted subdivision signs shall be as follows: 
a.  The sign shall be placed behind all platted setback lines. 
b.  The sign shall only advertise the sale or lease of property within the development on which the sign is placed. 
c.  The sign shall have a separation of at least 400 feet from another sign for the same subdivision. 
d.  The sign shall have a maximum display surface area of 250 square feet and a maximum height of 14 feet. 
e.  The sign may have indirect illumination from a source other than a residential structure. 
f.  The sign shall be removed upon sale by the developer of all lots and/or residences in the subdivision. 
(4)  Construction signs for commercial, industrial, apartments and similar large projects. Standards for exempted construction signs for commercial, industrial, apartments and similar large projects shall be as follows: 
a.  One sign shall be permitted per frontage per contractor, development company or financing institution participating in the construction; subcontractors shall be identified on the sign of the contractor. 
b.  The permitted size for all such signs shall be based on two square feet of display surface area for each lineal foot of frontage up to a maximum of 500 total square feet for all signs. 
c.  The sign may have indirect illumination. 
d.  The sign shall be removed within ten days of completion of construction. 
(5)  Construction signs, one- through three-family residential. Standards for exempted one- through three-family residential construction signs shall be as follows: 
a.  One sign shall be permitted per frontage per contractor. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed 12 square feet of display surface area for the builder or principal contractor and four square feet for each subcontractor. 
c.  The sign shall be removed within ten days of the completion of construction. 
(6)  Noncommercial expressive signs, residential. Noncommercial expressive signs shall be limited to two signs per frontage. An aggregate of eight square feet of display surface area per frontage shall be permitted in residential areas. 
(7)  Accessory directional and information sign. Standards for exempted accessory directional and information signs shall be as follows: 
a.  These shall include signs directing traffic movement into or within premises. 
b.  The size shall not exceed four square feet in area per sign. 
c.  Illumination of such sign shall be permitted in accordance with the building code and zoning district regulations in which the premises are located, provided that no flashing lights shall be permitted. 
d.  Horizontal directional signs painted on or installed flush with paved streets shall not be subject to the size regulations of this subsection. 
e.  The use of such signs is prohibited except where needed for the safe and efficient movement of traffic and provision of information as provided in section 3-1. 
(8)  Decorations, insignias and flags. Decorations, insignias and flags shall be exempt from this chapter in accordance with the following: 
a.  Seasonal decorations. Decorations pertaining to recognized national, state and local holidays and observances, provided that such decorations shall not be erected earlier than six weeks prior to the holiday or observance, and the decorations shall be removed no later than two weeks after the holiday. 
b.  Insignias and flags. Such insignias, flags and emblems of the United States, the state and municipal and other bodies of established government or flags which display the recognized symbol of a nonprofit and/or noncommercial organization. 
(9)  Public signs. This chapter shall not apply to signs erected by the city, county, state or federal government for traffic direction or street identification. 
(10)  Certain wall signs. Memorial signs on tablets, the name of a building and the date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials, shall be exempt from this chapter. 
(11)  Accessory signs within structure. There shall be no restrictions on the placement of signs within a structure where they cannot be viewed from any point outside the structure; for example, a shopping center mall. However, all signs so constructed shall require appropriate building and electrical permits. 
(12)  Public utility signs. Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices, shall be exempt from this chapter. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-78, 3-83(4), (5); Code 2002, § 3-4) 
Secs. 3-5-3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-31. - Penalty. 
    A person who shall violate a section of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any section of this chapter or with any of the requirements of this chapter or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a sign in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-10. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 3-76; Code 2002, § 3-31) 
Sec. 3-32. - Enforcing officer; right of entry. 
(a)  The chief code enforcement official is authorized and directed to enforce all sections of this chapter. He shall appear for and on behalf of the city in all matters regarding the interpretation and application of this chapter and shall resist and oppose any deviations from this chapter. 
(b)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, the chief code enforcement official may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises usually open to the public in the city to perform any duty imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-75; Code 2002, § 3-32) 
Sec. 3-33. - Inspection of work. 
    The chief code enforcement official shall inspect at such time as deemed necessary each sign regulated by this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-67; Code 2002, § 3-33) 
Sec. 3-34. - Notices; hearings; orders. 
(a)  Whenever the chief code enforcement official determines a violation of a pertinent regulation of this chapter exists, he shall notify the licensee or permittee of such alleged violation. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance. 
(3)  Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with this chapter and other pertinent regulations. 
(4)  Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed seven working days, for the performance of any act it requires. 
(5)  Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require, provided that such notice or order shall be deemed as properly served upon the owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last known address or has been posted upon the offending sign. 
(b)  Any person affected by a notice issued under this chapter or resulting regulations may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the zoning board of adjustment, provided that such person shall file with the chief code enforcement official a written request for such hearing setting forth briefly the grounds for such request within seven days after the day the notice was served. The filing of such request shall stay the notice of suspension of a permit and license except for orders issued under subsection (e) of this section. The hearing shall be held at the next zoning board of adjustment meeting for which the agenda has not been completed or at a later meeting if so requested by the petitioner, should the chief code enforcement official determine sufficient cause for such delay exists. 
(c)  After such hearing the chief code enforcement official shall compile the findings of the zoning board of adjustment as to compliance with this chapter and applicable regulations and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the prior notice, which shall be served as provided in subsection (d) of this section. Upon failure to comply with such order, the permit of the sign or the sign company's license shall be revoked. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of adjustment may seek relief in district court. 
(e)  Whenever the chief code enforcement official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may, without notice of hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the board of adjustment shall be afforded a hearing at the next regular meeting. Subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-77; Code 2002, § 3-34) 
Sec. 3-35. - Identification of signs. 
    Every sign for which a permit has been issued and which is erected, constructed or maintained after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be plainly marked with the name of the person owning, erecting, maintaining or operating such sign. The method and location of this identification shall appear on the plans and within the specifications filed with the chief code enforcement official. 
(Code 1986, § 3-69; Code 2002, § 3-35) 
Sec. 3-36. - Continuation of legal nonconforming signs. 
    Any sign located within the city on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or located in an area annexed to the city thereafter, which does not conform with this chapter, shall be considered as a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, provided that the sign was in all respects in compliance with the applicable law on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. If such sign is not in conformance with the existing law, such sign must be brought into conformance or removed according to procedures established in this chapter. Such sign shall be maintained in a good condition and shall be allowed to remain in existence so long as, and only as long as, such sign is not: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming sign. 
(2)  Structurally altered, except to meet safety requirements, so as to prolong the life of the sign. 
(3)  Expanded. 
(4)  Reestablished after its discontinuance for 90 days. 
(5)  Continued in use after cessation or change of ownership of the business or activity to which the sign pertains. 
(6)  Reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent appraised replacement cost, as determined by the chief code enforcement official. 
(Code 1986, § 3-71; Code 2002, § 3-36) 
Sec. 3-37. - Removal by impoundment. 
(a)  Impoundment without notice. Any sign situated in the right-of-way of a public street or in a required sight triangle, an unanchored sign or a sign which has been damaged by storm or collision in such a manner that its presence constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public is declared a public nuisance endangering public safety, and it may be impounded by the chief code enforcement official or any police officer. If impounded, a reasonable effort shall be made to determine the identity of the sign owner for purpose of notification. If a sign contains ownership information, as required by this chapter, the chief code enforcement official shall provide mailed notice that the sign has been impounded within two working days of the action. 
(b)  Impoundment with notice. As provided in this subsection, signs may be impounded on three days' written notice of violation being given to any of the following: the property owner, the sign contractor or the business identified on the sign advertising copy. Attachment of a tag to the sign citing the nature of the violation shall constitute sufficient notice if none of the methods in this subsection are available. The following signs are subject to being impounded: 
(1)  A sign placed on private property without the owner's consent. 
(2)  A sign placed without a permit, except as exempted by section 3-4. 
(c)  Redemption. All impounded signs shall be stored and, upon proper identification thereof by the owner, may be redeemed upon the payment of a reasonable charge in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, which is incurred by the city for removal, transportation, storage, safeguarding, accounting and bookkeeping resulting from the impoundment. All signs that are not redeemed shall be subject to disposal in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed property after a 30-day holding period. 
(Code 1986, § 3-74; Code 2002, § 3-37) 
Sec. 3-38. - Discontinuance of prohibited signs. 
    Any nonconforming sign which is listed as a prohibited sign shall be removed or brought in conformance with this chapter according to the following schedule: Within six months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, any sign in these categories which is in existence on such effective date shall be altered in such a manner that its movement or illumination does not continue operating in a prohibited manner. 
(Code 1986, § 3-72; Code 2002, § 3-38) 
Sec. 3-39. - Discontinuance of nonconforming portable/temporary signs. 
    Any nonconforming sign erected or displayed more than 90 days prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which is defined as a portable or temporary sign under this chapter shall be removed forthwith. 
(Code 1986, § 3-73; Code 2002, § 3-39) 
Secs. 3-40-3-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 3-66. - Required; alteration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to display, erect, relocate or alter any sign without first filing an application in writing and obtaining a sign permit. 
(b)  When a sign permit has been issued, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the permit without prior approval of the chief code enforcement official. A written record of such approval shall be entered upon the original permit application and maintained in the files of the code enforcement office. 
(Code 1986, § 3-57; Code 2002, § 3-66) 
Sec. 3-67. - Application. 
    The application for a sign permit shall be made by the owner or a sign contractor licensed by the city. Such application shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the code enforcement office and shall be signed by the applicant. 
(Code 1986, § 3-58; Code 2002, § 3-67) 
Sec. 3-68. - Plans, specifications and other data required with application. 
    The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the following plans and other information: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner or person entitled to possession of the sign and the sign contractor or erector. 
(2)  The location by street address and legal description of the site of the proposed sign structure. 
(3)  Complete information as required on the application forms provided by the code enforcement office, including a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, caption to the proposed sign and such other data as is pertinent to the application. 
(4)  Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines, supports and footings and material to be used. 
(5)  Application and required information for such application for an electrical permit for all electric signs, if the person building the sign is to make the electrical connection. 
(6)  Wind stress calculations as per the design table for the construction of symmetrically loaded signs as per an attachment to the sign application. 
(7)  A statement of valuation. 
(Code 1986, § 3-61; Code 2002, § 3-68) 
Sec. 3-69. - Fees. 
(a)  A permit fee shall be paid to the city for each sign permit issued under this chapter; provided, however, that a fee shall not be charged for copy change when no change in the business is involved. The permit fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  The fees in subsection (a) of this section do not include electrical permit fees, which shall be in addition to the fees in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 3-62; Code 2002, § 3-69) 
Sec. 3-70. - Revocation. 
    If the chief code enforcement official finds that work under any sign permit issued is not in accordance with the information supplied in the permit application and/or is in violation of this chapter or any pertinent code or if he finds that there has been any misrepresentation in connection with the application for the permit, he shall notify the owner or sign contractor of such findings and that the violation must be corrected without delay. If such correction is not made, the code enforcement office shall revoke the permit and serve written notice by certified mail thereof upon the owner or sign contractor or shall post it upon the offending sign. No person shall proceed with any part of such work after the notice is received. Any violation of this chapter or other pertinent code provision is subject to the penalty in section 1-10 in addition to revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1986, § 3-59; Code 2002, § 3-70) 
Sec. 3-71. - Forfeiture of fees. 
    When any sign permit has been revoked under the terms of section 3-70, permit fees shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1986, § 3-60; Code 2002, § 3-71) 
Secs. 3-72-3-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIGN CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 3-96. - License; fee. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of erecting or hanging signs or painting or posting advertisements or bills in the city without having first procured a license therefor from the city clerk and having paid to the city clerk for such license an amount as described in the city fee schedule per annum or any fraction thereof. Such license shall expire on December 31 following the date of its issuance. The full annual fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule shall be paid, and no license shall be issued for less than the full annual fee. Insurance and bond in the amounts and under the conditions specified in section 3-98 shall also be required. 
(b)  One license will cover electrical and nonelectrical signs. 
(Code 1986, § 3-63; Code 2002, § 3-96) 
Sec. 3-97. - Electrical and neon sign hanger's license; fee. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of erecting or hanging signs that are equipped with electricity or neon or engage in altering, rebuilding, enlarging or repairing such signs in the city without having first procured a license therefor from the city clerk and having paid the city clerk for such license an amount as described in the city fee schedule per annum or any fraction thereof. The license shall expire on December 31 following the date of its issuance. The full annual fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule shall be paid, and no license shall be issued for less than the full annual fee. All service lines conveying electricity to signs shall be installed only by bonded and licensed electricians. 
(b)  The penalty for late license renewal shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. No license shall be issued for longer than one year. A license may be renewed upon application and payment of fees 30 days preceding or following December 31 of each year and not be subject to a late renewal penalty. No penalty for late renewal shall be charged to any holder of a license which expires while the holder is in military service, if an application for renewal is made within one year following his service discharge. 
(Code 1986, § 3-65; Code 2002, § 3-97) 
Sec. 3-98. - Bond; letter of credit; liability insurance. 
(a)  In addition to the license required by this division, any person applying therefor shall file with the city clerk, prior to the issuance of any license and annually on January 1 thereafter, a good and sufficient bond and a letter of credit to be approved by the city manager or designee, running to the city, in the penal sum of in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. The bond and letter of credit shall be conditioned to indemnify, save and keep harmless the city from all costs, damages or expenses of any kind whatsoever which may be suffered by the city or any of the inhabitants thereof because of negligence on the part of such person in the hanging, erection or maintenance of such signs or any other act or omission in the conduct of such business. The bond and letter of credit shall be further conditioned upon the faithful and prompt observance of all the conditions and regulations of this chapter and all other sections of this Code and provisions of any other city codes relative thereto. When the number of permits issued to any person shall cover more than 50 signs, panels or structures of 25 feet in length or less, the penal sum of such bond shall be increased in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each additional 40 of such panels, signs or structures or fraction thereof for which permits are issued to such person. Before any license shall be issued to erect, hang or paint signs under this chapter, every person obtaining such license shall file with the city clerk an insurance policy for an indemnity fund as provided in this section. 
(b)  The insurance policy shall be issued by an insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in the state and shall provide public liability insurance coverage for every operation required in the erecting, hanging or painting of signs for the injury or death of any one person in any one accident, for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident and for property damage in any one accident. Such insurance coverage shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The insurance policy shall also provide that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation has been given to the city clerk, and such policy shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city for any changes therein. 
(d)  The insurance policy is to be approved by the city manager or designee and endorsed thereon. It shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(e)  The insurance policy shall be made for the use, benefit and protection of the city and for the use, benefit and protection of any person who may suffer injury either to his person or property because of any accident or omission or negligence of any person engaged in erecting, hanging or painting signs. Such policy, if approved by the chief code enforcement official, shall remain in full force and effect during the life of any license issued. If, after the approval of such policy and after the issuance of the license, such policy is allowed to lapse or is not renewed by the payment of premiums, the chief code enforcement official may cancel any license issued under this chapter, after notice to the licensee and after an opportunity to be heard. The cancellation of any policy shall in no way affect or terminate any liability arising prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(Code 1986, § 3-66; Code 2002, § 3-98) 
Sec. 3-99. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
    The chief code enforcement official shall have the right to revoke or suspend the license of any sign contractor for a violation of any of the city codes relating to signs. 
(Code 1986, § 3-68; Code 2002, § 3-99) 
Sec. 3-100. - Transfer of license to obtain permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person holding a license issued under this division to transfer the license or allow the use of the license, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any of the sign work specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-70; Code 2002, § 3-100) 
Secs. 3-101-3-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-126. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Unless specifically permitted in another section of this chapter, no sign shall be erected on or over the public right-of-way. Merchandise such as tires, produce, automotive vehicles and any other articles for display or sale shall not be located in any manner in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Where a parcel is occupied by a use or structure which does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which the parcel is located, no sign shall be erected on the parcel until the use is changed to become conforming. 
(c)  The use of boulevards, streets, ways, terraces, drives and lanes, also park roads or parks, under the control of the city, for any political, social, civic or charitable nonaccessory advertising purpose within full view of those traveling on a public road is prohibited. However, the government use of these areas to display public information, the placement of decorations or the placement of neighborhood identification signs as authorized by section 3-217 shall not be included in this restriction. 
(d)  The painting, scattering, posting or spreading in any manner along any public right-of-way or public property of signs, bills, wastepaper, paper, cloth or other materials used in advertising is prohibited. This prohibition shall include the posting of such materials on any utility pole or device. 
(e)  No person shall permit the manufacturing, installing, erecting or displaying of any obscene matter. 
(f)  A-frame, sandwich signs and swinger signs are prohibited. 
(g)  The erection, construction or maintenance of any sign which will obstruct any fire escape, stairway or standpipe, be attached to or supported by a fire escape or stairway interfere with human exit through any emergency opening; obstruct the exterior door or required exit of any building or obstruct any legally required light or ventilation is prohibited. 
(h)  No sign shall occupy any parking space required under the minimum standards of the zoning code, unless additional parking is provided. 
(Code 1986, § 3-79(a); Code 2002, § 3-126) 
Sec. 3-127. - Signs on vehicles. 
(a)  Signs shall be permitted to be painted or directly attached to a commercial vehicle, provided the signs identify the business for which the vehicle is operated. 
(b)  No trailer or vehicle larger than a 11/2-ton capacity van or pickup truck shall be parked on the street side of a business property for purposes other than immediate loading or unloading. 
(c)  Use of a message painted or affixed to trucks or semitrailers as an advertising device shall be prohibited, unless such vehicles are parked in a defined storage area as permitted by the zoning code. 
(d)  No portable, A-frame, sandwich, swinger or similar sign shall be mounted on a vehicle for the purpose of advertising. 
(Code 1986, § 3-79(b); Code 2002, § 3-127) 
Sec. 3-128. - Alterations. 
    A sign shall not be enlarged or relocated except in conformity to the provisions of this section for new signs, nor until a proper permit has been secured. The changing of movable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or for the repainting or reposting of display matter, shall not be deemed an alteration, provided the conditions of the original approval and the requirements of this section are not violated. 
(Code 2002, § 3-128) 
Sec. 3-129. - Maintenance of sign vicinity. 
    The owner of any property on which a sign is located and those responsible for maintenance of the sign shall be equally responsible for the conditions of the area in the vicinity of the sign and shall be required to keep this area clean, sanitary and free from noxious or offensive substances, rubbish and flammable waste materials. 
(Code 1986, § 3-79(c)(4); Code 2002, § 3-129) 
Secs. 3-130-3-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLASHING, MOVING AND SOUND EMITTING SIGNS 

Sec. 3-156. - Review by city departments. 
(a)  The city staff shall review all applications for the placement of flashing, rotating and movable signs, including time-temperature and moving message signs in authorized zoning districts, to protect against traffic hazards, subject to the standards listed in section 3-158. 
(b)  The city staff shall review any complaint by the public or a public official in reference to a possible traffic hazard caused by any sign. Where a hazard is determined to exist, the chief code enforcement official shall request that the sign be removed or altered. 
(Code 1986, § 3-81; Code 2002, § 3-156) 
Sec. 3-157. - Moving and sound emitting signs. 
(a)  No sign or part of a sign shall move or be permitted to move, with the exception of movable and flashing signs as permitted in this chapter. 
(b)  No sign shall emit any sound which is designed to attract attention. 
(Code 1986, § 3-80; Code 2002, § 3-157) 
Sec. 3-158. - Flashing signs. 
(a)  No strobe or high intensity flashing lights shall be permitted except where required on structures for aircraft warning lights. 
(b)  No flashing signs or lights on a sign used in a flashing manner shall be permitted unless approved by the city staff. The city staff shall use the following criteria: 
(1)  The sign shall not be located within 150 feet of a residential district if such lighting can be seen from the residential district. 
(2)  If the sign is an attached sign, it shall have a setback sufficient to avoid any traffic conflicts. 
(3)  If the sign is a freestanding sign, it must be set back from the street a distance adequate to avoid traffic conflicts, and lights of a color or combination of colors shall be used which will not be confused with emergency or service vehicles and equipment. 
(c)  The color of all flashing signs or lights on a sign used in a flashing manner shall be approved by the city staff. 
(Code 1986, § 3-82; Code 2002, § 3-158) 
Secs. 3-159-3-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ACCESSORY SIGNS 

Sec. 3-186. - Applicability of division. 
    The standards in this division shall apply to the location or construction of specific accessory sign types where permitted in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-82; Code 2002, § 3-186) 
Sec. 3-187. - Canopy, marquee, parapet wall, projecting, combination, wall and awning signs. 
(a)  Standards. The standards in this section shall apply to canopy signs, marquee signs, parapet wall signs, projecting signs, combination signs, wall signs and awning (backlit) signs. 
(b)  Size. All signs mentioned in subsection (a) of this section and located in commercial zoning districts shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
(c)  Clearance. The clearance above ground for these signs shall be not less than nine feet or 14 feet if there will be vehicular access below them. Where there is no pedestrian access below a wall sign, there shall be no clearance requirement. 
(d)  Location. The location of such signs shall be as follows: 
(1)  Regardless of building setback requirements, a canopy, marquee, parapet wall, projecting or combination sign may project from the supporting surface to a distance not to exceed ten feet or to within two feet of the nearest property line, whichever is the least. No such sign shall extend between the ground surface and the bottom level of the canopy or marquee to which the sign is attached, except as provided for identification nameplates in this chapter. 
(2)  A wall sign may extend from the wall as follows: 
a.  Where the bottom of the sign is less than 14 feet above the level of the ground below it, the sign may extend 12 inches from the wall. 
b.  Where the bottom of the sign is greater than 14 feet above the level of the ground below it, the sign may extend 24 inches from the wall. 
c.  No sign shall be wider than the surface to which it is affixed, except for a fascia sign. 
(e)  Memorial signs; cornerstones. A memorial sign on a tablet, the name of a building and the date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material, shall be exempt from this chapter. 
(f)  Accessory signs within a structure. There shall be no restrictions on placement of signs within a structure where they cannot be viewed from any point outside the structure; for example, in a shopping center mall. However, all signs so constructed shall require appropriate building and electrical permits. 
(Code 1986, § 3-83; Code 2002, § 3-187) 
Sec. 3-188. - Agricultural, residential and mobile/manufactured home zoning districts. 
(a)  Single- to three-family uses. No accessory sign shall be permitted for single-family through three-family uses, except for the temporary signs authorized in division 5 of this article. 
(b)  Multiple-family uses. A multiple-family residential use shall be permitted either one ground sign or one attached sign as follows: 
(1)  Five to 12 units. One sign, not to exceed eight square feet. 
(2)  Thirteen to 29 units. One sign, not to exceed 20 square feet. 
(3)  Thirty or more units. One sign per street frontage. The permitted size shall be one square foot of display surface area for each three lineal feet of frontage. However, where street frontage is not available, the sign footage will be based upon the number of units, up to a maximum of 100 square feet. 
(c)  Residential developments. A subdivision or residential development of five acres or larger shall be permitted one ground sign per entry street. The sign shall be nonilluminated, shall not exceed 18 square feet in area and six feet in height and shall contain only the name of the subdivision or the street. 
(d)  Nonresidential uses. The following standards shall apply to nonresidential permitted uses and uses permitted on review and special exception uses in agricultural, residential and mobile home zoning districts. They shall also apply to manufactured home parks and subdivisions permitted under R-1 and R-2 district regulations of the zoning code: 
(1)  Number. One sign shall be permitted per street frontage. 
(2)  Type. The sign shall be a ground sign or an attached sign. 
(3)  Size. One square foot of display surface area shall be permitted for every three lineal feet of frontage, up to a maximum of 100 square feet. 
(4)  Illumination. Indirect lighting or interior lighting behind a translucent panel shall be permitted. No flashing or intermittent lighting shall be permitted in these districts. 
(e)  Maximum height. The maximum height of the sign shall be as follows: 
(1)  Ground sign. For a ground sign, the maximum height shall be 20 feet above grade level. 
(2)  Attached sign. The maximum height of an attached sign shall not exceed the height of the surface to which it is attached. 
(f)  Setback. All permitted freestanding signs shall observe sight triangles of 30 feet from all street curblines and driveways. 
(g)  Permit requirements. In these zoning districts, nonilluminated signs and/or signs not affected by building code structural requirements may be installed by other than a licensed sign contractor, provided a permit is issued after application and review for conformance to all applicable regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 3-84; Code 2002, § 3-188) 
Sec. 3-189. - C-1 and C-2 Zoning districts. 
(a)  Single-family through three-family uses. No accessory sign shall be permitted for single-family through three-family uses in C-1 and C-2 zoning districts, except for the temporary signs authorized in division 5 of this article. 
(b)  Multiple-family uses. Signs for permitted multiple-family residential uses shall be subject to the standards for residential districts in section 3-188. 
(c)  Permitted signs. In the C-1 and C-2 districts permitted signs are as follows: 
(1)  Number. One ground sign location with the attached sign is permitted per street frontage; however, the attached sign can be split into two signs, but cannot exceed the maximum square footage. For multiple occupants, one attached sign shall be permitted for each occupant, provided the total display surface area of all signs does not exceed the maximum permitted total. 
(2)  Size. The size of the signs shall be as follows: 
a.  Ground sign. One square foot of display surface area is permitted for each two lineal feet of frontage, not to exceed 150 square feet. 
b.  Attached signs. One square foot of display surface area for each two lineal feet of building width is permitted, not to exceed a total of 150 square feet. An attached sign can be two signs, but the total of both signs cannot exceed the maximum square footage. 
(3)  Maximum height. The maximum height shall be as follows: 
a.  Ground sign. For a ground sign, the maximum height shall be 20 feet above grade level. 
b.  Attached sign. For an attached sign, the maximum height shall be as follows: 
1.  For a wall sign, the height shall not exceed the height of the structure to which it is attached. 
2.  For all other signs, the height shall not exceed six feet above the structure to which it is attached. 
(4)  Illumination. Indirect lighting or interior lighting is permitted behind a translucent panel. No flashing or intermittent light shall be permitted in these districts. 
(5)  Sight triangles. All permitted freestanding signs shall observe sight triangles of 30 feet from all street curbs or driveways. 
(6)  Permit requirements. In these zoning districts, nonilluminated signs and/or signs not affected by building code structural requirements may be installed by other than a licensed sign contractor, provided a permit is issued after application and review for conformance to all applicable regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 3-85; Code 2002, § 3-189) 
Sec. 3-190. - Other commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(a)  Permitted residential uses. Signs for permitted multiple-family residential uses shall be subject to the standards for residential districts in section 3-188. 
(b)  Number. The number of signs permitted shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  One freestanding sign location per street frontage is permitted for a single business or a group of businesses which share common access and parking facilities, provided that an additional sign location shall be permitted for each 150 lineal feet of frontage which is not included in calculations to permit a larger sign as provided in subsection (d) of this section and so long as such sign locations are a minimum of 150 feet apart; plus 
(2)  One roof sign is permitted for any structure with three stories or more; plus 
(3)  Attached signs shall be permitted for each occupant having street frontage, provided the total display surface area of all such signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted total; 
(4)  One identification nameplate shall be permitted for each business or professional occupancy of a building without direct exterior access, with a maximum size of four square feet per nameplate, and nonflashing illumination is permitted; 
(5)  There shall be no restriction on signs placed inside a display window. 
(c)  Size standards for attached signs. The following standards shall be used to permit larger sign area for attached signs in proportion to increased setback and building width: 
PERMITTED SIGN AREA FOR ATTACHED SIGNS (SQUARE FEET) 
Building Setback (feet) Building Width (feet) 0- 
24.99 25- 
39.99 40- 
59.99 60 or 
more Less than 25 50 60 70 75 25-35.99 85 105 115 125 36-45.99 120 145 160 170 46-55.99 155 190 205 220 56-65.99 190 230 250 270 66-75.99 225 270 295 320 76-85.99 260 315 340 370 86-95.99 295 355 390 420 96-105.99 330 400 430 465 106-115.99 365 440 480 515 116-124.99 400 480 520 560 Over 125 435 525 570 600  
(d)  Size standards for freestanding signs. Size standards for freestanding signs shall be as follows: 
(1)  The display surface area shall be permitted on the basis of two square feet of sign for each one lineal foot of frontage, up to the following maximum size: 
a.  For C-5, CP and C-3 districts, 400 square feet. 
b.  For the I-1 district, 400 square feet. 
c.  For I-2 and I-3 districts, 700 square feet. 
d.  For the C-4 district, 150 square feet. 
(2)  Any frontage above 400 feet utilized in calculations to permit an additional freestanding sign location under subsection (b)(1) of this section shall not be included in calculations to permit a larger sign. 
(3)  Where an individual or aggregate use abuts Interstate Highway 40 and U.S. 117/270 and the lineal foot frontage of the use is less than 100 feet, a freestanding sign location may have 200 feet of display surface for better identification of the use from the highway, provided that all other regulations of this chapter shall apply. A maximum sign height for this highway district shall be 40 feet. This height shall apply when a sign is located within one-half mile of the rights-of-way of the highways. 
(4)  Wall and canopy signs will be allowed in the C-4 central business district. Wall signs will be permitted across property lines; however, all signs within this district shall have a setback requirement of two feet from existing curbs. There shall be a minimum clearance of eight feet from ground level to the bottom of the sign. Sign heights shall be limited to 20 feet maximum from ground level to the top of the sign. Any property owner within the C-4 central business district who can comply with the sign setback line will be permitted pole and ground signs if in compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  Height. The height of signs shall be as follows: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. For a freestanding sign there shall be a minimum clearance of 14 feet above any driveway, service drive or trafficway and as follows: 
a.  The maximum height shall be 20 feet above grade level, except as provided in subsection (e)(1)b of this section. 
b.  For a use abutting Interstate Highway 40 or U.S. 177/270, the maximum height shall be 40 feet above grade level on the thoroughfare frontage to provide better identification of the use from thoroughfares, subject to all other regulations of this chapter. 
(2)  Attached signs. The maximum height for attached signs shall be as follows: 
a.  For a wall sign, the height shall not exceed the height of the surface to which it is attached. 
b.  For a roof sign, the maximum height shall not exceed the allowed total height of the particular zoning district. 
c.  For all others, the height shall not exceed six feet above the structure to which it is attached. 
(f)  Illumination. Illumination of signs shall be in conformance with the following: 
(1)  Direct or indirect lighting is permitted. 
(2)  Flashing signs shall be permitted subject to all regulations of this chapter. 
(g)  Sight triangle. All permitted freestanding signs shall observe a sight triangle of 30 feet from all street curblines and driveways. 
(h)  Permit requirements. In these zoning districts, nonilluminated signs and/or signs not affected by building code structural requirements may be installed by other than a licensed sign contractor, provided a permit is issued after application and review for conformance to all applicable regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 3-86; Code 2002, § 3-190) 
Sec. 3-191. - Electronic reader board signs. 
(a)  The city may permit an electronically changeable message board as an allowed use in commercially zoned districts. Such message signs must conform to the applicable sign codes and further shall be subject to the following minimum standards and requirements: 
(1)  The permit shall be accompanied by the following information: 
a.  All of the information required for a sign permit; 
b.  Identification of all interstate highways or other thoroughfares from which the sign will be visible; 
c.  Number of nearest milepost on interstate highway from which the sign will be visible or distance and/or direction from the nearest intersection on another thoroughfare; 
d.  The location of the proposed sign on a U.S. Geological Survey, 1:24,000 scale, topographic map and the location of all existing electronically changeable message boards within one-quarter mile of the proposed location; 
e.  A profile of the line through the center of the proposed sign at an angle of zero to 75 degrees to the centerline of each thoroughfare from which the sign will be visible; 
f.  A photograph not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, taken of the proposed location(s) of the sign from each thoroughfare from which the sign will be visible. The proposed location of the sign shall be clearly marked on each photograph; and 
(2)  LED signs are allowed subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Brightness controls. The sign shall be equipped with photosensitive equipment which automatically adjusts the brightness and contrast of the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor illumination; 
b.  Location. The sign shall be erected only by attachment to the primary sign, as the primary sign or to the building facade; 
c.  Content. The sign is limited to products, goods, services or facilities sold, produced or furnished on the premises on which the sign is located, but may include community service messages; 
d.  Movement restriction. Nonintervalled, flashing or blinking characters are prohibited; and 
e.  Number. One LED sign per establishment, lot, or development is permitted. 
(Code 2002, § 3-191; Ord. No. 2169NS, § 2, 7-6-2004) 
Secs. 3-192-3-216. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONACCESSORY SIGNS 

Sec. 3-217. - Neighborhood identification signs on public rights-of-way. 
    The chief code enforcement official may issue a permit to erect a nonaccessory directional or informational sign on the public right-of-way when it is not considered a traffic hazard and if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  If 60 percent of the property owners or the neighborhood association within the boundaries of any delineated area request signs. 
(2)  The sign must be used for public purposes such as historical preservation markers, urban conservation markers and neighborhood watch signs. 
(3)  The sign cannot interfere with the sight triangle. 
(4)  A map must be submitted to the chief code enforcement official showing the location of all proposed signs. 
(5)  A sketch of each type of sign proposed must be submitted showing height, length, width and square feet of the display surface. 
(6)  Letters from major utility companies shall be submitted indicating approval or disapproval to the location of the proposed sign. 
(7)  The sign may not exceed four square feet in display area. 
(Code 1986, § 3-88; Code 2002, § 3-217) 
Secs. 3-218-3-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PORTABLE SIGNS 

Sec. 3-246. - Permitted uses and time limits. 
    In addition to being permitted and regulated in specified zoning districts as ground signs, portable signs shall be permitted as ground signs under the conditions in this division and in no case to exceed 30 days per calendar year. 
(Code 1986, § 3-89; Code 2002, § 3-246) 
Sec. 3-247. - Public works construction disrupting access to businesses. 
    Where street, highway or other public works construction disrupts normal access to a business, the director of community development or designated agent may authorize a portable sign to be located on private property (and in some instances, public property), to provide directions to the business, where he has determined that the location will not constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public. This sign shall be permitted only as long as the construction disrupts access or until ordered to be moved by the director or agent, whichever shall occur first. 
(Code 1986, § 3-89(1); Code 2002, § 3-247) 
Sec. 3-248. - Special events. 
    When a spectator event or special entertainment event is proposed, one portable sign shall be permitted in place of an authorized permanent sign for a period not to exceed 30 days per event, provided that no more than one sign per location at a time shall be permitted, subject to all regulations for accessory signs in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-89(2); Code 2002, § 3-248) 
Sec. 3-249. - Accessory signs. 
    Where no more than one ground sign or freestanding sign is located upon a parcel and additional sign display surface in excess of 32 square feet is available for signing pursuant to this chapter, one portable sign shall be permitted as an accessory use. Permits may be issued for up to 30 days per year. There shall be a minimum of a 60-day waiting period between renewals. 
(Code 1986, § 3-89(3); Code 2002, § 3-249) 
Sec. 3-250. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  Anchoring required. For safety purposes, all portable signs shall be secured by one of the following types of anchors: 
(1)  If placed upon a concrete slab, concrete anchors at least one-quarter inch in diameter shall be placed to a minimum depth of two inches to secure each corner ground support. 
(2)  If placed upon an earthen base, a metal auger anchor at least three-eighths inch in diameter, with an expanded diameter of three inches, shall be placed to a minimum depth of 15 inches to secure each corner ground support. 
(3)  If placed upon an asphalt base, a metal stake at least three-eighths inches in diameter shall be placed to a minimum depth of 18 inches to secure each corner ground support. 
(b)  Lighting and electric wiring. Lighting and electric wiring shall be subject to the National Electrical Code and the zoning district standards in which the sign is located. In addition, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Any such sign which is located for a period in excess of 30 days shall be provided with a permanent underground wiring source. 
(2)  A temporary portable sign may be served by a code-approved 110-volt outlet with a three-wire outdoor cord of not less than 16-gauge. No such cord shall exceed 25 feet in length, and it shall not be placed on or across a sidewalk, driveway or parking space. 
(3)  Where no more than one ground sign is located upon a parcel and additional sign display surface in excess of 32 square feet is available for signing pursuant to this chapter, one portable sign shall be permitted as an accessory use. Permits may be issued for up to 90 days. 
(Code 1986, § 3-89(4); Code 2002, § 3-250) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Intoxicating liquors generally, 37 O.S. § 8 et seq.; municipal occupational taxes, 37 O.S. § 554.1; intoxicated person in public place, 43A O.S. § 3-428. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    It is the intent of the city that definitions of terms used in this chapter be in conformity with those provided by state law. Subject to that limitation, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means and includes hydrated oxide of ethyl, ethyl alcohol, ethanol or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. It does not include wood alcohol or alcohol that has been denatured or produced as denatured in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, beer and wine, as those terms are defined in this section, and also includes every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by human beings. 
    Beer means any beverage containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight and obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley or other grain, malt or similar products. Beer may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products. The term "beer" includes, among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and other malt or brewed liquors, but does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Bottle club means any establishment in a county which has not authorized the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink, which is required to be licensed to keep, mix and serve alcoholic beverages belonging to club members on club premises. 
    Brewer means any person who produces beer in this state. 
    Class B wholesaler means and includes any person doing any such acts or carrying on any such business that would require such person to obtain a class B wholesaler's license. 
    Distiller means any person who produces spirits from any source or substance, or any person who brews or makes mash, wort or wash, fit for distillation or for the production of spirits except a person making or using such material in the authorized production of wine or beer, or the production of vinegar by fermentation, or any person who by any process separates alcoholic spirits from any fermented substance, or any person who, making or keeping mash, wort or wash, has also in his possession or use a still. 
    Manufacturer means a brewer, distiller, winemaker, rectifier or bottler of any alcoholic beverage. 
    Manufacturer's agent means a salaried or commissioned salesperson who sells to a wholesaler or a class B wholesaler only. 
    Mixed beverages means one or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed beverage, caterer or special event license. 
    Occupation, as used in connection with an occupation tax, means the site occupied as the place of business of the manufacturer, wholesaler, class B wholesaler and retailer, mixed beverage licensee, bottle club, caterer and special event licensee. 
    Rectifier means any person who rectifies, purifies or refines spirits or wine by any process other than by original and continuous distillation or original and continuous processing, from mash, wort, wash or other substance, through continuous closed vessels and pipes, until the production thereof is complete, and any person who, without rectifying, purifying or refining spirits, shall by mixing, except for immediate consumption on the premises where mixed, such spirits, wine or other liquor with any material, manufactures any spurious, imitation or compound liquors for sale, under the name of whiskey, brandy, rum, gin, wine, spirits, cordials or any other name. 
    Retailer means the holder of a package store license. 
    State winemaker means a business premises in the state licensed pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act wherein wine is produced by the licensee who must be a resident of the state. The wine product fermented in the licensed premises shall be of grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables imported into this state and processed in this state or shall be of grapes, berries and other fruits and vegetables grown in the state. 
    Wholesaler means and includes any person doing any such acts or carrying on any such business that would require such person to obtain a wholesaler's license pursuant to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. 
    Wine means and includes any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume at 60 degrees Fahrenheit obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits, vegetables, honey, milk or other products containing sugar, whether or not other ingredients are added, and includes vermouth and sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Winemaker means any person who produces wine. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1; Code 2002, § 4-1; Ord. No. 2529NS, § 1, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 2640NS, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference- Definitions, 37 O.S. § 506; issuance of licenses and permits, 37 O.S. §§ 508, 509. 
Sec. 4-2. - Statutes adopted. 
    The provisions of 37 O.S. § 8 et seq. are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth, and such shall apply in this city. 
(Code 2002, § 4-2) 
Sec. 4-3. - State license. 
    No person shall sell intoxicating beverages or engage in any activity or perform any transaction or act whatsoever relating to intoxicating beverages for which a state license is required, without first having in his possession a current and valid state license therefor. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2; Code 2002, § 4-3; Ord. No. 2640NS, § 3, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference- Kinds of licenses and permits, 37 O.S. § 518. 
Sec. 4-4. - City license; occupation tax levied. 
(a)  No retailer, mixed beverage, beer and wine caterer or special event licensee; bottle club; manufacturer; wholesaler; or class B wholesaler whose principal place of business is in the city shall do business in the city until the occupation tax levied by this article has been paid in full to the city clerk and a receipt or license has been issued therefor by the city clerk. The amount of occupation tax for each type of license is provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  The fees provided in the city fee schedule for a brewer's license and for a class B wholesaler's license shall be reduced by 75 percent if the applicant therefor is also the holder of a license to manufacture or wholesale any nonintoxicating malt beverages as provided for in Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes. 
(Code 1986, § 4-3; Code 2002, § 4-4; Ord. No. 2529NS, § 2, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 2640NS, § 4, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference- Municipal occupational taxes, 37 O.S. § 518. 
Sec. 4-5. - Occupation tax schedules; expiration date of licenses. 
(a)  There is levied an annual occupation tax for the privilege of operating as a retailer; mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer or special event licensee; bottle club; manufacturer; wholesaler; or class B wholesaler, whose principal place of business is located in the city in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  The license fee for those service organizations which are exempt under section 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code for mixed beverage or bottle club licenses shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per year. 
(c)  All licenses, except as otherwise provided, shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance unless revoked or surrendered, provided that a special event license shall be valid for a period not to exceed ten consecutive days from the first day the license is valid, the date to be specified on the license. 
(d)  If the county authorizes the sale of alcoholic beverages by the individual drink for on-premises consumption, the holder of a license, issued by the state alcoholic beverage laws enforcement commission, for a bottle club, may exchange the bottle club license for a mixed beverage license and operate the licensed premises as a mixed beverage establishment subject to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. There shall be no additional fee for such exchange, and the mixed beverage license issued shall expire one year from the date of issuance of the original bottle club license. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4; Code 2002, § 4-5; Ord. No. 2640NS, § 5, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference- License fees generally, 37 O.S. § 518. 
Sec. 4-6. - Annual report of occupation taxes to state. 
    The city clerk shall make and transmit to the state alcoholic beverage control board an annual report, covering the fiscal year, showing the number and class of licenses upon which occupation taxes were levied and the amount of money collected from such taxes. 
(Code 1986, § 4-11; Code 2002, § 4-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 554.1. 
Sec. 4-7. - Possession by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in the possession of any intoxicating beverage while such person is upon any public street, road or highway or in any public building or place. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine. If the person is 18 or above, he may also be punished by imprisonment. The applicable fine and period of imprisonment are as provided in the city fine schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 4-7; Code 2002, § 4-7; Ord. No. 2529NS, § 3, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 2640NS, § 6, 9-4-2018) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, penalties, 21 O.S. §§ 1215, 1216. 
Sec. 4-8. - Sale to or employment of minors; presence of minors in package store; misrepresentation of age by minors. 
(a)  No holder of any state license shall employ any person under the age of 21 years of age in the selling or handling of alcoholic beverages within the city, except as provided in 37 O.S. § 537(B)(2). 
(b)  No person shall knowingly sell, furnish or give any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(c)  No package store licensee shall permit any person under 21 years of age to enter into, remain within or loiter about the premises of such store. 
(d)  No person under the age of 21 years shall misrepresent his age in writing or by presenting false documentation of age for the purpose of inducing any person to sell him alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1986, § 4-8; Code 2002, § 4-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. §§ 537(A)(1), (B)(2), (C)(7), 538(E). 
Sec. 4-9. - Posting of signs by business. 
(a)  Every person who sells alcoholic beverages at retail shall post conspicuously and keep so posted at the place of business a sign stating the following: 
"IT'S THE LAW. WE DO NOT SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE." 
(b)  Any person who owns, operates or manages a place of business which sells beer, or alcohol, as defined in section 4-1, for off-premises consumption shall conspicuously post at the place of display of such beer or alcohol and at the place of sale (cash register) a sign described as follows: The word "WARNING:" centered and in capital letters at least three inches in height will be at the top of the notice, with the following language in capital letters of at least three-fourths inch in height: 
"PURCHASING ALCOHOL OR BEER AND SUPPLYING IT TO A PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS A FELONY UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF OKLAHOMA, PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF NOT LESS THAN $2,500.00 NOR MORE THAN $5,000.00, OR IMPRISONMENT FOR UP TO FIVE YEARS, OR BOTH SUCH FINE AND IMPRISONMENT." 
(c)  Failure to post a sign as required in subsection (b) of this section shall be an offense punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 4-8.1; Code 2002, § 4-9; Ord. No. 2640NS, § 7, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. 4-10. - Sale or possession of untaxed alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No person shall sell any alcoholic beverage upon which the state excise tax is delinquent or unpaid. 
(b)  No person shall have in his possession more than one liter of an alcoholic beverage upon which the state excise tax is delinquent or unpaid. 
(Code 1986, § 4-9; Code 2002, § 4-10) 
State Law reference- Possession of more than one liter of beverages upon which the tax is unpaid, 37 O.S. § 549; excise tax generally, 37 O.S. § 553 et seq. 
Sec. 4-11. - Compliance with zoning code. 
    The city clerk is authorized to issue a certificate certifying that the city zoning code would not be violated by the locating of a retail liquor store, wholesale liquor store, warehouse or distillery on certain premises on which such business is located or is proposed to be located, if such zoning code would not, in fact, be violated by such location. 
(Code 1986, § 4-10; Code 2002, § 4-11) 
Sec. 4-12. - Hours of sale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any place licensed to sell alcoholic beverages to sell alcoholic beverages between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2640NS, § 9, 9-4-2018) 
Secs. 4-13-4-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2640NS, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 2018, repealed Art. II, §§ 4-42-4-49, which pertained to nonintoxicating beverages and derived from Code 1986, §§ 4-72-4-79; Code 2002, §§ 4-42-4-49; Ord. No. 1999NS, § 1, adopted Mar. 5, 2001; and Ord. No. 2529NS, § 5, adopted Feb. 18, 2014. 

Secs. 4-42-4-49. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals, 4 O.S.; municipal regulation of animals, 11 O.S. § 22-115; nuisances, 11 O.S. § 22-121, 50 O.S.; injuries to animals, 21 O.S. § 1681 et seq.; rabies, 63 O.S. § 1-508. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Violations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who shall violate any section of this chapter, either by doing that which is prohibited or by failing or refusing to do that which is commanded, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1; Code 2002, § 5-1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Cruelty. 
(a)  All animals kept within the city limits shall be housed, watered, fed and protected from the weather in such a manner as not to endanger any animal's life or well-being. 
(b)  No person shall willfully or maliciously: 
(1)  Torture, cruelly beat, injure, maim, mutilate, overdrive, overload, unjustly destroy, kill or instigate, engage in or in any way further any act of cruelty to any animal or any act tending to produce such cruelty belonging to himself or to another. 
(2)  Deprive any animal of food, drink, shelter or expose it to inclement weather for more than four hours at a time. 
(3)  Unjustly administer any poison or noxious drug or substance to any animal. 
(4)  Unjustly expose any drug or substance with the intent the drug or substance shall be taken by an animal, whether such animal is the property of that owner or another person. 
(5)  Cause any other person to do any of the acts listed in this subsection. 
(c)  No animal shall be confined within or on a motor vehicle under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal, including but not limited to dangerous temperature or lack of food or water. 
(d)  No person shall abandon or cause to be abandoned any animal within the city limits. 
(e)  Any act tending to produce such cruelty shall be punished by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding 60 days or by fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule or by both such imprisonment and fine. 
(f)  If the condition of the animal is not improved to the satisfaction of the animal control officer, another citation may be issued. 
(g)  The owner and keeper of any animal shall provide food, water, shelter and medical attention to any animal, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Sufficient, wholesome food that is nutritious for the species. 
(2)  Fresh, potable drinking water. 
(3)  Medical attention to relieve such animal from suffering. 
(4)  Shelter to allow the animal to remain dry and protected from the elements. Such shelter shall be fully enclosed on three sides and roofed. The shelter shall be small enough to retain the animal's body heat and large enough to allow the animal to stand and turn comfortably. The structure shall be structurally sound and in good repair. 
(h)  Any animal kept on a chain or rope shall be placed so that it cannot become entangled with the restraints of other animals or with any other objects. The chain or rope shall be of sufficient length and a minimum of ten feet to allow the animal complete access to food, water and shelter at all times. The chain shall be attached in a manner, such as an acceptable collar, so as not to cause injury or discomfort to the animal. No chain, rope, wire or bandanna shall be used as a collar. 
(i)  Any animal control officer finding an animal maltreated or abused may remove the animal or give the owner or person causing maltreatment 72 hours to remedy the violation. If, in the opinion of the animal control officer, the life or welfare of the animal is in immediate danger, he may take charge of the animal and place the animal in the care of a veterinarian at the owner's expense or place such animal in the animal shelter. The animal shall be maintained there until such time as the problem can be rectified and all fines, court costs and charges for animal care are paid in full. The decision as to whether the animal shall be released back to the person causing maltreatment will then be made by the presiding judge upon recommendations of the animal control officer. 
(Code 1986, § 5-12; Code 2002, § 5-2; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 1, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference- Disposal of animals held in shelter, 4 O.S. § 501 et seq.; killing of dogs unlawfully at large, 11 O.S. § 22-115; cruelty to animals, 21 O.S. § 1685. 
Sec. 5-3. - Vicious animals. 
(a)  No persons shall own or harbor any vicious animal within the city, unless the same is kept upon private premises of such person and securely locked within a sufficient enclosure to prevent any possible means of escape. For a secure enclosure to be sufficient, it must be constructed with four sides, a top, a bottom and a locked gate of sufficient materials, not including soil, to prevent any possible means of escape. Any vicious animal running at large on the streets or alleys, or other public ways, of the city may be immediately removed and impounded, or terminated when deemed necessary by the animal control officer to protect public safety when the situation warrants, regardless of whether or not such animal has a collar and tag or muzzle. Any leash, tether, chain, rope or other device used to control a vicious animal when an animal is taken off personal property shall not relieve the owner of responsibility of maintaining control of the animal. Other officers of the law may likewise, when deemed necessary to protect the public safety, remove, impound or terminate a vicious animal when the situation warrants. 
(b)  A vicious animal or a dangerous animal is defined as any animal that: 
(1)  Because of its physical nature, is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to human beings and would constitute a danger to human life or property; 
(2)  Has behaved in such a manner that the owner knows or should reasonably know that the animal has tendencies to attack or to bite human beings or other animals; 
(3)  Commits an unprovoked attack on a person or animal on private or public property; or 
(4)  Threatens to attack or terrorizes a person in such a manner that personal safety is in jeopardy and when, in the opinion of the animal control officer or other officer of the law, such animal poses a personal or public threat following a complaint filed by the affected person with the city animal control division or police department. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to limit or restrict the language in section 5-6 dealing with wild or exotic animals. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to investigate any proper claim that an animal is vicious within the meaning of this chapter. Should the investigating official determine that a vicious animal poses an immediate threat to the public health or safety, he may immediately seize and impound the animal, or otherwise seek an order from the court that the animal be impounded. The animal control officer may also refer the matter to the city prosecutor for approval of a verified complaint requesting a finding by the court that the impounded animal is vicious and aid in the proceedings instituted in the municipal criminal court against any person for harboring a vicious animal. 
(e)  If the court shall fail to find, upon a preponderance of the evidence presented in an evidentiary hearing, that the animal seized and impounded is a vicious animal, then the court may order the animal control officer to return the animal to its owner. If such animal is found by the court to be a vicious animal, the court may order the animal control officer to euthanize the animal. 
(f)  At the option of the owner, but subject to the approval of the animal control officer, an animal impounded pursuant to this section may be impounded in a private kennel or veterinary clinic during the pendency of the vicious animal action. The operators of the facility shall then assume full liability for the confinement and maintenance of such animal and shall not release it without it first being authorized by the animal control officer or the court. All fees for such impoundment shall be the responsibility of the owner. In no event shall the city be liable for costs or fees charged by the private facility. Further, the court may assess the owner the cost of transporting the animal to the privately operated impoundment facility. 
(g)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus court costs. 
(Code 1986, § 5-5.1; Code 2002, § 5-3; Ord. No. 2043NS, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2385NS, §§ 1, 2, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2395NS, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 2502NS, § 1, 6-10-2013l; Ord. No. 2593NS, §§ 2-4, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, 4 O.S. § 44 et seq. 
Sec. 5-4. - Keeping bovines or equines. 
    No person shall keep or maintain any bovine or equine within the city and upon residentially zoned property or adjacent to a residentially zoned property, except upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The bovine or equine shall be kept in a suitable enclosure substantially erected. A ground area of not less than 1,500 square feet of unobstructed space for each animal shall be required on the site, lot or property. 
(2)  The lot and stables wherein a bovine or equine is kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and free from all filth at all times. Manure and feces shall be removed from the stable or shelter daily and the premises disinfected not less than once in each period of two weeks. Manure and feces shall be disposed of properly by either burying or removing it from the site on a weekly basis. No part of any stable or shelter for a bovine or equine shall be within 250 feet of any dwelling. 
(Code 1986, § 5-2; Code 2002, § 5-4) 
Sec. 5-5. - Keeping porcine, goats, sheep or hoofed animals other than bovines or equines. 
    No owner or person having custody or control thereof shall keep any porcine, goat, sheep or hoofed animal other than a bovine or equine upon any property or within any enclosure which is situated within the city, except as follows: 
(1)  The property is located within an agricultural zoning district. 
(2)  No goat, sheep or hoofed animal other than a bovine or equine shall be kept or maintained in other zoning districts of the city, unless a permit is first procured from the animal control officer in the amount provided by the city fee schedule. 
(3)  No porcine shall be kept or maintained in other zoning districts of the city unless a permit is first procured from the animal control officer in the fee amount provided by the city fee schedule. It is unlawful for any person to raise or keep any porcine within the city, except as may be otherwise provided in this section or other sections of this chapter. Asian potbellied porcine shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Each potbellied porcine shall be a pet that is to be kept for personal enjoyment and not kept or raised for human consumption. 
b.  Each potbellied porcine shall not exceed 75 pounds in weight and 20 inches in height. 
c.  There shall not be more than two potbellied porcine of more than three months of age per residence. 
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to limit or hinder city or state health enforcement personnel from restricting or removing or requiring the removal of any such porcine from the city if such an action is deemed necessary to promote or protect the health and safety of the city's inhabitants. Furthermore, any regulation promulgated by the state department of health or statute adopted by the legislature relating to potbellied pigs or other small porcine shall be deemed applicable to any such porcine or potbellied pigs authorized by this section. 
(4)  Permit requirements for porcine, goats, sheep or hoofed animals other than a bovine or equine shall be as follows: 
a.  The permit shall not be valid until approved, in writing, by the city manager, which approval shall be subsequently exhibited to the animal control officer, who shall make the notation of approval on a duplicate thereof. The property shall be inspected by authorized persons before the permit is issued. 
b.  Each permit shall state the following: 
1.  The name of the person to whom it is issued. 
2.  The date of issuance. 
3.  The time of its operation, which shall not exceed six months from the date of issuance. 
4.  The maximum number of porcine, goats, sheep or hoofed animals other than bovines or equines, which shall not exceed a maximum number of three. 
5.  The location of the enclosure and the ground area of the enclosure. 
c.  Criteria for issuance of the permit shall be as follows: 
1.  The permit is conditioned on the right of the city manager to revoke such permit when, in his judgment, the public health may require such revocation; 
2.  The permit shall in no case be construed as an authority to open, build, keep or maintain a pen for a porcine, goat, sheep or hoofed animal other than bovine or equine to be used to keep such animal when the pen is located within 250 feet of any structure used for dwelling purposes or business purposes, except that of the owner; and 
3.  The enclosure shall be kept clean and sanitary and well drained at all times, and such enclosure shall be erected in a place where good drainage may be obtained and kept dry at all times. 
d.  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the person who keeps a pen used to shelter or confine a porcine, goat, sheep or hoofed animal other than bovine or equine contrary to this section to remove the porcine, goat, sheep or hoofed animal within three days from the date of such notice. Upon failure to comply with the notice, the pen for a porcine, goat, sheep or hoofed animal, other than a bovine or equine, shall be abated as required by law, provided that this shall be cumulative of and in addition to the other subsections of this section. 
e.  The lot and stables wherein animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and free from all filth at all times. Manure and feces shall be removed from the stable or shelter daily and the premises disinfected not less than once in each period of two weeks. Manure and feces shall be disposed of properly by either burying or removing it from the site on a weekly basis. 
(Code 1986, § 5-4; Code 2002, § 5-5; Ord. No. 2593NS, §§ 5,6, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference- Nuisances, 11 O.S. § 22-121, 50 O.S. 
Sec. 5-6. - Keeping wild and exotic animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain or have in possession or control, within the city, any poisonous reptile or other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile or any other wild or exotic animal or reptile of vicious or dangerous propensities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain or have in possession or control, within the city, any of the following animals: 
(1)  All poisonous animals, including rear-fang snakes. 
(2)  Apes: chimpanzees (Pan); gibbons (Hylobates); gorillas (Gorilla); orangutans (Pongo); and siamangs (Symphalangus). 
(3)  Baboons (Papio, Mandrillus). 
(4)  Bears (Ursidae). 
(5)  Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus). 
(6)  Constrictor snakes, six feet in length or more. 
(7)  Coyotes (Canis latrans) and hybrid coyote mixes. 
(8)  Crocodilians (Crocodylia), 30 inches in length or more. 
(9)  Deer (Cervidae), which includes all members of the deer family; for example, white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose. 
(10)  Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta). 
(11)  Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae). 
(12)  Hyenas (Hyaenidae). 
(13)  Jaguars (Panthera onca). 
(14)  Leopards (Panthera pardus). 
(15)  Lions (Panthera leo). 
(16)  Lynxes (Lynx). 
(17)  Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae). 
(18)  Ostriches (Struthio). 
(19)  Piranha fish (Characidae). 
(20)  Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain lions and panthers. 
(21)  Rhinoceroses (Rhinocerotidae). 
(22)  Sharks (class Chondrichthyes), unless kept in an aquarium. 
(23)  Snow leopards (Panthera uncia). 
(24)  Tigers (Panthera tigris). 
(25)  Wolves (Canis lupus) or wolf, canine mixes. 
(26)  Any other wild, dangerous or undomesticated animal which is not of a species customarily used as an ordinary household pet, but one which would ordinarily be confined to a zoo or one which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country or one which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or property damage. 
It shall be unlawful to raise and/or keep more than five adult mice or rats at any given time. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to licensed pet shops, menageries, zoological gardens, exotic animal shows or sales and circuses if: 
(1)  Their location conforms to the provisions of the city zoning ordinance; 
(2)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and are so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors; 
(3)  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape; and 
(4)  No person lives or resides within 100 feet of the quarters in which the animals are kept. 
(Code 1986, § 5-5; Code 2002, § 5-6) 
Sec. 5-7. - Keeping fowl. 
(a)  No person shall keep any domestic fowl or nondomestic fowl other than that customarily considered a household pet within the city, except in an agricultural zoning district. Such fowl shall be kept within an enclosure sufficient to prevent the fowl from escaping therefrom, and all coops, houses and roosts shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and disinfected in such a manner and to the extent necessary to prevent odors or unsanitary conditions. No person shall maintain, have or keep any pen, yard, building or enclosure for the purpose of keeping or restraining chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas, pigeons or other domestic or nondomestic fowl of any kind within 20 feet of any residence within the city or within 50 feet of the front line of any open and used street, road or avenue. 
(b)  No person shall keep fowl which may create a nuisance. A nuisance shall be deemed as the conduct or behavior of such fowl which damages private or public property or the fowl crows or makes other noises in an excessive, continuous fashion which annoys the comfort, health or peace or quiet of the people in the community. 
(Code 1986, § 5-7; Code 2002, § 5-7) 
State Law reference- Domesticated fowl deemed as "livestock" or "animals," 2 O.S. § 1-3. 
Sec. 5-8. - Fowl running at large. 
    No person shall allow any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas or other domestic or nondomestic fowl to run or fly at large at any place within the city, other than the property of the owner or proprietor and other than as provided in section 5-7. All such fowl shall be kept in a sufficient enclosure and shall not be permitted to trespass upon the premises of others or in the city alleys or streets. 
(Code 1986, § 5-8; Code 2002, § 5-8) 
State Law reference- Failure to keep domestic animals enclosed, penalties, 4 O.S. § 99. 
Sec. 5-9. - Keeping rabbits. 
(a)  No person shall keep any domestic rabbits or nondomestic rabbits, except in an agricultural zoning district. Such rabbits shall be kept within an enclosure sufficient to prevent the rabbits from escaping therefrom, and all cages, hutches or houses shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and disinfected in such a manner and to the extent necessary to prevent odors or unsanitary conditions. No person shall maintain, have or keep any cage, hutch or enclosure for the purpose of keeping or restraining domestic or nondomestic rabbits of any kind within 20 feet of any residence within the city or within 50 feet of the line of any open and used street, road or avenue. 
(b)  No person shall keep domestic or nondomestic rabbits which may create a nuisance. A nuisance shall be deemed as the condition, conduct or behavior of such rabbits which damages private or public property. 
(Code 1986, § 5-14; Code 2002, § 5-9) 
Sec. 5-10. - Rabbits running at large. 
    No person shall allow any domestic or nondomestic rabbit to run at large at any place within the city, other than the property of the owner or proprietor and other than as provided in section 5-9. All such rabbits shall be kept in a sufficient enclosure and shall not be permitted to trespass upon the premises of others or in the city alleys or streets. 
(Code 1986, § 5-15; Code 2002, § 5-10) 
Sec. 5-11. - Livestock running at large. 
    No person having control of any horse, mule, donkey, bovine, llama or other hoofed animal, porcine, goat, sheep or any animal of the equine, bovine or swine family shall allow such animal to run at large within the city. For the purpose of this section, an animal is deemed to be running at large when the animal: 
(1)  Is staked out, picketed, roped or lariated to a stake in such a way that the animal can do injury to a shade tree or property of any person other than the owner of such animal. 
(2)  Is picketed or tied to a stake or fixture in such a way that, within the range of the full length of the rope, chain or picket, the animal can enter upon any lot or ground of any person other than the owner of such animal and for which the property owner's consent has not been obtained. 
(3)  Is tied to a stake or fixture picketed in such a way that the animal may enter upon any city street, alley, sidewalk or public ground. 
(4)  Intrudes upon the property of another person or city property other than the owner's. 
(Code 1986, § 5-6; Code 2002, § 5-11) 
State Law reference- Failure to keep domestic animals enclosed, penalties, 4 O.S. § 99; animals running at large, 11 O.S. § 22-115; diseased animals running at large, etc., 21 O.S. § 1221. 
Sec. 5-12. - Indecent exhibit or breeding in public. 
    No person shall indecently exhibit or cause or allow the indecent exhibition of any animal or fowl referenced in this chapter, and no person shall let or cause to be let any such animal to any animal or fowl of the opposite sex for sexual intercourse, unless such is in some enclosed place entirely out of public view. 
(Code 1986, § 5-9; Code 2002, § 5-12) 
Sec. 5-13. - Selling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any animal or fowl within the city limits, except on the owner's or proprietor's property or in a sales arena, sales barn or commercial establishment designed for that purpose. Itinerant sale of animals or pets is expressly forbidden. 
(Code 1986, § 5-10; Code 2002, § 5-13) 
Sec. 5-14. - Shooting or injuring birds or destruction of bird nests. 
    No person shall kill, wound, maim or injure, in any manner whatever, any bird. No person shall throw, fire or shoot at such birds with any gun, pistol or other deadly weapon or with any stone, arrow or other missile. No person shall break, tear down or destroy any bird's nest or the eggs or other contents of the nest. 
(Code 1986, § 5-11; Code 2002, § 5-14) 
State Law reference- Wounding or trapping birds in cemetery, 21 O.S. § 1684. 
Sec. 5-15. - Removal and disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  The animal control officer, when notified, shall remove dead animals and dispose of them in a sanitary manner, except as otherwise stated in this section. 
(b)  When deceased animals, other than those excluded in subsection (c) of this section, are found on a public thoroughfare, street, road or public land, they shall be removed and properly disposed of by the animal control officer. 
(c)  The removal and disposal of any deceased bovine, equine, porcine or other hoofed animal shall be the responsibility of the owner, and such owner shall make arrangements for proper and sanitary disposal thereof when such animal is found on public or private property. 
(Code 1986, § 5-13; Code 2002, § 5-16) 
State Law reference- Interment of animal remains, 11 O.S. § 26-101; disposal of infected animal carcasses, 21 O.S. § 1222 et seq. 
Sec. 5-16. - Abandoning animals in public or private place. 
    Any person who deposits any live dog, cat or other domestic animal along any private or public roadway, or in any other private or public place with the intention of abandoning the domestic animal, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus court costs. 
(Code 2002, § 5-17; Ord. No. 2381NS, § 1, 11-17-2008; Ord. No. 2395NS, § 3, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 5-17. - Use of traps. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or set a trap capable of trapping animals unless authorized by the chief of police, or designee. Persons using traps not issued by the animal shelter may be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus court costs for each offense. 
(Code 2002, § 5-18; Ord. No. 2387NS, § 1, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2439NS, § 1, 8-16-2010; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 7, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-18. - Destruction of animals. 
    When an animal within the corporate limits of the city shall be so wounded, maimed, sick, diseased or injured as to render its recovery hopeless in the opinion of a police officer, animal control officer or licensed veterinarian, it shall become the duty of the police officer or animal control officer to kill or euthanize or cause to be killed or euthanized such animal as soon as practicable in such manner as in his judgment shall be the least painful. Once the animal is destroyed the officer shall cause the carcass to be removed and disposed of according to law. 
(Code 2002, § 5-19; Ord. No. 2384NS, § 1, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 5-19. - Animal a nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to investigate any proper claim that an animal is a nuisance within the meaning of this chapter. Should the investigating official determine that a nuisance exists and it is necessary to abate the nuisance or should the official have reason to believe a threat to public health or safety exists, he shall refer the matter to the city prosecutor for approval of a verified complaint and an order from the court that the animal be impounded. Following the filing of such verified complaint and an evidentiary hearing, if the court finds upon a preponderance of the evidence that a nuisance existed, the court may order the animal euthanized as in the case of a vicious animal. In lieu of ordering the animal euthanized, the court shall, at the request of the animal owner, require that the owner abate and prevent such nuisance and give a good and sufficient bond within three days in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, satisfactory for a period not exceeding one year. In this event, the court may order the return of such animal to the owner. However, during the pendency of such bond, upon a finding by the court that the nuisance has reoccurred, the court may order the animal be impounded, euthanized and the owner's bond be forfeited. If the court shall find no nuisance existed, the court shall order the animal be surrendered to the owner. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, nuisance shall mean any animal that habitually commits any one or a combination of the following acts: 
(1)  Scratches or digs into any flower bed, garden, tilled soil, vines, shrubbery or small plants and in so doing injures the same; 
(2)  Overturns any garbage can or other vessel for waste products or scatters the contents of same; 
(3)  Chases any person or domestic animal, or kills any domestic animal; 
(4)  Barks, howls, brays or makes any other loud or offensive noise common to its species or peculiar to itself, so as to disturb the inhabitants of the community; 
(5)  Is running at large. 
(c)  At the option of the owner, but subject to the approval of the animal control officer, an animal impounded pursuant to this section may be impounded in a private kennel or veterinary clinic during the pendency of the nuisance action. The operators of the facility shall then assume full liability for the confinement and maintenance of such animal and shall not release it without first being authorized by the animal control officer or the court. All fees for such impoundment shall be the responsibility of the owner. In no event shall the city be liable for costs of fees charged by the private facility. Further, the city may assess to the owner the cost of transporting the animal to the privately operated impoundment facility. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the release from impoundment of any animal not properly licensed and vaccinated, or a threat to public health or safety. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus court costs. 
(Code 2002, § 5-20; Ord. No. 2386NS, § 1, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2395NS, § 2, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 8, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-20-5-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Disposal of animals held in shelter, 4 O.S. § 501 et seq.; impoundment of animals, 22 O.S. § 22-115. 

Sec. 5-46. - City animal shelter established. 
    There is established a city animal shelter, located at such place as the city commission shall approve and provide. 
(Code 1986, § 5-31; Code 2002, § 5-46) 
Sec. 5-47. - Obstructing animal control officers. 
    No person shall interfere with or hinder any animal control officer in the performance of any duty of such agent or seek to release any animal in the custody of the city or its agents, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 5-35; Code 2002, § 5-47) 
State Law reference- Obstructing officer, 21 O.S. § 540. 
Sec. 5-48. - Reports of animal control officer. 
    The animal control officer shall render monthly reports in writing to the chief of police or designee of his acts as keeper of the city animal shelter. Such reports shall show distinctly all money received from claimants of impounded animals, the gross proceeds of all monetary receipts, all amounts retained by him as authorized by this Code or any other city ordinances and all money disbursed, indicating to whom paid and the amount to each person. He shall make an annual report which shall give an itemized summary of all disbursements and receipts on a monthly basis. 
(Code 1986, § 5-32; Code 2002, § 5-48) 
Sec. 5-49. - Domesticated animals or house pets. 
(a)  Any domesticated animal or house pet not specifically described or named elsewhere in this chapter shall not be allowed by its owner to run at large at any place within the city other than the property of the owner. 
(b)  Any domesticated animal which is picked up while it is running at large shall be impounded and subject to redemption as set forth in this article. 
(c)  All domesticated animals that are seized and impounded as provided in this section shall be kept in the city animal shelter for not less than 48 hours from the time they are impounded. If, at the expiration of such time, they are not called for, the animal control officer may dispose of such animals by euthanasia and dispose of the bodies according to law provided, however, any domesticated animal may be adopted out at the end of the impoundment period in lieu of disposal. For each animal that is adopted out, a fee as provided by the city fee schedule for the adoption, plus the impoundment fee shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-36; Code 2002, § 5-49; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 9, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-50. - Charges. 
    The city shall receive a fee for each animal the city seizes and impounds and an additional fee, per day, for the care and keeping of such animal that is impounded. The city shall also receive a fee for any animal that the animal control officer was required to tranquilize by the use of a tranquilizer dart when the animal was being seized and impounded by the city. Fees may be waived in whole or in part by the chief of police or his designee for hardship or special cases, including, but not limited to, animal owner death, owner incarceration, or owner hospitalization, to rectify adoption disputes, and for similar situations where the best interest of all parties are served by such waiver. Such fees and charges will be provided by the city fee schedule and shall be paid at the animal shelter before any such animal is released to the owner. 
(Code 1986, § 5-33; Code 2002, § 5-50; Ord. No. 2431NS, § 1, 4-19-2010; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 10, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-51. - Redemption. 
(a)  If the owner of any animal impounded by an animal control officer shall pay the animal control officer for the costs, charges and expenses incurred, at any time before the adoption of such animal, as established elsewhere in this chapter, the animal control officer shall release such animal. 
(b)  The animal control officer, before he releases any impounded animal to any person who claims that he is the owner, shall satisfy himself of the fact that such representations are true and, to this end, shall have the right to make such inquiry as may be necessary to establish such facts. He shall have the unreserved right to require the affidavit of the claimant to the effect that he is the true and lawful owner of such animal and that he has owned such animal for the time the claimant alleges. He shall have the further unreserved right to require the claimant to produce witnesses of the fact whose representations may or may not be reduced in writing and certified accordingly, as the animal control officer in his discretion shall determine. 
(c)  Any unclaimed domesticated animal, other than a dog or cat, that has been held ten days by animal control may be offered for adoption. Notice of adoption shall be posted ten days prior to the adoption. Animals will be adopted out by means of sealed bids, and the highest bidder shall be awarded the adoption. Such revenue received by sealed bids for unclaimed animals, sold by animal control, shall be accredited to the account of the animal control division. 
(d)  No person shall intentionally falsify information in an affidavit or supply false information in any form to any animal control officer in relation to the redemption of an impounded animal. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus court cost. 
(Code 1986, § 5-34; Code 2002, § 5-51) 
Sec. 5-52. - Disposal of diseased or injured animals. 
    To prevent unnecessary suffering by any animal impounded by animal control and to protect the health and welfare of the remainder of the animal population held by animal control, any animal impounded and placed into the city's animal shelter that is determined by the animal control officer, to be suffering from a serious life-threatening injury or suspected of a contagious or infectious disease such as, but not limited to, mange, distemper, etc., may be euthanized or medically released to an approved animal rescue organization as soon as possible after immediate attempts to locate the owner of said animal by animal control are unsuccessful. 
(Code 2002, § 5-52; Ord. No. 2339NS, § 3, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 11, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-53-5-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances, 11 O.S. § 22-121, 50 O.S. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-81. - Parents' liability. 
    The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any dog shall be deemed to be the owner of such animal and shall be charged for all penalties and shelter fees imposed by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-57; Code 2002, § 5-81) 
Sec. 5-82. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Any person affected by a nuisance cited in subsection (b) of this section shall notify the animal control officer of the nuisance, and the animal control officer shall make an inspection to verify the complaint. The complainant shall be given the opportunity to file a written complaint with the animal control officer if the officer determines a nuisance exists. Following the receipt of a written complaint, the animal control officer may give the owner of the dog causing the nuisance a citation or a warning to mitigate the nuisance. Each day a nuisance exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  A nuisance condition exists when the owner of a dog allows feces of such animal to accumulate and, in the opinion of the animal control officer, causes odors and becomes offensive to smell and unsightly. 
(Code 1986, § 5-56; Code 2002, § 5-82) 
State Law reference- Nuisances, 11 O.S. § 22-121, 50 O.S. 
Sec. 5-83. - Running at large. 
    Every dog shall be confined within the owner's property by either a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the dog from escaping therefrom or by being secured on the premises by a metal chain or leash sufficient in strength to prevent the dog from escaping from the owner's property and so arranged that the dog will remain upon the property when the leash or chain is stretched to full length. A dog may be off such premises if it is under the control of a competent person and restrained by a substantial leash. Any dog running at large within the city may be impounded. 
(Code 1986, § 5-51; Code 2002, § 5-83; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 12, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference- Animals running at large, 11 O.S. § 22-115. 
Sec. 5-84. - Disturbing the peace. 
    No person shall keep, own or harbor any dog within the city which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, whining or the making of other noises shall annoy or disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, family or person. It is the intent of this section to restrict the privilege of keeping or harboring any dog within the city to a dog of a quiet and peaceful nature, which is not given to the habit of howling, whining or barking, except by intentional provocation directed to such dog by some person, and then only while in the act of guarding or protecting the premises on which he is domiciled, of the master or of his household or effects. A violation of this section shall be considered a nuisance and is to be abated as set forth in section 5-82. 
(Code 1986, § 5-52; Code 2002, § 5-84) 
Sec. 5-85. - Proximity to residences. 
    No person shall keep or maintain any dog pen or shelter closer than 25 feet to the residence of any person other than the owner of such dog. 
(Code 1986, § 5-53; Code 2002, § 5-85) 
Sec. 5-86. - Maximum number. 
    It shall be unlawful for any premise or lot in the city to have in their possession or under their control more than two dogs over the age of four months. However, a premise or lot may have in possession three dogs over the age of four months, if all three dogs are altered in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 5-58; Code 2002, § 5-86; Ord. No. 2623NS, § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 5-87. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Has inflicted injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; or 
(2)  Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having received notice of such by the animal control authority in writing and the dog thereafter aggressively bites., attacks or endangers the safety of humans. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation organization or department possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having control or custody of an animal. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites on a human, either on public or private property. 
(Code 2002, § 5-87; Ord. No. 2383NS, § 1, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 5-88. - Confiscation of a dangerous dog. 
(a)  Any dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by a police officer or animal control officer if: 
(1)  The dog is not validly registered according to this chapter; 
(2)  The owner does not secure the liability insurance coverage or surety bond required by this chapter; 
(3)  The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure; or 
(4)  The dog is outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside the proper enclosure and not under physical restraint of the responsible person. 
(b)  Any dangerous dog confiscated pursuant to this section and not reclaimed by its owner under the requirements of this chapter within 48 hours from the date of notice of confiscation shall be deemed abandoned and, at the discretion of the chief of police, euthanized pursuant to procedures provided by law in the city. 
(Code 2002, § 5-88; Ord. No. 2383NS, § 2, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 13, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-89. - Dogs not to be declared dangerous. 
    Dogs shall not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Code 2002, § 5-89; Ord. No. 2383NS, § 3, 12-1-2008) 
Secs. 5-90-5-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to tax, 11 O.S. § 22-115. 

Sec. 5-111. - Required generally; user fee. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Altered dog means either a male or female dog that, by a procedure rendered by a veterinarian, has been prevented from impregnating or from becoming impregnated. 
    Unaltered dog means a dog that has not been spayed or neutered by a veterinarian. 
(b)  Fee. Every person owning or harboring any dog within the city over the age of four months shall pay an annual license user fee provided by the city fee schedule for each unaltered male or female dog; and, a fee for each altered male or female dog having been neutered or sprayed. There shall be no charge for dogs used for the sight or hearing impaired, although such dogs shall be licensed by their owners. Senior citizens shall receive a 50 percent discount on licenses. Such license user fee shall cover a period of one year from the date of vaccination of such dog for rabies. Upon the expiration of a period of one year from the date of vaccination of such dog, the license shall expire. The license user fee shall become due and payable upon each dog attaining the age of four months and upon the expiration of the period covered by the license. 
(Code 1986, § 5-72; Code 2002, § 5-111; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 14, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-112. - Required after acquisition. 
    It shall be the responsibility of any person acquiring a dog, whether newly born or transferred from another owner, to obtain a new license, which shall be valid one year from the date such dog was vaccinated for rabies. 
(Code 1986, § 5-78; Code 2002, § 5-112) 
Sec. 5-113. - Exceptions. 
    Any dog brought into the city by any traveler or nonresident of the city, while with its owner or keeper, shall not be impounded, nor shall such owner or keeper be arrested for the reason that the dog is not lawfully licensed by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-71; Code 2002, § 5-113) 
Sec. 5-114. - Issuance. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall issue licenses for dogs as provided for in this article. User fees collected for the issuance of such licenses shall be remitted daily to the city treasurer-finance director, and an accurate record of all licenses issued and amounts collected shall be kept at all times. Such records shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by the city manager or other persons designated by him to make inspections. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall record information concerning each such license issued, including the following: 
(1)  The date of issuance; 
(2)  The date of expiration; 
(3)  The name of the owner or the person in whose name the license was issued; 
(4)  The sex of the dog; 
(5)  The age, color and breed of the dog; and 
(6)  The date of vaccination and by whom vaccinated. 
(Code 1986, § 5-73; Code 2002, § 5-114) 
Sec. 5-115. - Receipt. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall issue a receipt to the person paying the dog license user fee. Such receipt shall show the following: 
(1)  The date and the amount of payment; 
(2)  The age of the dog, as stated by the owner; and 
(3)  The sex, color and breed of the dog. 
(b)  The dog user fee receipt shall operate as a license to own, keep or harbor the dog therein described for the year ending on the last day of the period covered by the license, which shall be valid for a period of one year from the date the dog was vaccinated for rabies. 
(Code 1986, § 5-74; Code 2002, § 5-115) 
Sec. 5-116. - Expiration; delinquent payment. 
    The license user fee required in this division shall become delinquent upon the expiration of the period covered by a license issued pursuant to this division. If the license user fee is not paid within ten days after the delinquency date, a penalty of 50 percent of the amount due shall be added to the delinquent fee and collected together with such fee. A senior citizen discount shall not apply to any penalty fees, and such penalty fee shall be 50 percent of the amount originally paid by the senior citizen. 
(Code 1986, § 5-77; Code 2002, § 5-116) 
Sec. 5-117. - Issuance and use of tags. 
    The animal control officer shall furnish any person who shall pay a dog license user fee a metal tag, on which shall be inscribed and stamped in a durable manner the year for which the fee was paid, a number separate and distinct from all other numbers used for like purposes in the same year, and the words "dog tag" in one line and "City of Shawnee" in another line. The owner of the dog shall provide a substantial collar to be worn by the dog at all times and to which such tag shall be firmly fixed in a good and substantial manner. 
(Code 1986, § 5-75; Code 2002, § 5-117) 
Sec. 5-118. - Unlawful use or disposal of tags. 
    No person shall unlawfully use or dispose of any dog license tag for any consideration, or without any consideration. 
(Code 1986, § 5-79; Code 2002, § 5-118) 
Sec. 5-119. - Issuance of duplicate tags. 
    Whenever a dog license tag is lost or stolen from any dog, the owner of the dog shall procure another tag from the animal control officer by making an affidavit to the effect that the license fee was paid for the lost tag, that all regulations have been complied with prior to the issuance of such tag, and that the tag was lost or stolen through no fault of his own. Upon the filing of such affidavit and payment of a fee provided by the city fee schedule, the animal control officer shall issue another tag. A senior citizen discount shall not apply to duplicate tag fees. 
(Code 1986, § 5-80; Code 2002, § 5-119; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 15, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-120-5-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, 63 O.S. § 1-508. 

Sec. 5-146. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  No person shall own or harbor in the city any dog that has not been properly immunized against rabies by vaccination. The owner and/or keeper of any dog shall have such dog vaccinated against rabies by some licensed veterinarian at the age of four months with a second inoculation due within one year after the first, then to be vaccinated at least once every three years and shall procure from such veterinarian a certificate of vaccination showing the description of the dog vaccinated and the date of vaccination. 
(b)  The certificate shall be in force from the date of vaccination, through the effective lifespan of the vaccination dose administered to the dog as set forth in the certificate. 
(c)  Every dog shall be vaccinated on or before reaching four months of age. Any dog that is over the age of four months and that has not been vaccinated against rabies within the preceding 12 months and that has been kept within the city for a period of 30 days or more shall be vaccinated immediately. 
(Code 1986, § 5-91; Code 2002, § 5-146; Ord. No. 2251NS, § 1, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 16, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-147. - Registration for vaccination certificate. 
    The owner of every dog vaccinated pursuant to this division shall present the certificate therefor to the animal control officer, who shall register the vaccination certificate by noting in the dog register the date of vaccination and the veterinarian who administered the vaccine. No license shall be issued to keep or harbor a dog within the city until such certificate has been presented to the animal control officer, and the period covered by such license shall date from the date of immunization as shown on the certificate and shall be for the period of the certificate from the date of such immunization. 
(Code 1986, § 5-92; Code 2002, § 5-147; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 17, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-148. - Observation of dog that bites person. 
(a)  Any dog that bites a person within the city limits shall be reported to animal control. The owner of the dog shall place the dog in the care of a veterinarian. Exceptions to this rule include the following circumstances: 
(1)  Dogs involved in a first party ownership may be allowed to be placed in a home quarantine for a ten day period immediately following the bite. 
(2)  Dogs meeting the criteria of currently vaccinated against rabies, and not inflicting a severe injury, shall be placed in a home quarantine until the end of a ten-day period from the bite. In some instances, a certification of animal health obtained after examination by a licensed veterinarian on the tenth day may be required. 
(3)  Animals in service to the blind or hearing-impaired, and search and rescue dogs or other animals used for police enforcement duties shall be exempt from the quarantine when a bite exposure occurs and proper record of immunization against rabies is presented. A certification of animal health obtained after examination by a licensed veterinarian at the end of ten days may be required by the department. 
(b)  Within 24 hours, the dog will be placed under the care of a veterinarian. Failure to do so will constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  The owner may elect at his own expense to have the animal euthanized by a licensed veterinary doctor and tested by the Oklahoma City Health Department for rabies. Once the testing is completed, the owner must supply a copy of the health department report to the city animal shelter. 
(d)  The veterinarian shall impound the dog for care and observation for a period of ten days from the date of the bite. 
(e)  When a dog under observation has been diagnosed as being rabid or suspected by a veterinarian as being rabid and dies while under observation, the veterinarian shall immediately send the dog to the Oklahoma City Health Department for rabies testing and shall notify the animal shelter of the test results. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to release any dog held for observation to any person prior to completion of the period of observation. 
(g)  The person to whom the dog is released shall have proof prior to release that the dog does not have rabies and that the dog has been properly vaccinated against rabies. 
(h)  If ownership of a dog that bites a person within the city limits cannot be verified, the dog shall be impounded for 24 hours and then euthanized and tested by the Oklahoma City Health Department for rabies. 
(Code 1986, § 5-54; Code 2002, § 5-148; Ord. No. 2043NS, § 3, 3-4-2002; Ord. No. 2048NS, § 1, 4-1-2002; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 18, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-149-5-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 5-176. - Authority of officers. 
(a)  The animal control officer, while on duty, may seize and impound, subject to this article, all dogs found running at large upon any public highway, street, alley, court, square, park, sidewalk or any other public property within the city limits, whether in the immediate presence of the owner or custodian or otherwise, as provided in this Code. 
(b)  The animal control officer, while on duty, may seize and impound, subject to this article, all dogs found running at large upon any unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land within the city limits, whether in the immediate presence of the owner or custodian or otherwise, and such animal control officer is authorized to enter upon any unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any dog running at large thereon, as provided in this Code. 
(c)  The animal control officer is empowered and authorized to enforce all aspects of this Code. Further, he is authorized and empowered to issue citations to any person in violation of this Code. He can cause the arrest of any person who resists the animal control officer's attempts at resolving animal-caused violations. 
(Code 1986, § 5-106; Code 2002, § 5-176; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 19, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-177. - Care of impounded dogs. 
    The animal control officer shall see that all dogs that are impounded shall have sufficient amounts of water and food and shall furnish shelter from the elements. Sanitary conditions will be maintained, and dogs will be cared for in a humane manner. 
(Code 1986, § 5-107; Code 2002, § 5-177) 
Sec. 5-178. - Redemption; release. 
    Any person appearing at the city animal shelter who satisfies the animal control officer of the fact of his ownership or right to the possession of any dog therein impounded shall have such dog returned to him upon the following conditions: 
(1)  If the dog so impounded has a valid city dog tag and vaccination tag, such dog may be returned to the owner upon his paying to the animal control officer an impounding fee provided by the city fee schedule, and a fee for each day the dog has been impounded. The animal control officer shall give a receipt to such claimant in duplicate for such payment and release the dog to the owner. 
(2)  If the dog impounded does not have a valid city tag or vaccination tag, the dog may be released to the owner upon his paying to the animal control officer an impounding fee provided by the city fee schedule, for each day the dog has been impounded and obtaining from the animal control officer a dog tag, as provided for in this article. The fees, as provided for in this subsection, shall be paid to the animal control officer and, upon presentation of evidence that such dog has been vaccinated for rabies, the animal control officer may authorize the release of the dog. A dog that is not currently vaccinated for rabies shall not be released or returned to its owner until the dog has been vaccinated as set forth in this article. 
(3)  If a licensed but untagged dog is impounded, it shall be the duty of the owner of such dog to comply with this article by filing his affidavit and procuring a duplicate tag within three days of impoundment. The animal control officer may then release the dog to the owner upon payment of the fees as provided in this section. If the affidavit is not filed within three days of impoundment or if the fees are not paid or if the order of release is not obtained within the three-day period, the dog shall be disposed of in the same manner as in all other cases. 
(Code 1986, § 5-108; Code 2002, § 5-178; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 20, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-179. - Disposal of unclaimed dogs. 
    All dogs seized and impounded, as provided in this chapter, that are not identified with a city license tag, shall be kept in the city animal shelter for a period of two working days, or not less than 48 hours from the time they are so impounded. However, a dog having on it a city license tag shall be held four working days, or not less than 96 hours from the time it is so impounded. If, at the expiration of such time, the dog is not called for and the fees paid as provided by this division, the animal control officer may dispose of such dog by euthanasia and dispose of the body according to law. However, any unlicensed dog impounded for more than two working days, or not less than 48 hours, or any licensed dog impounded for more than four working days, or not less than 96 hours, may be adopted out or released to a rescue organization at the end of the impoundment period in lieu of disposal. 
(Code 1986, § 5-109; Code 2002, § 5-179; Ord. No. 2066NS, § 1, 8-5-2002; Ord. No. 2252NS, § 1, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 2339NS, § 1, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 21, 12-19-2016) 
State Law reference- Disposal of animals held in shelter, 4 O.S. § 501 et seq. 
Secs. 5-180-5-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - KENNELS 

Sec. 5-206. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Kennel means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs more than four months of age are kept. 
(Code 1986, § 5-121(a); Code 2002, § 5-206) 
Sec. 5-207. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall maintain or operate any kennel for the sale, exchange, boarding, training, breeding or raising of dogs within the city without first procuring from the animal control officer an annual license to operate such kennel. 
(b)  Each facility regulated by this division shall be considered a separate enterprise and shall require an individual license. 
(c)  No fee shall be required of any veterinary hospital or government-operated zoological park or city-operated facility. 
(d)  Failure to obtain a license before opening any facility covered in this division shall be an offense, punishable with each day constituting a separate violation. 
(Code 1986, § 5-121; Code 2002, § 5-207) 
Sec. 5-208. - License fee; permit terms and conditions. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a dog kennel shall pay an annual license fee provided by the city fee schedule for such privilege. All such dogs over four months of age shall be vaccinated in the same manner as other dogs. A city license shall also be required for each dog kept at an established licensed kennel. 
(b)  The license shall not be valid until approved in writing by the animal control officer, who shall make a notation of approval on a duplicate thereof. The property on which the kennel is kept shall be inspected by an animal control officer before the permit is issued. 
(c)  Each permit shall state the following: 
(1)  The name of the person to whom it is issued. 
(2)  The date of issuance. 
(3)  The period for which the permit is valid, which shall be one year from the date of issuance. 
(4)  The maximum number of dogs allowed, which will be determined with the restriction that each dog must have at least 35 square feet of unrestricted pen area with a solid floor. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the person who keeps a kennel contrary to this section to correct the violation within three days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1986, § 5-122; Code 2002, § 5-208; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 22, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-209. - Revocation of permit or license. 
(a)  The city manager may, after opportunity for hearing before the city manager or designate, revoke any dog kennel license if the person holding the license refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, the regulations promulgated by the animal control officer or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(b)  Any person whose license is revoked shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or harbored by such person. No part of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(c)  It shall be a condition of the issuance of any license that the animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect all dogs and the premises where dogs are kept at any time. The city manager shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the license of the refusing owner, after affording an opportunity for hearing before the city manager or designate. 
(d)  If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the animal control officer shall refuse to issue a license. No person who has been convicted of an offense related to cruelty to animals shall be issued a permit or license to operate a commercial animal establishment or kennel. 
(e)  Any person having been denied a license may not reapply for a period of 30 days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a fee, as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 5-125; Code 2002, § 5-209) 
Sec. 5-210. - Standards and sanitation. 
(a)  Standards for dog kennels shall be developed by animal control as a policy and shall be administered by the department. 
(b)  Any building, fence, pen or other enclosure in which the dogs are confined shall be located 50 feet from any structure used for dwelling purposes or business purposes, and no human habitation shall be allowed within the animal establishment. 
(c)  The kennel wherein dogs are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and free from filth at all times. Dog feces shall be removed from the kennel daily and the premises disinfected not less than once in each period of two weeks. Feces shall be disposed of properly by either burying or removing it from the site on a weekly basis. 
(Code 1986, § 5-123; Code 2002, § 5-210) 
Sec. 5-211. - Vaccination required. 
    It shall be the responsibility of any holder of a kennel license to provide proof that all dogs, four months and older, under the holder's control have had the required rabies vaccinations by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1986, § 5-124; Code 2002, § 5-211; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 23, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-212-5-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CATS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cat means any feline, regardless of age or sex. 
(Code 1986, § 5-131; Code 2002, § 5-241) 
Sec. 5-242. - Identification. 
    Every person residing in the city and owning or having in possession any cat over four months old shall have the cat bear identification. 
(Code 1986, § 5-131; Code 2002, § 5-242) 
Sec. 5-243. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  Every person residing in the city and owning or having in possession any cat over four months old shall be required to have the cat inoculated for rabies. Every veterinarian who vaccinates any cat shall collect his fee for the vaccination from the owner or keeper of the cat and shall issue a certificate of vaccination to such owner or keeper. He shall state in the certificate the name of the owner or keeper, the date of vaccination. 
(b)  Any person or entity owning, harboring, or keeping a cat which in the preceding ten days has bitten any person, shall upon receipt of written notice by the local animal control authority or department designee, place such animal in quarantine under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days from the date the person was bitten. The impoundment and observation of the cat or shall be conducted at the veterinarian's facility, or a recognized animal control facility. Unvaccinated animals shall be vaccinated against rabies on the final day of the ten-day observation period prior to discharge from the veterinarian's supervision and the date of vaccination. 
(c)  Exceptions to this rule include the following circumstances: 
(1)  Cats involved in a first party ownership may be allowed to be placed in a home quarantine for a ten-day period immediately following the bite. 
(2)  Cats meeting the criteria of currently vaccinated against rabies, and not inflicting a severe injury, shall be placed in a home quarantine until the end of a ten-day period from the bite. In some instances, a certification of animal health obtained after examination by a licensed veterinarian on the tenth day may be required by the department or local animal control authority. 
(Code 1986, § 5-135; Code 2002, § 5-243; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 24, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-244. - Maximum number. 
    It shall be unlawful for any premise or lot in the city to have in possession or under control more than three unaltered cats over the age of four months. However, a premise or lot may have under control six felines, all of which are altered as provided by article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 5-133; Code 2002, § 5-244; Ord. No. 2623NS, § 2, 1-16-2018) 
Sec. 5-245. - Parents' liability. 
    The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any cat shall be deemed to be the owner of such animal and shall be charged for all penalties and shelter fees imposed by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-132; Code 2002, § 5-245) 
Sec. 5-246. - Noise. 
    Every person owning, possessing or harboring a cat shall prevent such cat from whining or making other sounds common to its species in excessive, continuous or untimely fashion which shall annoy or disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, family or person. 
(Code 1986, § 5-136; Code 2002, § 5-246) 
Sec. 5-247. - Running at large. 
    No person shall permit his cat to run at large within the city limits at any time. A cat shall be deemed running at large when off the premises of its owner or keeper without being under adequate control of its owner or keeper. 
(Code 1986, § 5-137; Code 2002, § 5-247) 
Sec. 5-248. - Disposition of feral or vicious cats. 
    Any feral or vicious cat found running at large which, because of its disposition or diseased condition, it is too hazardous to apprehend, may be destroyed when so ordered by the chief of police or the animal control officer. In an emergency, if the chief of police or animal control officer cannot be contacted in time to avoid danger to any person, any police officer may destroy such animal without first contacting the chief of police or animal control officer. 
(Code 1986, § 5-140; Code 2002, § 5-248; Ord. No. 2250NS, § 1, 5-1-2006) 
Secs. 5-249-5-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 5-276. - Required generally; fee. 
    Every person owning or harboring any cat within the city over the age of four months shall pay: an annual license user fee provided by the city fee schedule for each unaltered male or female cat, and a fee, for each altered male or female cat having been neutered or spayed. Senior citizens shall receive a 50 percent discount on licenses. Such license user fee shall cover a period of one year from the date of vaccination of the cat for rabies. Upon the expiration of a period of one year from the date of vaccination of the cat, the license shall expire. The license user fee shall become due and payable upon each cat attaining the age of four months and upon the expiration of the period covered by the license. 
(Code 1986, § 5-134(a); Code 2002, § 5-276; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 25, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-277. - Required after acquisition. 
    It shall be the responsibility of any person acquiring a cat, whether newly born or transferred from another owner, to obtain a new license, which shall be valid for one year from the date the cat was vaccinated for rabies. 
(Code 1986, § 5-134(f); Code 2002, § 5-277) 
Sec. 5-278. - Issuance; term. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall issue a receipt to the person paying the cat license fee. Such receipt shall show the following: 
(1)  The date and the amount of payment; 
(2)  The age as stated by the owner; and 
(3)  The sex, color and breed of the cat. 
(b)  The cat tag receipt shall operate as a license to own, keep or harbor the cat therein described for the year ending on the last day of the period covered by such license, which shall be one year from the date such cat was vaccinated for rabies. 
(Code 1986, § 5-134(b); Code 2002, § 5-278) 
Sec. 5-279. - Delinquent payment. 
    The license fee required in this division shall become delinquent upon the expiration of the period covered by a license issued pursuant to this division. If the fee is not paid within ten days after the delinquency date, a penalty of 50 percent of the amount due shall be added to such delinquent fee and collected together with such fee. A senior citizen discount shall not apply to any penalty fees. 
(Code 1986, § 5-134(d); Code 2002, § 5-279) 
Sec. 5-280. - Tag. 
    The animal control officer shall furnish any person who shall pay a cat license user fee a metal tag, on which shall be inscribed and stamped in a durable manner the year for which the fee was paid, a number separate and distinct from all other numbers used for like purposes in the same year, and the words "cat tag" in one line and "City of Shawnee" in another line. The owner of such cat shall provide a substantial collar to be worn by the cat at all times and to which such tag shall be firmly fixed in a good and substantial manner. 
(Code 1986, § 5-134(c); Code 2002, § 5-280) 
Sec. 5-281. - Duplicate tags. 
    Whenever a cat license tag is lost or stolen from any cat, the owner of the cat shall procure another tag from the animal control officer by making an affidavit to the effect that the license fee was paid for the lost tag, that all regulations have been complied with prior to the issuance of such tag and that the tag was lost or stolen through no fault of the owner. Upon the filing of such affidavit and payment of a fee provided by the city fee schedule, the animal control officer shall issue another tag. A senior citizen discount shall not apply to duplicate tag fees. 
(Code 1986, § 5-134(e); Code 2002, § 5-281; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 26, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-282-5-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 5-306. - Running at large or creating nuisance. 
    Any cat running at large or creating a nuisance, in violation of this article, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be impounded by the animal control officer, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 5-139(a); Code 2002, § 5-306; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 27, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-307. - Redemption. 
    Any person appearing at the city animal shelter who satisfies the animal control officer of the fact of his ownership or right to the possession of any cat therein impounded shall have such cat returned to him upon the following conditions: 
(1)  If the cat so impounded has a valid city cat tag and vaccination tag, such cat may be returned to the owner upon his paying to the animal control officer an impounding fee provided by the city fee schedule, and an additional fee for each day the cat has been impounded. 
(2)  If the cat impounded does not have a valid city tag or vaccination tag, the cat may be released to the owner upon his paying to the animal control officer an impounding fee provided by the city fee schedule, and an additional fee for each day the cat has been impounded and obtaining from the animal control officer a cat tag, as provided for in this article. The fees, as provided for in this subsection, shall be paid to the animal control officer and, upon presentation of evidence that such cat has been vaccinated for rabies, the animal control officer may authorize the release of the cat. A cat that is not currently vaccinated for rabies shall not be released or returned to its owner until the cat has been vaccinated as set forth in this subsection. 
(3)  If a licensed but untagged cat is impounded, it shall be the duty of the owner of such cat to comply with this article by filing his affidavit and procuring a duplicate tag within three days of impoundment. The animal control officer may then release the cat to the owner upon payment of the fees, as provided in this section. If the affidavit is not filed within three days of impoundment or if the fees are not paid or if the order of release is not obtained within the three-day period, the cat shall be disposed of in the same manner as provided in section 5-308. 
(Code 1986, § 5-139(b); Code 2002, § 5-307; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 28, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-308. - Term; disposition. 
    All cats seized and impounded, as provided in this article, that are not identified with a city license tag, shall be kept in the city animal shelter for a period of two working days or not less than 48 hours from the time they are so impounded. However, a cat having on a city license tag shall be held four working days or not less than 96 hours from the time it is so impounded. If, at the expiration of such time, the cat is not called for and the fees paid as provided by this division, the animal control officer may dispose of such cat by euthanasia and dispose of the body according to law. However, any unlicensed cat impounded for more than two working days or not less than 48 hours, or any licensed cat impounded for more than four working days or not less than 96 hours, may be adopted out or released to a rescue organization at the end of the impoundment period in lieu of disposal. 
(Code 1986, § 5-139(c); Code 2002, § 5-308; Ord. No. 2066NS, § 2, 8-5-2002; Ord. No. 2252NS, § 2, 4-3-2006; Ord. No. 2339NS, § 2, 2-19-2008; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 29, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-309-5-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - KENNELS 

Sec. 5-336. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Kennel means any lot or premises on which more than three unaltered cats or more than six altered cats, more than four months of age, are kept. 
(Code 1986, § 5-143; Code 2002, § 5-336) 
Sec. 5-337. - License and permit required. 
(a)  No person shall maintain or operate any cattery for the sale, exchange, boarding, training, breeding or raising of cats within the city without first procuring from the animal control officer an annual license to operate such kennel. 
(b)  Each facility regulated by this division shall be considered a separate enterprise and shall require an individual license. 
(c)  No fee shall be required of any veterinary hospital or government-operated zoological park or city-operated facility. 
(d)  Failure to obtain a license before opening any facility covered in this division shall be an offense, punishable with each day constituting a separate violation. 
(Code 1986, § 5-143; Code 2002, § 5-337) 
Sec. 5-338. - License fee; terms and conditions. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a cat kennel shall pay an annual license fee provided by the city fee schedule for such privilege. All such cats over four months of age shall be vaccinated in the same manner as other cats. A city license shall also be required for each cat kept at an established licensed kennel. 
(b)  The license shall not be valid until approved in writing by the animal control officer, who shall make a notation of approval on a duplicate thereof. The property shall be inspected by an animal control officer before the permit is issued. 
(c)  Each license shall state the following: 
(1)  The name of the person to whom it is issued. 
(2)  The date of issuance. 
(3)  The period for which the license is valid, which is one year from the date of issuance. 
(4)  The maximum number of cats allowed, which shall not exceed one cat per 12 square feet of unrestricted pen area with a solid floor. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the person who keeps a kennel contrary to this division to correct the violation within three days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1986, § 5-144; Code 2002, § 5-338; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 30, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-339. - Revocation of permit or license. 
(a)  The city manager may, after opportunity for hearing before the city manager or designate, revoke any cat kennel license if the person holding the license refuses or fails to comply with this article, the regulations promulgated by the animal control officer or any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(b)  Any person whose license is revoked shall remove all cats within ten days thereafter. No part of the license fee shall be refunded. 
(c)  It shall be a condition of the issuance of any license that the animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect all cats and the premises where cats are kept at any time. The city manager shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the license of the refusing owner, after affording an opportunity for hearing before the city manager or designate. 
(d)  If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the application, the animal control officer shall refuse to issue a permit. No person who has been convicted of an offense related to cruelty to animals shall be issued a license to operate a commercial animal establishment or kennel. 
(e)  Any person having been denied a license may not reapply for a period of 30 days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 5-147; Code 2002, § 5-339) 
Sec. 5-340. - Standards and sanitation. 
(a)  Standards for cat kennels shall be developed by animal control as a policy and shall be administered by the department. 
(b)  Any building, fence, pen or other enclosure in which the cats are confined shall be located 50 feet from any structure used for dwelling purposes or business purposes, and no human habitation shall be allowed within the animal establishment. 
(c)  The kennel wherein cats are kept shall be maintained in a clean condition and free from filth at all times. Feces shall be removed from the kennel daily and the premises disinfected not less than once in each period of two weeks. Feces shall be disposed of properly by either burying or removing it from the site on a weekly basis. 
(Code 1986, § 5-145; Code 2002, § 5-340) 
Sec. 5-341. - Rabies vaccination required. 
    It shall be the responsibility of any holder of a cat kennel license to provide proof that each cat, four months and older, under the holder's control shall have the required rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1986, § 5-146; Code 2002, § 5-341; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 31, 12-19-2016) 
Secs. 5-342-5-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DOG AND CAT STERILIZATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Dog and Cat Sterilization Act, 4 O.S. § 499 et seq. 

Sec. 5-371. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of 4 O.S. § 499.1 are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set forth. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Immunization means a vaccination or inoculation given by a veterinarian or other person authorized by law, which reduces the likelihood of animals contracting rabies or other infectious diseases. 
    Neutered means a process performed by a veterinarian or other person authorized by law, which removes the reproductive organs of any animal. 
    New owner or owner means a person legally competent (18 years of age) to enter into a contract to acquire a dog or cat from the city animal shelter. 
    Porcine means pig, hog, potbellied pig or of the pig, hog, kine or swine family. 
    Senior citizen means any person 55 years of age or older. 
    Spay means a process performed by a veterinarian or other person authorized by law, which removes the reproductive organs of a female animal. 
    Sterilize means to spay or neuter a dog or cat. 
    Unaltered animal means an animal that has not been spayed or neutered by a veterinarian. 
    Vaccination means the inoculation given by a veterinarian or other person authorized by law, which reduces the likelihood of animals contracting rabies or other infectious diseases. 
(Code 1986, § 5-156; Code 2002, § 5-371) 
Sec. 5-372. - Sterilization or agreement and deposit required for adoption. 
    No dog or cat may be released for adoption from the city animal shelter unless the dog or cat has been surgically spayed or neutered or unless the adopting party signs an agreement to have the dog or cat sterilized and deposits funds with the city to ensure that the adopted dog or cat will be spayed or neutered. Rescue organizations may be exempt from deposits. 
(Code 1986, § 5-157; Code 2002, § 5-372; Ord. No. 2593NS, § 32, 12-19-2016) 
Sec. 5-373. - Sterilization required to refund deposit. 
    The funds deposited with the city as provided in section 5-372 shall be refunded to the adopting party upon the adopting party's presentation of a written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that the adopted dog or cat has been spayed or neutered. However, no refund shall be made unless the dog or cat was spayed or neutered within 60 days of adoption of an adult dog or cat or, for an infant dog or cat, within 30 days of the date a female dog or cat has attained the age of six months or a male dog or cat has attained the age of eight months. 
(Code 1986, § 5-158; Code 2002, § 5-373) 
Sec. 5-374. - Form of agreement. 
    The sterilization agreement to be used by the city under this article shall be in substantially the following form: 
RECEIPT # ____________ 
STERILIZATION AGREEMENT 
This Agreement is made and entered into this ____________ day of ____________ , ____________ , by and between: 
THE CITY OF SHAWNEE, OKLAHOMA 
A Municipal Corporation 
By and Through Its City Animal Shelter 
City Hall 
Shawnee, Oklahoma 
273-1250 
878-1531 
Name ____________ 
Address ____________ 
City ____________ 
State ____________ 
Phone # ____________ 
Work Place Phone # ____________ 
Driver's License # ____________ 
Date of Birth ____________ 
Age ____________ 
Weight ____________ 
Race ____________ 
Height ____________ 
Eyes ____________ 
Sex ____________ 
In consideration of the release of a certain animal, and in the further consideration of mutual obligations herein, the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma releases the following animal to the new owner. 
Breed/Color/Sex/Age/Other ____________ 
(1)  The City of Shawnee, Oklahoma agrees to release the above-listed animal into the care of the new owner and refund the new owner's spay/neuter deposit provided that: 
a.  The animal be sterilized by a licensed veterinarian by Date: ____________ . 
b.  A written agreement signed by the veterinarian performing the sterilization that the animal has been sterilized by the stated date if given to the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
(2)  New owner accepts the above-listed animal and agrees: 
a.  To have the animal sterilized by a licensed veterinarian by Date: ____________ . 
b.  To provide written evidence to the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma from the veterinarian performing the sterilization that the animal has been sterilized by the above date listed. 
This agreement shall be binding upon the legatees, administrators, heirs, executors and assigns of the respective parties. The parties hereto have hereunto set their hands the day and year first above written. 
The City of Shawnee, Oklahoma 
By: ____________ 
New Owner: ____________ 
Failure to comply with the provisions of article V of chapter 14 of the city Code shall constitute either a public or private nuisance. Any person may maintain a civil action to enjoin the continuance of said private nuisance. The public nuisance may be abated by the city or by a public officer authorized by law to do so. Further, any person who shall violate any provisions of article V of chapter 14 of the city Code, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in in an amount as described in the city fee schedule plus costs, provided, that each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
If for any reason the above-listed animal should die, or you no longer want to keep the animal, it must be returned to the Shawnee Animal Shelter in order to void the Sterilization Agreement. 
I, ____________ , have read all of the above information and fully understand my obligation of spaying or neutering of the above-listed animal. 
Veterinarian ____________ Date spayed/neutered ____________ 
Verified by ____________ Date verified ____________ 
Animal died ____________ / ____________ / ____________ strayed ____________ / ____________ / ____________ returned ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(Code 1986, § 5-159; Code 2002, § 5-374) 
Sec. 5-375. - Extension of deadline. 
    Upon presentation of a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of an adopted dog or cat may be jeopardized by surgery, the city may grant a 30-day extension of the period within which the spay or neuter surgery would otherwise be required. Further extensions may be granted upon additional veterinary reports stating their necessity. 
(Code 1986, § 5-160; Code 2002, § 5-375) 
Sec. 5-376. - Refund of deposit upon death of dog or cat. 
    If requested to do so, the city shall refund deposited funds to the adopting party upon reasonable proof being presented to the city by the adopting party that the adopted dog or cat died before the expiration of the period during which the spaying or neutering was required to be completed. 
(Code 1986, § 5-161; Code 2002, § 5-376) 
Sec. 5-377. - Disposition of forfeited deposits. 
    Funds that have been forfeited by adopting parties pursuant to this article shall be placed in a separate account, which shall be an interest-bearing account, whenever feasible, and the city shall allocate funds from the account to programs which directly promote, subsidize or otherwise reduce the cost of spaying or neutering dogs or cats adopted from the animal shelter. The city shall maintain accurate records of accounts which fund the spay/neuter programs. 
(Code 1986, § 5-162; Code 2002, § 5-377) 
Sec. 5-378. - Exemption for certain dogs and cats. 
    This article shall not be construed to require the sterilization of dogs and cats that are being held by the city which might be claimed by their rightful owners. 
(Code 1986, § 5-163; Code 2002, § 5-378) 
Sec. 5-379. - Failure to comply. 
    Failure to comply with this article shall constitute either a public or private nuisance. Any person may maintain a civil action to enjoin the continuance of the private nuisance. The public nuisance may also be abated by the city or by any public officer authorized by law to do so. Furthermore, any person who shall violate any section of this article, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 5-164; Code 2002, § 5-379) 
Chapter 6 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Aircraft and airports, 3 O.S. § 61 et seq.; power to adopt, administer and enforce airport zoning regulations, 3 O.S. § 103; power of city to acquire, own and maintain airport, 11 O.S. § 22-104; lease by county to city for airport, 19 O.S. § 338. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 6-26. - Established; composition. 
    There is established an airport advisory board consisting of seven members. 
(Code 1986, § 6-16; Code 2002, § 6-26) 
Sec. 6-27. - Appointment; terms of office. 
    The members of the airport advisory board shall be appointed by the chairman of the Shawnee Airport Authority with the approval of the trustees. The members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years. Terms of office shall begin July 1 and end June 30 of the last year of appointment, provided members shall serve until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1986, § 6-17; Code 2002, § 6-27; Ord. No. 2511NS, § 1, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 6-28. - Chairman. 
    The airport advisory board shall elect one of its members as chairman. 
(Code 1986, § 6-18; Code 2002, § 6-28) 
Sec. 6-29. - Meetings. 
    A meeting of the airport advisory board shall be held no less often than quarterly in March, June, September and December at a time and place and on a date determined by the board. Special meetings may be held upon giving notice to all members and as required by the state open meeting law. A special meeting may be called by the general manager of the Shawnee Airport Authority; the chairman and trustees of the Shawnee Airport Authority; or the chairman or any two members of the airport advisory board. 
(Code 1986, § 6-18; Code 2002, § 6-29; Ord. No. 2511NS, § 2, 7-1-2013) 
State Law reference- Open meetings, 25 O.S. § 301 et seq. 
Sec. 6-30. - Powers and duties. 
    The airport advisory board shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Investigate the present airport facilities of the municipal airport, including the use, operation, equipping and management thereof. 
(2)  Recommend to the chairman and trustees of the Shawnee Airport Authority any changes or alterations in the use, operation, equipping and management of the municipal airport that the airport advisory board determines to be for the best interest of the city and its citizens. 
(Code 1986, § 6-19; Ord. No. 2511NS, § 3, 7-1-2013) 
Secs. 6-31-6-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGIONAL AIRPORT 

Sec. 6-56. - Statutes adopted. 
    The provisions of 3 O.S. § 65.1, as amended, are adopted by reference in this article as if fully set forth. 
(Code 2002, § 6-56) 
Sec. 6-57. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aeronautical activity means any activity which involves, makes possible or is required for the operation of aircraft or which contributes to or is required for the safety of such operations and includes, but not by way of limitation, all activities commonly conducted on airports, such as charter operations; pilot training; aircraft rental and sightseeing; aerial photography; crop dusting; flying clubs; aerial advertising and surveying; air carrier operations; aircraft sales and services; sale of aviation petroleum products, whether or not conducted in conjunction with other included activities; repair and maintenance of aircraft; sale of aircraft, parts; sale and maintenance of aircraft accessories, radio, communication and navigation equipment; and any other activity which, because of its direct relationship to the operation of aircraft, can appropriately be regarded as an aeronautical activity. 
    Airport means the Shawnee Regional Airport located on city, county and state lands and operated by the city. 
    Airport advisory board means the city airport advisory board as duly constituted at any time. 
    City commission means the board of city commissioners of the City of Shawnee as duly elected and constituted at any time. 
    General manager means the general manager of the Shawnee Airport Authority or another person appointed by the chairman and trustees of the Shawnee Airport Authority. 
    Master plan or layout plan means the scaled dimensional layout of the entire airport property as originally prepared by Hudgins, Thompson and Ball under the date of April 10, 1973, indicating current and proposed usage for each identifiable segment as approved by the city commission and as amended from time to time. 
    Minimum standards means the qualifications established and as amended from time to time by the city commission upon recommendation of the airport advisory board, setting forth the minimum requirements to be met as a condition or the right to conduct an aeronautical activity on the airport. 
    Person means any person, firm, general or limited partnership, corporation, trust or association making application for leasing or using any land or facility at the airport. 
    Shawnee Airport Authority means the chairman and trustees of the public trust charged by the city commission with the operation of the airport. 
(Code 1986, § 6-20; Code 2002, § 6-57; Ord. No. 2055NS, § 1, 5-20-2002; Ord. No. 2511NS, § 4, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 6-58. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person operating or handling an aircraft or vehicle in violation of any of the rules in this article or refusing to comply therewith may, at once, be ejected from the airport and for a period of time, not to exceed 15 days by the airport manager, and, upon hearing by the city commission, may be deprived of the further use of the airport and its facilities for such period of time as may appear necessary for the protection of life and property. 
(b)  Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine in the amount provided in the city fine schedule. This section is cumulative of all other penalties for violation of federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 6-40; Code 2002, § 6-58; Ord. No. 1984NS, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 2511NS, § 5, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 6-59. - Knowledge of rules implied. 
(a)  Publication of this chapter as required by law is deemed to give all persons to have knowledge of its contents. The airport manager is directed to have copies of this article printed and posted where appropriate. Copies will be kept for review in the airport manager's office, at the office of the city clerk and furnished each owner or operator of an aircraft based on the airport at the time of leasing hangar or tie down space. 
(b)  General rules applicable to the airport operation, aircraft operations and conduct of persons at the airport shall be adopted by resolution of the Shawnee Airport Authority upon the recommendation of the airport advisory board. The resolution shall be available in the office of the city clerk and the airport manager, and shall be given to all persons who have operations or lease space at the airport. Violation of the rules may result in the termination of leases, the prohibition from being upon the grounds of the airport, the loss of the opportunity to conduct any operations at the airport, or such other actions as the airport advisory board or the Shawnee Airport Authority deems appropriate, in addition to any penalties imposed if such violations are also violations of law. 
(Code 1986, § 6-38; Code 2002, § 6-59; Ord. No. 2511NS, §§ 6, 7, 7-1-2013) 
Sec. 6-60. - Conflict in rules. 
    If and where there is conflict in this article and the Federal Aviation Rules (FAR), the latter shall prevail. 
(Code 1986, § 6-39; Code 2002, § 6-60) 
Sec. 6-61. - Use restricted. 
(a)  Commercial activities. No person, incorporated or otherwise, shall use the airport for any commercial activity, unless approved by the appropriate permit, lease agreement or written permission from the airport advisory board and city commission. 
(b)  Restricted areas. The airport operations area consists of all runways, taxiways, aprons and other paved areas regularly used by aircraft. In addition, it consists of the safety areas, which is the turfed area adjacent to operational pavements within 500 feet of the runway centerline, 39.5 feet from a taxiway edge or apron edge, and extending 1,000 feet beyond the physical ends of the runway. All areas of the airport except those areas open to the public are restricted, and no person shall enter upon the operations area. The operations area also consists of, but is not limited to, landing areas, ramp areas, hangar and T-hangar areas and aircraft parking and storage areas. The following are exempted from this restriction: 
(1)  Persons assigned to duty therein. 
(2)  Authorized representatives of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(3)  Persons authorized by the airport manager. 
(4)  Passengers under appropriate supervision entering the ramp areas for the purpose of enplaning or deplaning. 
(5)  Persons engaged or about to be engaged or having been engaged in the operation of any aircraft. 
(6)  Persons authorized under contractual agreements with the city. 
(c)  Proper certification. No person not properly certified by the Federal Aviation Administration and no aircraft not similarly certified shall operate on or over the airport, provided that this restriction shall not apply to public aircraft belonging to the government of the United States or to a state, territory, possession or any political subdivision, nor to any aircraft of a foreign country operated under permission of the federal government. 
(d)  Obligation and implied consent. The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create the obligation and implied consent of the user to obey all of the regulations provided in this article. 
(e)  Privilege to use airport. The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof and he shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use as well as against claims of third persons as against those of the person so using the airport. The exercise of the Shawnee Regional Airport Rules and Regulations privilege of use shall constitute an acknowledgment that the city maintain said airport in a governmental capacity. 
(Code 1986, § 6-21; Code 2002, § 6-61; Ord. No. 1984NS, § 1, 10-16-2000; Ord. No. 2055NS, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes, 11 O.S. § 14-107; license taxes on occupations, 11 O.S. § 22-106 et seq.; dilapidated buildings, 11 O.S. § 22-112; fire hazards and building location restrictions, 11 O.S. § 22-113; permit required for certain buildings, 74 O.S. § 324.11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Revocation and suspension of licenses and permits. 
    Licenses and permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked as provided for in section 8-2. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1; Code 2002, § 7-1) 
Sec. 7-2. - Violations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who shall violate any section or provision of this chapter or who shall do that which is prohibited or who shall refuse or fail to do that which is commanded shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-10. Each day of violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 7-232; Code 2002, § 7-2) 
Sec. 7-3. - Conflicting provisions. 
    Wherever there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any National or International Code adopted herein, the specific provisions of this chapter will prevail. 
(Code 2002, § 7-3; Ord. No. 2533NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
Secs. 7-4-7-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes, 11 O.S. § 14-107. 

Sec. 7-31. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2015 edition, as amended and modified in Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC) 748:20-1-1 to 748:20-1-19 is hereby adopted. Such code shall be in full force and effect within the city to the same extent as if set forth in full in this section; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between any provision of such code and any provision of the ordinances of the city, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2; Code 2002, § 7-31; Ord. No. 2127NS, § 1, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 1, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes, 11 O.S. § 14-107. 
Sec. 7-32. - Amendments. 
    The building code adopted in section 7-31 is amended as follows: 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
Section 105.5 is amended to read: Unless otherwise provided for, any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit or after the work is started, the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months. Following suspension of a permit, the owner or contractor may apply for an extension to the permit and new permit fees shall be charged. There shall be a one-time-only six-month extension of a permit. If upon expiration of the permit extension the structure is not completed, the building official shall proceed to have the structure declared a public nuisance. 
Section 109.2 is amended by inserting the following: 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued until the following fees shall have been paid to the building permit clerk or agent thereof: 
1.  New construction: For a permit for the new construction of a room addition, building or structure, a fee amount provided by the city fee schedule shall be paid. 
2.  Remodel or alteration of structure: For a permit for the remodeling or alteration of an existing building or structure, a fee amount provided by the city fee schedule shall be paid. 
3.  Accessory structure construction: For a permit to construct an accessory structure up to 400 square feet, but no less than 200 square feet, a fee amount provided by the city fee schedule shall be paid. 
4.  Plan check fee: A plan check fee for the building plan review of building construction shall be 25 percent of the building permit fee. 
5.  Removal of a structure to another location: The permit fee for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to an adjacent lot shall be provided by the city fee schedule. 
6.  Demolition: For a permit for the demolition of a building or structure or parts thereof, a fee amount provided by the city fee schedule shall be paid. The fee is credited back if a construction starts within 30 days on the vacant lot. 
7.  Swimming pool permits: A fee in the amount provided by the city fee schedule shall be charged per permit. This is required for both in-ground and above-ground pools with a diameter greater than ten feet and a water depth greater than 40 inches. 
8.  Driveway permits: A fee in the amount provided by the city fee schedule shall be charged per driveway. 
9.  Minimum permit fee: A minimum permit fee in the amount provided by the city fee schedule is established for any construction permit. 
10.  Construction without a permit: The permit fee shall triple if any person commences construction prior to obtaining a permit. 
Section 111.0 Certificate of occupancy is amended by inserting the following: 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy; fee. No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any commercial or industrial building until a certificate of occupancy is obtained from the building inspector certifying that all the provisions of this Code are met. The fee for a certificate of occupancy is provided by the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Whenever a building permit is issued for the erection of a new building or structure, an occupancy permit shall be required prior to occupancy. Fees are provided by the city fee schedule. 
(c)  Temporary certificates of occupancy for a change in use of any land or tenancy or existing building or structure or for a new building or structure may be approved at the discretion of the building official, but at no time shall a temporary certificate of occupancy be approved if any life, safety or health requirements do not meet the ordinances of the city as determined by the building official. Should a final commercial or industrial certificate of occupancy not be approved by the building official, a temporary commercial or industrial certificate of occupancy may be approved for 60 days at the discretion of the building official. At the end of the first 60 days, the building official shall have the authority to extend the temporary commercial or industrial certificate of occupancy in 30-day increments. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to apply for a renewal at the end of the date of expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy. No renewal of the temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued until an additional fee is paid. Such fee is provided by the city fee schedule. The building official shall have the authority to deny applications for renewal of temporary certificates of occupancy. Upon denial of the application for renewal of a temporary certificate of occupancy, the building official shall give written notice to the applicant that the utility services to the premises shall be disconnected if operations have not ceased within ten days after receipt of the notice of denial of the temporary certificate of occupancy. Notice shall be delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt, within ten days of the denial. 
(d)  One- and two-family residences are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
Section 114.4 is amended by inserting the following: 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine represented in the city fee schedule, or punishable by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be a separate offense. 
Section 115.3 is amended by inserting the following: 
    Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine established in the city fee schedule. 
Section 1612.3 Insert: City of Shawnee, the adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section, and at all times henceforth, the most current version of the FEMA map and documentation shall be automatically adopted and shall take precedent over previous maps. 
Section 3412.2 is amended by inserting the following: Compliance alternatives: Structures existing prior to February 3, 1983 in which there is work involving rehabilitation. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3; Code 2002, § 7-32; Ord. No. 1327NS, § 3, 2-3-1986; Ord. No. 1341NS, § 3, 3-17-1986; Ord. No. 1385NS, § 2, 4-6-1987; Ord. No. 1540NS, § 2, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 1654NS, § 2, 10-4-1993; Ord. No. 1881NS, § 2, 5-18-1998; Ord. No. 2127NS, § 1, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2205NS, § 1, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 2, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 2, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 7-33-7-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of electrical work, 59 O.S. § 1693 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-61. - Electrical code adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, as amended and modified in Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC) 748:20-1-1 to 748:20-15-17 is hereby adopted. Such code shall be in full force and effect within the city to the same extend as if set forth in full in this section; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between any provision of such code and any provision of the ordinances of the city, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1986, § 7-245; Code 2002, § 7-61; Ord. No. 2125NS, § 1, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 3, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 3, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 7-62-7-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICIANS 

Sec. 7-126. - Qualifications; issuance of certificate of registration. 
(a)  Whosoever desires to enter the electrician business or offers electrical services within the city will be the holder of a proper, valid, unexpired and unrevoked license issued by the state. Such person desiring to enter the electrician business or to offer electrical services within the city, upon showing satisfactory proof that he holds a valid license issued by the state, will have issued to him a certificate of registration by the city clerk, who will collect therefrom fees in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Upon meeting the requirements contained in this section and the payment of fees, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the applicant will be issued by the city clerk a certificate of registration which will expire on the applicant's date of birth following the date of issue. Every person who holds a certificate of registration as issued by the terms of this Code will renew such certificate of registration each year by making application for renewal preceding the expiration date of such current certificate of registration and upon payment of fees in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 7-237; Code 2002, § 7-126; Ord. No. 2154NS, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 2533NS, § 2, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- Duration of municipal license, 11 O.S. § 22-107; authority of city to charge fees for registration, 59 O.S. § 1696. 
Sec. 7-127. - Registration of maintenance electricians. 
    No person shall engage in the occupation of maintenance electrician without first being registered with the electrical inspector by the owner of the building or by the authorized representative of such owner. Such registration shall show the name of the employer, the place of employment and shall certify that the maintenance electrician named is a regular employee giving his full time to this employer's service. 
(Code 1986, § 7-240; Code 2002, § 7-127) 
Sec. 7-128. - Transfer of certificate of registration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person holding a certificate of registration issued under this division to transfer the certificate or to allow the use of the certificate, directly or indirectly, by any person, for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any of the electrical work specified in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-243; Code 2002, § 7-128) 
Sec. 7-129. - Suspension or revocation of certificate of registration. 
    Every certificate of registration issued by the city to an electrical contractor shall be conditioned upon the registrant's having a current license issued by the state. If any such state license is suspended or revoked, the certificate of registration issued to the holder of such license by the city shall be suspended or revoked during the period of suspension or revocation by the state. Certificates of registration may also be suspended or revoked by the city for failure to comply with this article and pursuant to section 8-2 relating to suspension and revocation of licenses and permits. 
(Code 1986, § 7-244; Code 2002, § 7-129; Ord. No. 2154NS, § 3, 4-19-2004) 
State Law reference- Electrical License Act, 59 O.S. § 1680 et seq.; authority of city to revoke registration, 59 O.S. § 1696. 
Secs. 7-130-7-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND FEES 

Sec. 7-156. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall do or cause to be done any interior or exterior electrical wiring or any electrical construction, electrical installation or alteration of any electrical wiring, apparatus or fixtures within the city without first having obtained an electrical construction permit number for the work from the office of the electrical inspector. A permit for such work shall not be issued to any person who has failed to comply with this Code. Permits to do electrical work shall be issued only to licensed electrical contractors. Permits shall not be required for maintenance work or for repair work if the maintenance and repair work does not require alteration or rearrangement of an electrical installation. 
(b)  The applicant for a permit, as required in this section, shall, prior to doing any work requiring a permit, call the office of the electrical inspector and give the name of the electrical contractor who is to do such work and the address where the work is to be done. 
(c)  Any electrical contractor who proceeds to do work requiring a permit, without following the requirements of this section, shall be assessed double the amount of the fee that should have been paid, which sum shall be deducted from his bond if not otherwise paid. 
(d)  If the electrical inspector or any of his assistants finds electrical work in progress on any job for which no electrical construction permit has been issued, he shall immediately order all such electrical work to cease, and any person who thereafter does electrical work on such job before an electrical construction permit has been issued shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 7-256; Code 2002, § 7-156) 
Sec. 7-157. - Permit issuance. 
    Upon compliance with section 7-156 and prior to commencement of the work, it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to issue a permit permitting the person to perform the electrical work covered by the application, provided the plans for the work conform to or comply with this Code, and the office of the electrical inspector shall charge the electrical contractor with the amount of the proper fees. 
(Code 1986, § 7-257; Code 2002, § 7-157) 
Sec. 7-158. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  The office of the electrical inspector may require from any electrical contractor a set of plans and specifications for any proposed electrical job in order that the electrical inspector may check such plans and specifications to determine if the proposed electrical installations will comply with this Code. If requested by the electrical contractor, the electrical inspector may render a decision in writing on such plans and specifications, within five days after receiving the plans and specifications, as to whether or not the electrical installation, as set out in such plans, complies with this Code. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall have and is given authority to refuse to issue a permit for the installation of electric wiring, as provided in this division, or for any additions or extensions to any electric wiring in or on any building where the wiring done or proposed to be done is shown to be unsafe or not in accordance with this Code. 
(c)  Approval of plans and specifications for purposes of issuing an electrical permit by the city shall not relieve the owner or his agents of responsibility for errors of any kind in drawings and specifications and for compliance with applicable codes. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-258, 7-259; Code 2002, § 7-158) 
Sec. 7-159. - Inspections. 
(a)  Required. When any electrical work is done for which a permit is required under section 7-156, such work shall be inspected by the electrical inspector or one of his assistants. If such work is not done in such manner and with such materials as required by this article, the inspector shall require the work to be redone to comply with the electrical code. If such work is not redone to comply with the electrical code, the electrical inspector may order the electric utility company to disconnect electrical service to the premises in which the defective work is situated. 
(b)  Request. It shall be the duty of electrical contractors and any others holding permits to do electrical work to notify the office of the electrical inspector as soon as any electrical work is ready for inspection. 
(c)  Time limits. The electrical inspector or one of his assistants shall inspect any and all new electrical wiring within 24 hours after receipt of notice from the permit holder that the work is complete and ready for inspection. The period shall not include Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(d)  Final certificate of approval. Upon completion of the work covered by a permit as set forth in this article, if such work is performed according to this article, the electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of approval and therein certify that the electrical work is in accordance with the city electrical code. However, whenever a permit is issued for any new wiring as an addition to old existing wiring or work, which existing work does not comply with this article, but is of at least no. 14 size wire on 15 ampere circuits, the electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of approval without requiring the replacement of such existing wiring and other electrical fixtures, provided the new work for which the permit was issued complies with this article and, further, the existing wiring is of sufficient capacity so as not to be dangerous to life or property. 
(Code 1986, § 7-260; Code 2002, § 7-159) 
Sec. 7-160. - Inspection fees. 
(a)  In order to secure a permit for the installation of electric wiring, any licensed electrical contractor, before beginning any electrical work, will make application to the electrical inspector accompanied by the applicable permit and inspection fees in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Any structure having more than one electrical service meter located on the same structure shall number each meter consecutively and concurrent with each unit to which electrical service is provided. 
(c)  New construction, single-family residence. For new construction in a single-family residence, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
(d)  New construction, commercial or multiple-occupancy. For new construction in a commercial or multiple-occupancy, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
(e)  Change of an existing service. For modification of an existing service in a residential, commercial or multiple-occupancy, the fee is provided by the city fee schedule. 
(f)  Re-inspection. For re-inspection made necessary because of defective work, a fee provided by the city fee schedule based on the number of occurrences. 
(g)  Miscellaneous work shall be charged a permit fee as established in the city fee schedule. 
(h)  Construction without a permit. The permit fee shall triple if any person commences construction prior to obtaining a permit. 
(Code 1986, § 7-264; Code 2002, § 7-160; Ord. No. 2205NS, § 2, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 2533NS, § 3, 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 4, 3-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to charge fees for permits and inspections, 59 O.S. § 1696. 
Sec. 7-161. - Certificate of approval required before connecting electricity. 
    No electric utility company shall connect to any electrical installation of any kind whatsoever until furnished with a certificate of approval providing for such connection duly executed by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 7-261; Code 2002, § 7-161) 
Sec. 7-162. - Notice of rejection. 
    When a job has been rejected by the office of the electrical inspector or electrical work has been condemned by the electrical inspector, a letter shall be delivered to the owner of the premises on which the inspection work was done or to the electrical contractor doing the electrical work or to both, specifically setting out what is required to place the electrical portion of the premises in condition for approval by the electrical inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 7-262; Code 2002, § 7-162) 
Sec. 7-163. - Alteration after inspection. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to alter any electric work after its final inspection without obtaining a permit, the same as required for the original installation, repair or alteration. 
(Code 1986, § 7-263; Code 2002, § 7-163) 
Secs. 7-164-7-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FUEL GAS CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, 52 O.S. 

Sec. 7-266. - Code adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, as amended and modified in Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC) 748:20-1-1 to 748:20-15-17 is hereby adopted. Such code shall be in full force and effect within the city to the same extend as if set forth in full in this section; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between any provision of such code and any provision of the ordinances of the city, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1986, § 7-106; Code 2002, § 7-266; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 16, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 5, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 7-267. - Amendments to code. 
    The fuel gas code adopted in section 7-266 is amended as follows: 
Section IFGC-101.1 is amended by inserting the following: City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
Section IFGC-106.6.2 is amended by inserting the following: 
a.  New construction, single-family residence. For new construction in a single-family residence, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
b.  New construction, commercial or multiple occupancy. For new construction in a commercial or multiple occupancy, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
c.  Change of an existing service. For modification of an existing service in a residential, commercial or multiple-occupancy, the fee is provided by the city fee schedule. 
d.  Re-inspection. For re-inspection made necessary because of defective work, a fee provided by the city fee schedule based on the number of occurrences. 
e.  Boring. The fee for boring in the public right-of-way shall be as established in the city fee schedule. 
f.  Construction without a permit. The permit fee shall triple if any person commences construction prior to obtaining a permit. 
Section IFGC-106.6.3.2 is hereby deleted. 
Section IFGC-106.6.3.3 is hereby deleted. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-107-7-113; Code 2002, § 7-267; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 17, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 6, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 7-268-7-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REFRIGERATION, AIR CONDITIONING AND FORCED AIR HEATING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-296. - Mechanical Licensing Act adopted. 
    The provisions of 59 O.S. § 1850.2 et seq., known as the Mechanical Licensing Act, and any amendments or modifications thereto are adopted by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-126; Code 2002, § 7-296) 
Sec. 7-297. - Mechanical code adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, as amended and modified in Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC) 748:20-1-1 to 748:20-15-17 is hereby adopted. Such code shall be in full force and effect within the city to the same extend as if set forth in full in this section; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between any provision of such code and any provision of the ordinances of the city, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1986, § 7-132; Code 2002, § 7-297; Ord. No. 2130NS, § 1, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 18, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 7, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 7-298. - Statutory penalties adopted. 
    The penalty in 59 O.S. § 1850.11, as amended, is adopted by reference in this article as if fully set forth. 
(Code 2002, § 7-298) 
Sec. 7-299. - Violations. 
    Every person who violates this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished therefor in the sum not to exceed an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or may be imprisoned in the city jail for a term not to exceed 60 days or may be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1986, § 7-131; Code 2002, § 7-299) 
Sec. 7-300. - Mechanical inspector. 
    There is established the office of mechanical inspector, who shall be the city inspector. He shall make inspections of mechanical work performed within the city and shall issue permits for mechanical work. 
(Code 1986, § 7-128; Code 2002, § 7-300) 
Sec. 7-301. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in or offer to engage in any mechanical work in the city who does not possess a valid and appropriate license issued pursuant to the state Mechanical Licensing Act. 
(Code 1986, § 7-127; Code 2002, § 7-301) 
Sec. 7-302. - Registration with city. 
(a)  All persons who engage in mechanical work within the city shall, before performing such work, register in the office of the city clerk and pay an annual registration and/or registration renewal fee according to the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Upon meeting all requirements contained in the mechanical code and the payment of fees, as described in subsection (a) of this section, a mechanical contractor license shall be issued by the city clerk, which will expire on the contractor's date of birth following the date of issue. Every person who holds a registration certificate pursuant to the mechanical code shall renew such registration upon payment of the fee set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 7-129; Code 2002, § 7-302; Ord. No. 2155NS, § 1, 4-19-2004) 
Secs. 7-303-7-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 7-331. - Permit fees. 
    The mechanical code adopted in section 7-297 is amended as follows: 
(1)  Section IMC-101.1 is amended by inserting the following: City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
(2)  Section IMC-106.5.2 is amended by inserting the following: 
a.  New construction, single-family residence. For new construction in a single-family residence, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
b.  New construction, commercial or multiple-occupancy. For new construction in a commercial or multiple-occupancy, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
c.  Change of an existing service. For modification of an existing service in a residential, commercial or multiple-occupancy, the fee is provided by the city fee schedule. 
d.  Re-inspection. For re-inspection made necessary because of defective work, a fee provided by the city fee schedule based on the number of occurrences. 
e.  Construction without a permit. The permit fee shall triple if any person commences construction prior to obtaining a permit. 
(8)  Section IMC-106.5.3(2) is hereby deleted. 
(9)  Section IMC-106.5.3(3) is hereby deleted. 
(Code 1986, § 7-166; Code 2002, § 7-331; Ord. No. 2205NS, § 3, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 8, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 7-332. - Authority of inspector. 
    The city inspector shall have full power and authority to enforce this article. He shall inspect all refrigeration, air conditioning and forced air heating systems within either old or new buildings. It shall be his duty to see that the terms and provisions of this article and any amendments thereto are complied with. He shall examine the plans and specifications of contemplated buildings, improvements, alterations and repairs to buildings, improvements and alterations, which may be filed with the city inspector insofar as such plans and specifications relate to the refrigeration systems and heating plants and systems. The city inspector shall have the authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting the air conditioning, refrigeration and forced air heating systems during installation or alteration. The refusal of any owner, agent or occupant of such entrance by the city inspector for that purpose shall be grounds for the city inspector to order that all of such installation or alteration work be stopped. 
(Code 1986, § 7-167; Code 2002, § 7-332) 
Secs. 7-333-7-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Plumbers, plumbing contractors, 59 O.S. § 1001 et seq.; plumbing in municipalities, 59 O.S. §§ 1015, 1016, 1019, 1020. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-361. - Code adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, as amended and modified in Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC) 748:20-1-1 to 748:20-15-17 is hereby adopted. Such code shall be in full force and effect within the city to the same extend as if set forth in full in this section; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between any provision of such code and any provision of the ordinances of the city, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1986, § 7-86; Code 2002, § 7-361; Ord. No. 2128NS, § 1, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 20, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 9, 3-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes, 11 O.S. § 14-107. 
Sec. 7-362. - Amendments to code. 
    The plumbing code adopted in section 7-361 is amended as follows: 
Section 101.1 is amended by inserting the following: City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
Section 106.6.2 is amended by inserting the following: 
a.  New construction, single-family residence. For new construction in a single-family residence, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
b.  New construction, commercial or multiple-occupancy. For new construction in a commercial or multiple-occupancy, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
c.  Change of an existing service. For modification of an existing service in a residential, commercial or multiple-occupancy, the fee is provided by the city fee schedule. 
d.  Re-inspection. For re-inspection made necessary because of defective work, a fee provided by the city fee schedule based on the number of occurrences. 
e.  Boring. The fee for boring in the public right-of-way shall be as established in the city fee schedule. 
f.  Construction without a permit. The permit fee shall triple if any person commences construction prior to obtaining a permit. 
Section IPC-106.5.3(2) is hereby deleted. 
Section IPC-106.5.3(3) is hereby deleted. 
Section 305.4.1 shall read, insert: 18 inches; 18 inches. 
Section 903.1 shall read, insert: 6 inches. 
(Code 1986, § 7-87; Code 2002, § 7-362; Ord. No. 2205NS, § 4, 6-6-2005; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 21, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 10, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 7-363-7-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION OF PLUMBERS 

Sec. 7-396. - Required. 
    Before any person shall engage in the plumbing business or offer plumbing services, he shall be qualified as set forth in this division, and a registration certificate shall be obtained from the city and a license shall be obtained from the state as required. Where any plumbing work is being done, a master or journeyman plumber shall at all times be present on the job and in actual control and in charge of the work being done. 
(Code 1986, § 7-88(a); Code 2002, § 7-396; Ord. No. 2153NS, § 1, 4-19-2004) 
Sec. 7-397. - Qualifications and registration fees. 
    Any person who desires to enter the plumbing business or offer plumbing services within the city will be the holder of a proper, valid, unexpired and unrevoked license issued by the state and, upon proper showing that such person is competent to enter the plumbing business, will have issued to him a certificate of registration by the city clerk who will collect fees in the amounts provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 7-88(b); Code 2002, § 7-397; Ord. No. 2153NS, § 2, 4-19-2004; Ord. No. 2533NS, § 4, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 7-398. - Issuance, term and renewal of certificate. 
(a)  Upon meeting requirements contained in this division and the payment of fees as described in section 7-397, the applicant shall be issued by the city clerk a registration certificate which will expire on the applicant's date of birth following the date of issuance. Every person who holds a registration certificate issued pursuant to this division shall renew such registration certificate each year by making application for renewal and upon payment of the fee as described in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  No registration certificate shall be issued for longer than one year, and all registration certificates shall expire on the date of birth of the applicant for each year. Such registration may also be renewed upon application and payment of the fees within 30 days preceding or following the date of birth of the applicant each year and not be subject to a late renewal penalty. No penalty for late renewal shall be charged to any holder whose registration certificate that expires while the holder is in military service, if an application for renewal is made within one year following his service discharge. 
(Code 1986, § 7-88(c); Code 2002, § 7-398; Ord. No. 2153NS, § 3, 4-19-2004) 
Sec. 7-399. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Before any registration certificate shall be issued to a plumbing contractor and before any renewal of such registration certificate, the person applying for such registration certificate or renewal shall file with the city clerk an insurance policy as provided in this section. 
(b)  The policy shall be issued by an insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in the state and shall provide public liability insurance coverage for every operation required of a master plumber for the injury of any one person, for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident and for property damage in any one accident. Such insurance policy shall provide coverage in the amount as established in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The policy shall further provide that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation has been given to the city clerk, and such policy shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city for any changes therein. 
(d)  The policy and endorsed thereon shall be approved by the city manager or designee. Such policy shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(e)  The policy shall be made for the use, benefit and protection of the city and for the use, benefit and protection of any person who may suffer injury either to his person or property because of any accident or omission or negligence of any master plumber. If such policy is approved by the city manager or designee, it shall remain in full force and effect during the life of any plumber registration certificate issued. If, after the approval of such policy and after the issuance of the registration certificate, such policy is allowed to lapse or is not renewed by the payment of premiums, the city commission may cancel any registration certificate issued under this division after notice to the holder of such registration certificate and after an opportunity to be heard. The cancellation of any policy shall in no way affect or terminate any liability arising prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(Code 1986, § 7-88(e); Code 2002, § 7-400) 
Sec. 7-400. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Each certificate of registration issued by the city to a plumbing contractor, journeyman plumber or apprentice plumber shall be conditioned upon the registrant's having a current license issued by the state. If any such state license is suspended or revoked, the certificate of registration issued to the holder of such license by the city shall be suspended or revoked during the period of suspension or revocation by the state. Certificates of registration may also be suspended or revoked by the city for failure to comply with this chapter and pursuant to section 8-2, relating to suspension and revocation of licenses and permits. 
(Code 1986, § 7-95; Code 2002, § 7-401) 
Sec. 7-401. - Labeling of business vehicles. 
(a)  Except for passenger automobiles, every motor vehicle used in any manner by the holder of a registration certificate issued under this division, while such vehicle is used in the scope of such business, shall be identified by having conspicuously placed on both sides of the vehicle an identification number issued by the city to the holder of the registration certificate. The number shall be issued by the licensing clerk in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  All such numbers shall be printed at least two inches in height. They shall be preceded by the letter "S", indicating the city, and "P", identifying the type of trade. Identifying letters shall be followed by the identification number given to the holder of the registration certificate by the office of the city clerk upon application for a registration certificate or renewal of such registration certificate. 
(Code 1986, § 7-94; Code 2002, § 7-402) 
Secs. 7-402-7-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 7-431. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition is hereby adopted. Such code shall be in full force and effect within the city to the same extent as if set forth in full in this section; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between any provision of such code and any provision of the ordinances of the city, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1986, § 7-431; Code 2002, § 7-431; Ord. No. 2403NS, § 1, 6-15-2009; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 27, 3-18-2013) 
Sec. 7-432. - Amendments. 
    The following amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code are hereby adopted: 
Section 101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Shawnee hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
Section 103.1 General: The Community Development Director or their designee shall enforce all of the provisions of this code. 
Section 103.5: Delete section. 
Section 106.4 Penalty: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus court costs. Each time such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offence. 
Section 110.1 through Section 110.4: Delete sections. 
Section 111.2 Membership of the Board: The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members, being the same persons who occupy the City of Shawnee Board of Adjustment, and shall have the same terms of office as for the Board of Adjustment. 
Section 111.2.1 through Section 111.2.2: Delete sections. 
Section 111.2.4 through Section 111.2.5: Delete sections. 
Section 111.4.1: Delete section. 
Section 302.3 through Section 302.4: Delete sections. 
Section 302.8 through Section 302.9: Delete sections. 
Section 303: Delete section. 
Section 304.14: Delete section. 
Section 307: Delete section. 
Section 602.3 Heat Supply: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom shall supply sufficient heat to maintain a constant room temperatures of 68 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces: shall be supplied with heat during the period from January 1 to December 31 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit during the period of time the spaces are occupied. 
(Code 2002, § 7-432; Ord. No. 2403NS, § 2, 6-15-2009; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 28, 3-18-2013) 
Secs. 7-433-7-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE 

Sec. 7-461. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, as amended and modified in Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC) 748:20-1-1 to 748:20-15-17 is hereby adopted. Such code shall be in full force and effect within the city to the same extend as if set forth in full in this section; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between any provision of such code and any provision of the ordinances of the city, the latter shall govern. 
(Code 1986, § 7-340; Code 2002, § 7-461; Ord. No. 2126NS, § 1, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 29, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 15, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 7-462. - Amendments. 
    The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2009 edition, adopted in section 7-461 is amended as follows: 
R101.1 (page 1 second line) is amended by inserting the following: City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
Table R301.2 (1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria, insert: 
Ground snow load = 10 psf. 
Wind design. 
Wind speed = 115 mph. 
Topographical effects = No. 
Special wind region = No. 
Wind borne debris = No. 
Seismic design category = B. 
Weathering = moderate. 
Frost line depth = 18 inches. 
Termite = moderate to heavy. 
Winter design temp = 13. 
Ice barrier underlayment = No. 
Flood hazards = as determined by the most current version of the FEMA Map and documentation. 
Air freezing index = 329. 
Mean annual temp = 60.5. 
Section P2603.5.1 : Insert: 6 inches; 6 inches 
(Code 2002, § 7-462; Ord. No. 2126NS, § 2, 1-20-2004; Ord. No. 2458NS, § 1, 6-6-2011; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 30, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 16, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 7-463-7-490. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - EXISTING BUILDINGS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Condemnation of dilapidated buildings, 11 O.S. § 22-112; housing authorities generally, 63 O.S. § 1051 et seq. 

Sec. 7-491. - Adopted. 
(a)  A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, as amended and modified in Oklahoma Administrative Code (OAC) 748:20-1-1 to 748:20-15-17 is hereby adopted. Such code shall be in full force and effect within the city to the same extend as if set forth in full in this section; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between any provision of such code and any provision of the ordinances of the city, the latter shall govern. 
(b)  Amendments. 
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
Section 1301.2 Insert: February 3, 1983. 
(Code 2002, § 7-491; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 32, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 12, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 7-492-7-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FAIR HOUSING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Discriminatory housing generally, 25 O.S. § 145.2 et seq. 

Sec. 7-521. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the sections of this article, upon being found guilty thereof by the municipal court, shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, for each offense. Each day that any offense is continued in violation of this article is to be construed as a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 12-31; Code 2002, § 7-521) 
Sec. 7-522. - Discriminatory housing practices; categories or classes of persons protected. 
(a)  It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person or any agent or employee of such person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of any housing or otherwise make unavailable or deny any housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of housing or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with any housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(3)  Make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of housing, that indicates any preference, limitation, discrimination or intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(4)  Represent to any person, for reasons of discrimination, that any housing is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such housing is in fact so available because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(5)  Deny any person access to or membership or participation in a multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions of access, membership or participation in such an organization, service or facility because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(6)  Include in any transfer, sale, rental or lease of housing any restrictive covenant that discriminates or honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(7)  Refuse to consider the income of both applicants when both applicants seek to buy or lease housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(8)  Refuse to consider as a valid source of income any public assistance, alimony or child support, awarded by a court, when that source can be verified as to its amount, length of time received, regularity or receipt because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(9)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges relating to the obtaining or use of financial assistance for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability. 
(10)  Discharge, demote or discriminate in matters of compensation or working conditions against any employee or agent because of the obedience of the employee or agent to the provisions of this section. 
(11)  Solicit or attempt to solicit the listing of housing for sale or lease, by door-to-door solicitation, in person or by telephone or by distribution of circulars, if one of the purposes is to change the racial composition of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Knowingly induce or attempt to induce another person to transfer an interest in real property or discourage another person from purchasing real property by representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of real property owned, used or occupied by persons of any particular race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status or disability or represent that such existing or potential proximity shall or may result in: 
a.  The lowering of property values; 
b.  A change in the racial, religious or ethnic character of the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is located; 
c.  An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or 
d.  A decline in quality of the schools serving the area. 
(13)  Refuse to rent or lease housing to a blind, deaf or disabled person on the basis of the person's use or possession of a bona fide, properly trained guide, signal or service animal. 
(14)  Demand the payment of an additional nonrefundable fee or an unreasonable deposit for rent from a blind, deaf or disabled person for such guide, signal or service animal. Such blind, deaf or disabled person may be liable for any damage done to the dwelling by such dog. 
(15)  Discriminate: 
a.  In the sale or rental or otherwise make available or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
1.  That buyer or renter; 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or 
3.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
b.  Against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability of: 
1.  That person; 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
3.  Any person associated with that person. 
(b)  For purposes of disability discrimination in housing pursuant to this section, discrimination includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises, provided that such person also provides a surety bond guaranteeing restoration of the premises to their prior condition, if necessary to make the premises suitable for nondisabled tenants; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy 30 months after the date of enactment of the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (PL 100-430), a failure to design and construct those dwellings in a manner that: 
a.  The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons; 
b.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs; and 
c.  All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
1.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
2.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
3.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
4.  Usable kitchen and bathrooms so that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
d.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically disabled people, commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.1," suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (b)(3)c of this section. 
e.  As used in this subsection, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means: 
1.  Buildings consisting of four or more units if the buildings have one or more elevators; and 
2.  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
f.  Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(c)  As used in this subsection, the term "residential real estate-related transaction" means: 
(1)  Making or purchasing loans or providing other financial assistance to: 
a.  Purchase, construct, improve, repair or maintain a dwelling; or 
b.  Secure residential real estate; or 
(2)  Selling, brokering or appraising residential real property. A person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions may not discriminate against a person in making a real estate-related transaction available or in the terms or conditions of a real estate-related transaction because of race, color, religion, gender, disability, familial status national origin or age. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit discrimination against a person because the person has been convicted under federal law or the law of any state of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
(e)  No other categories or classes of persons are protected pursuant to this section. The human rights commission shall have no authority or jurisdiction to act on complaints based on any kind of discrimination other than those kinds of discrimination prohibited pursuant to 25 O.S. § 1101 et seq. or any other specifically authorized by law. 
(Code 1986, § 12-32; Code 2002, § 7-522; Ord. No. 2533, § 6, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Human Rights Commission, 25 O.S. § 1501 et seq. 
Sec. 7-523. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in section 7-522 shall prohibit: 
(1)  A religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of housing which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preferences to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in section 7-522 apply to a private membership club which is a bona fide club and which is exempt from taxation pursuant to section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  A religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from: 
a.  Limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion; or 
b.  Giving preference to persons of the same religion, unless membership in the religion is restricted because of race, color or national origin. 
(3)  A private club not open to the public that, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(b)  Nothing in section 7-522 relating to familial status applies to housing for older persons. As used in this subsection, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  That the human rights commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons pursuant to a federal or state program; 
(2)  Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit as determined by human rights commission rules. 
(c)  (1)  Subject to subsection (c)(1)a.2 of this section, section 7-522 does not apply to: 
a.  The sale or rental of a single-family house sold or rented by an owner if: 
1.  The owner does not own: 
(i)  More than three single-family houses at any one time; or 
(ii)  Any interest in or is there owned or reserved on his behalf, pursuant to any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three single-family houses at any one time; and 
2.  The house was sold or rented without: 
(i)  The use of the sales or rental facilities or services of a real estate broker, agent or salesman licensed pursuant to the Oklahoma Real Estate License Code or of an employee or agent of a licensed broker, agent or salesman or the facilities or services of the owner of a dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five or more families; or 
(ii)  The publication, posting or mailing of a notice, statement or advertisement prohibited by law; or 
b.  The sale or rental of rooms or units in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner maintains and occupies one of the living quarters as the owner's residence. 
(2)  The exemption in subsection (c)(1)a of this section applies to only one sale or rental in a 24-month period, if the owner was not the most recent resident of the house at the time of the sale or rental. 
(d)  Nothing provided for in section 7-522 shall: 
(1)  Prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, age, religion, gender, disability, familial status or national origin. 
(2)  Affect a reasonable local or state restriction on the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling or restriction relating to health or safety standards. 
(3)  Prevent or restrict the sale, lease, rental, transfer or development of housing designed or intended for the use of the handicapped. 
(4)  Affect a requirement of nondiscrimination in any other state or federal law. 
(5)  Prohibit the transfer of property by will, by intestate succession or by gift. 
(Code 1986, § 12-33; Code 2002, § 7-523; Ord. No. 2533, § 6, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 7-524. - Complaints. 
    Any person aggrieved by a discriminatory practice prohibited by this article may file a complaint with the human rights commission. Such complaints shall be handled in accordance with sections 2-357 and 2-363. 
(Code 1986, § 12-34; Code 2002, § 7-524) 
Secs. 7-525-7-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SWIMMING POOLS AND TANKS 

Sec. 7-551. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Swimming pool or tank means those pools or tanks that are designed and maintained primarily for swimming purposes and that are so constructed that any portion thereof has a depth of more than 18 inches below the surface of the ground or for aboveground pools, such term means all aboveground pools. 
(Code 1986, § 7-306; Code 2002, § 7-551) 
Sec. 7-552. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating this article, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 7-307; Code 2002, § 7-552) 
Sec. 7-553. - Fence. 
    All private outdoor swimming pools or tanks shall be enclosed by a substantial fence not less than 48 inches in height, so constructed as to prevent, within reason, any person from gaining access beneath or through the fence, and which shall have a similarly substantial gate of the same height as the fence, with facilities for locking the gate when the pool is unguarded. 
(Code 1986, § 7-308; Code 2002, § 7-553) 
Sec. 7-554. - Locking of gate. 
    Whenever a gate is contained in any enclosure required under this article, the gate shall be kept closed and locked at all times except when open for the purpose of ingress and egress. 
(Code 1986, § 7-309; Code 2002, § 7-554) 
Secs. 7-555-7-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS 

Sec. 7-581. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dilapidated building means a structure: 
(1)  That, through neglect or injury, lacks necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the general public; 
(2)  That is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of necessary repairs and that is considered uninhabitable or that is a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the general public; 
(3)  That is determined by the city commission or the community development director to be an unsecured building, as defined by section 7-583(c), more than three times during any 12-month period; 
(4)  That has been boarded and secured, as defined by section 7-583(c), for more than 18 consecutive months; or 
(5)  A structure declared by the city commission to constitute a public nuisance. 
    Owner means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer. 
(Code 1986, § 7-321(7); Code 2002, § 7-581; Ord. No. 1941NS, § 1, 7-19-1999; Ord. No. 2486NS, § 1, 8-20-2012) 
Sec. 7-582. - Procedure for notice, hearing, removal and assessment of costs. 
(a)  Without limiting any procedure contained in other sections of this Code or in any other code duly adopted by the city, the community development director may cause dilapidated buildings within the city to be torn down and removed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  At least ten days' notice that a building is to be torn down or removed shall be given to the owner of the property before the community development director holds a hearing and takes action. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and shall state in general terms the specific problem or problems with the building which cause it to be dilapidated or otherwise detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. The notice shall also inform the property owner that failure to attend the hearing will result in the immediate removal of the dilapidated building. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner at the address shown on the current year's tax rolls in the office of the county treasurer or any other source deemed by the city to be more accurate than said tax rolls. At the time of mailing notice to the property owner, the municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. Written notice shall also be sent by certified mail to any mortgage holder, as shown in the records of the office of the county clerk, to the last known address of the mortgagee. At the time of mailing notice to the mortgage holder, the municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. If the certified mail to the property owner is refused, service of the notice shall be deemed valid and complete. However, if the property owner cannot be located, as shown by the certified on the property or by publication, by publishing in a legal newspaper published in the city and which is of general circulation in the city one time, not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action by the community development director. 
(2)  A hearing shall be held by the community development director to determine if the property is dilapidated and has become detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the general public and the community or if the property creates a fire hazard which is dangerous to other property. At the hearing the property owner shall be informed of the substance of the evidence upon which the charges are based. The property owner may be represented by counsel and may present evidence and testimony in his behalf and may cross examine witnesses against him. 
(3)  Pursuant to a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the community development director may cause the dilapidated building to be torn down and removed. The community development director shall fix reasonable dates for the commencement and completion of the work. The city clerk shall immediately file a notice of dilapidation and lien with the county clerk describing the property, the findings of the city at the hearing and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the destruction and removal costs and that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of filing the notice. The city agents are granted the right of entry on the property for the performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the city if the work is not performed by the property owner within the dates fixed by the community development director. 
(4)  The community development director shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removing of dilapidated buildings and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction with the dismantling and removing of the buildings, including the cost of notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward a statement of the actual cost attributable to the dismantling and removing of the buildings and a demand for payment of such costs by first-class mail to the property owner. In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address provided for in subsection (1) of this section. At the time of mailing the statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the city clerk shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. If the city dismantles or removes any dilapidated building, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required for the dismantling and removal of the dilapidated building. If dismantling and removal of the dilapidated building is done on a private-contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. 
(5)  When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city clerk shall file a release of lien. If payment attributable to the actual cost of the dismantling and removing of the building is not made within six months from the date of mailing the statement to the owner of such property, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer. Such costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law. Until finally paid, the costs and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of the notice of dilapidation and lien is filed with the county clerk. In addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the notice of the lien is filed with the county clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided for in this subsection, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon, including an action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property. A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of the lien. 
(6)  The property owner shall have the right of appeal to the city commission from any order of the community development director. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal, clearly stating all grounds upon which the appeal is based, with the city clerk within ten days after the administrative order is rendered. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from abating a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
(b)  The city officers, employees or agents shall not be liable for any damages or loss of property due to the removal of dilapidated buildings performed pursuant to this section or as otherwise prescribed by law. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 7-321(1)-(6), (8)-(10); Code 2002, § 7-582; Ord. No. 2057NS, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 7-583. - Unsecured buildings. 
(a)  After a building has been declared dilapidated as provided in section 7-582 and before the commencement of the tearing down and removing of a dilapidated building, the development director may authorize that such a building be boarded and secured. 
(b)  The development director may cause the premises on which an unsecured building is located to be cleaned of trash and weeds in accordance with other sections of this Code. 
(c)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boarding and securing or boarded and secured means the closing, boarding or locking of any or all exterior openings to prevent entry into the structure. 
    Unsecured building means any structure that is not occupied by a legal or equitable owner thereof or by a lessee of a legal or equitable owner and into which there are one or more unsecured openings such as broken windows, unlocked windows, broken doors, unlocked doors, holes in exterior walls, holes in the roof, broken basement or cellar hatchways, unlocked basement or cellar hatchways or other similar unsecured openings which would facilitate an unauthorized entry into the structure. The development director may cause an unsecured building to be boarded and secured in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Before the development director orders such action, at least ten days' notice that such unsecured building is to be boarded and secured shall be given by certified mail with return receipt requested to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in section 7-582. A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the property to be affected. 
(2)  The owner of the property may give his written consent to the city authorizing the boarding and securing of such unsecured building and to the payment of any costs incurred thereby. By giving written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing by the development director. 
(3)  If the property owner does not give his written consent to such actions, a hearing may be held by the development director to determine whether the boarding and securing of such unsecured building would promote and benefit the public health, safety and welfare. Such hearing may be held in conjunction with a hearing on the accumulation of trash or growth of weeds or grass on the premises of any unsecured building held pursuant to other sections contained in this Code. In making the determination, the development director shall apply the following standard: The development director may order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building when the boarding and securing thereof would make such building less available for transient occupation, decrease a fire hazard created by such building or decrease the hazard that such building would constitute an attractive nuisance to children. Upon making the required determination, the development director may order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building. 
(4)  After the development director orders the boarding and securing of the unsecured building, the city clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property, stating the findings of the city at the hearing at which such building was determined to be unsecured and stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the costs of boarding and securing the building. 
(5)  Pursuant to the order of the development director, the city agents are granted the right of entry on the property for the performance of the boarding and securing of such building and for the performance of all necessary duties as a governmental function of the city. 
(6)  After an unsecured building has been boarded and secured, the development director shall determine the actual costs of such actions and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction therewith. The city clerk shall forward a statement of the actual costs attributable to the boarding and securing of the unsecured building and a demand for payment of such costs, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the property owners and mortgage holders as provided in section 7-582. If the city boards and secures any unsecured building, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, materials and equipment required for the performance of such actions. If such actions are done on a private-contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. 
(7)  When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual costs of boarding and securing the unsecured building is not made within 30 days from the date of mailing the statement to the owner of such property, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer. The costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law. The costs and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the notice of the lien is filed with the county clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property. The lien shall continue until the costs and interest are fully paid. At any time prior to collection as provided for in this subsection, the city may pursue any civil remedy for the collection of the amount owing and interest thereon. Upon receiving payment the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct the discharge of the lien. 
(Code 1986, § 7-322; Code 2002, § 7-583) 
Sec. 7-584. - Sign maintenance. 
(a)  Every sign, including those specifically exempt from any city code in respect to permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or of rust-resistant metals. The code enforcement officer or his authorized representative shall inspect and shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which shall constitute a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence. 
(b)  The replacing or repairing of a sign or a sign structure which has been damaged to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the appraised replacement cost (as determined by the code enforcement officer) shall be considered as "maintenance" only when said sign conforms to all of the applicable provisions of the sign code of the city and when the damage has been caused by an act of God or violent accident. 
(Code 2002, § 7-584; Ord. No. 2064NS, § 1, 7-15-2002) 
Sec. 7-585. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Any sign, together with its supporting structure now or hereafter existing which, 12 months or more after the premises have been vacated, advertises an activity, business, product or service no longer produced or conducted upon the premises upon which such sign is located is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner of record, upon whose property a prohibited sign is located, to remove said sign within ten days of receiving notification from the city to do so. Should the property owner fail to remove the sign after receiving notification from the city, the community development director of the city may cause the sign within the city to be torn down and removed, with the cost of said removal being affixed as a lien on the property, pursuant to the identical procedure set forth in section 7-582. 
(Code 2002, § 7-585; Ord. No. 2064NS, § 2, 7-15-2002) 
Secs. 7-586-7-610. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 7-611. - Compliance with article and payment of permit fees. 
    Persons licensed under this article must comply with all of the sections of this article relating to the work being done and must pay the permit fees required for demolishing buildings and structures. 
(Code 1986, § 7-54; Code 2002, § 7-611) 
Sec. 7-612. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any section of this article, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than the amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 7-51; Code 2002, § 7-612) 
Sec. 7-613. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the city inspector to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-55; Code 2002, § 7-613) 
Sec. 7-614. - License. 
(a)  Application required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of demolishing buildings or structures without first having secured a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the city clerk. 
(b)  Fees. The fee for a license required under subsection (a) of this section shall be as described in the city fee schedule for an annual license, which will expire on December 31 of the year following the date of issue. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-52, 7-53; Code 2002, § 7-614) 
Sec. 7-615. - Surety bond. 
    Every person licensed under this article shall file with the city clerk a bond in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, with sureties to be approved by the city manager or designee. Such bond shall be payable to the city and shall be conditioned that: 
(1)  The principal will at all times do all demolition work and associated work, including, but not limited to, the removal of all debris and the transportation and deposit thereof, strictly in accordance with this article; 
(2)  All work will be done in a good and workmanlike manner; 
(3)  The city shall be fully indemnified and held harmless from any cost, expense, damages to real or personal property or personal injury done to any person or property in the conduct of such work; and 
(4)  The licensee shall cause all streets, alleys and sidewalks that have been damaged in any manner to be repaired and put in the same condition as they were before the work was done. 
(Code 1986, § 7-56; Code 2002, § 7-615) 
Sec. 7-616. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Before any license is issued under this article, the applicant for the license shall file with the city clerk an insurance policy for an indemnity fund as provided in this section. 
(b)  Such insurance policy shall be issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and shall provide public liability insurance for every operation or job performed by such person so engaged in the business of demolishing buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, the removal of all debris and the transportation and deposit thereof, for the injury or death of any one person, for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident and for property damage in any one accident arising out of such work, such insurance policy shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The policy shall further provide that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation has been given to the city clerk, and such policy shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city for any changes therein. 
(d)  The policy shall be approved by the city manager or designee. 
(e)  The policy shall be made for the use, benefit and protection of the city and for the use, benefit and protection of any person who may suffer injury either to his person or property because of any accident or omission or negligence of the licensee or his agents, servants and employees and all persons acting by, through or under the authority of such license. The policy of insurance shall remain in full force and effect during the life of any such license issued. If the policy is allowed to lapse or is not renewable by the payment of premiums, the city commission may cancel any license issued under this article, after notice to the licensee and after an opportunity to be heard. The cancellation of any policy shall in no way affect or terminate any liability arising prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(Code 1986, § 7-57; Code 2002, § 7-616) 
Secs. 7-617-7-645. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - STORM CELLARS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Storm shelters maintained by boards of education, 70 O.S. § 24-115. 

Sec. 7-646. - License required; fees. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of constructing or repairing storm cellars within the city unless such person applies for and obtains a license to conduct such business and pays to the city clerk a license fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, per annum. Such license fee shall expire on December 31 of each year following the date of issuance, and the full annual fee shall be paid in advance. No license shall be issued for less than the full annual fee. 
(b)  Late renewal of the license shall subject the licensee to an additional fee as described in the city fee schedule, and no license shall be renewed more than 90 days after expiration. 
(Code 1986, § 7-71; Code 2002, § 7-646) 
Sec. 7-647. - Surety bond. 
(a)  Before any license is issued to any person engaging in the business of constructing or repairing storm cellars, he shall file a surety bond with the city clerk in an amount as described in the city fee schedule payable to the city and conditioned that: 
(1)  The principal will at all times do all storm cellar construction and repair work strictly in accordance with this article; 
(2)  All work will be done in a good and workmanlike manner; and 
(3)  The city shall be fully indemnified and held whole and harmless from any cost, expense, damages to real property or injury done to any person or property in the prosecution of such work that may arise out of or be occasioned in the performance of such work. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any person engaged in the business of constructing or repairing storm cellars until such bond has been filed with and approved by the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1986, § 7-72; Code 2002, § 7-647) 
Sec. 7-648. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Before any license required under this article is issued to a person engaged in the business of constructing or repairing storm cellars, he shall file with the city clerk an insurance policy for an indemnity fund as provided in this section. 
(b)  Such insurance policy shall be issued by any insurance company licensed to do business in the state and shall provide public liability insurance for every operation or job performed by such person engaged in the business of constructing or repairing storm cellars for the injury or death to any one person, for the injury or death to any number of persons in any one accident and for the property damage in any one accident growing out of such work. Such insurance policy shall provide coverage in the amount as established in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The policy shall further provide that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation has been given to the city clerk, and the policy shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city for any changes therein. 
(d)  The policy shall be approved by the city manager or designee and endorsed thereon. 
(e)  The policy shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. The policy shall be made for the use, benefit and protection of the city and for the use, benefit and protection of any person who may suffer injury either to his person or property because of any accident or omission or negligence of any person engaged in the business of constructing or repairing storm cellars. If the policy is approved by the city manager or designee, it shall remain in full force and effect during the life of any such license issued. If, after the approval of the policy and after the issuance of the license, the policy is allowed to lapse or is not renewed by the payment of premiums, the city commission may cancel any license issued under this article, after notice to the licensee and after an opportunity to be heard. The cancellation of any policy shall in no way affect or terminate any liability arising prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(Code 1986, § 7-73; Code 2002, § 7-648) 
Secs. 7-649-7-675. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Encroachments and obstructions in streets generally, 11 O.S. § 36-107. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-676. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall move any building or structure or thing onto, over or across any street or alley without having complied with all of the sections of this article, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 7-21; Code 2002, § 7-676) 
Sec. 7-677. - Liability. 
    No section or condition of this article shall be construed to limit the civil liability of any person moving any house, building or other thing on or over any of the city streets, avenues and alleys from any damages which may result as the proximate cause of such acts to any person or his property or to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-35; Code 2002, § 7-677) 
Sec. 7-678. - Passageway around structure. 
    Any person operating under a permit issued pursuant to this article or his laborer, servant, agent or employee shall cause a sufficient passageway to be kept open for vehicles to pass on one side or both sides of any building, structure, edifice, object or thing while it is being moved upon any street, avenue or alley, if the character of the building, structure, edifice, object or thing permits such, and when possible the building, structure, edifice, object or thing shall be kept moving each day without avoidable delay. 
(Code 1986, § 7-30; Code 2002, § 7-678) 
Sec. 7-679. - Protection of trees and utility wires and poles. 
(a)  Any person who has a permit to move a building or structure over any street within the city shall derive no right, by virtue of such permit, to injure or impair the condition of usefulness of any shade tree or electric light or telephone or telegraph lines or poles. 
(b)  No tree of any kind shall be cut, bruised, scarred or injured under any circumstances, without the expressed permission, in writing, of the owner of the tree and without the permission of the public works director. 
(c)  When necessary to remove any electric light, telephone or telegraph construction, it shall be the duty of the person moving the building or structure to give not less than 24 hours' notice to the public utility company or person owning or operating such construction. The notice shall state the place, the construction that is necessary to be removed or temporarily changed or altered and the day on which it is desired to have such clearance made, as well as the amount of time it will be necessary to keep such space clear. The 24-hour notice to the public utility shall be the minimum time of the notice, but the building shall not be moved over the streets until the public utility involved shall have had a reasonable time, not exceeding seven days, to make such clearance. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the person moving the building or structure to deposit an amount of money with the city clerk, estimated by the city clerk to be the amount necessary to cover the cost of changing or moving the public utility overhead construction and replacing the construction in its former condition. Upon making such deposit with the city clerk and upon delivery of the notice to the owner or operator of the electric light, telephone or telegraph poles and line construction, it shall be the duty of the person owning or operating the light, telephone or telegraph overhead construction to make such temporary changes as are reasonably necessary to comply with the conditions set forth in the notice made and delivered to him. 
(Code 1986, § 7-31; Code 2002, § 7-679) 
Sec. 7-680. - Caution lights. 
    It shall be the duty of each person issued a permit under this article to place red lights, plainly visible for not less than 200 feet, on every side of the building or structure that is being moved, at the close of day and to keep the lights burning throughout the entire night and until one hour after sunrise on the morning following. The lights shall be so placed and maintained that the view of the lights in any sense will not be obstructed. As many additional lights as may be necessary shall be placed at such other points on the building or structure as will enable any person of reasonable and ordinary prudence to take notice of the obstruction. 
(Code 1986, § 7-32; Code 2002, § 7-680) 
Sec. 7-681. - Persons on guard and notice to protect public. 
    It shall be the duty of every housemover to station sufficient persons on guard and to establish such notice by placard or boards in the immediate vicinity of the moving activities as will be necessary to apprise any reasonable person of any potential danger that might be incurred by approaching the moving operations or buildings or the instruments or equipment used in the moving of the buildings. 
(Code 1986, § 7-33; Code 2002, § 7-681) 
Sec. 7-682. - Notice to fire chief. 
    When any person desires to move any building and has a permit issued pursuant to this article, he shall show his permit to the chief of the fire department. If for any reason any delay is occasioned by any unforeseen contingency, it shall be the permittee's duty to inform the fire chief of such facts to the end that the fire chief may keep accurate and recent information of the true condition of the streets and alleys for the fire department. 
(Code 1986, § 7-34; Code 2002, § 7-682) 
Secs. 7-683-7-710. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 7-711. - Required. 
    No person, as principal, agent, laborer, servant or employee, shall use or occupy any of the streets, avenues, alleys or other public places within the city for the purpose of moving any building, structure or edifice or any other object or thing, of any kind or character, to be used or placed therein for the purpose of effecting the transportation of such structure, building, edifice or other thing without having first obtained from the building inspector a permit for such purposes, which permit shall first have been approved by the public works director and the building inspector. No permit shall be necessary to move buildings or other structures that are under 131/2 feet in height, when loaded, and under 14 feet in width and an overall length of 65 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 7-22; Code 2002, § 7-711) 
Sec. 7-712. - Application. 
    A permit required by this division will be obtained upon written application accompanied by a permit fee in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. The application will state the following: 
(1)  The character of the thing or object to be moved and transported along or through and upon the streets, avenues or alleys; 
(2)  The proposed route of such transportation; and 
(3)  The place where the equipment used in effecting such moving and transportation will be placed and secured. 
(Code 1986, § 7-24; Code 2002, § 7-712; Ord. No. 2533NS, § 5, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 7-713. - Fees. 
    The fee for a permit for removing any building up to 24 feet in width shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule; from 24 feet to 30 feet in width the fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule; from 30 feet to 32 feet in width the fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. No fee shall be charged for removing any building or structure not more than 131/2 feet in height when loaded, nine feet wide, and an overall length of 50 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 7-23; Code 2002, § 7-713) 
Sec. 7-714. - Bonds. 
(a)  No permit required by this division shall be issued until the applicant for the permit shall have deposited with the officer issuing the permit a cash bond in such sum as may be reasonably necessary to cover all losses or damages to streets or pavements because of any negligence or improper occupancy of the streets, sidewalks and alleys. 
(b)  Every person engaged as principal in the business regulated by this article, in addition to the cash bond deposit, shall deliver a surety bond to be approved by the city manager or designee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, conditioned that such person shall save, indemnify and keep harmless the city against any liabilities, judgments, damages, costs and expenses that may in any way accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of the permit or while acting under the permit and that such person shall under all circumstances strictly comply with the terms of the permit. Such surety bond shall not in any manner be affected or limited by the cash deposit required. 
(Code 1986, § 7-25; Code 2002, § 7-714) 
Sec. 7-715. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Before any permit shall be issued to a housemover, every person obtaining such permit shall file with the city clerk an insurance policy for an indemnity fund as provided in this section. 
(b)  Such policy shall be an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in the state, providing public liability insurance coverage for each operation required in house moving for the injury or death of any one person, for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident growing out of the house moving and for property damage in any one accident, such insurance policy shall provide coverage in the amounts as described in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The policy shall also provide that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation has been given to the city clerk, and the policy shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city for any changes therein. 
(d)  The policy shall be approved by the city manager or designee and endorsed thereon, and it shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(e)  The policy shall be made for the use, benefit and protection of any person or property because of any accident, omission or negligence of any person engaged in house moving and shall remain in full force and effect during the life of any such permit issued. If, after the approval of the policy and after the issuance of the permit, such policy shall be allowed to lapse or shall not be renewed by the payment of premiums, the city commission may cancel any permit issued under this division, after notice to the permittee and after an opportunity to be heard. The cancellation of any policy shall in no way affect or terminate any liability arising prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(Code 1986, § 7-26; Code 2002, § 7-715) 
Sec. 7-716. - Prerequisites to issuance. 
(a)  The building inspector shall not approve any permit required under this division when he shall find, from a statement of the facts, that the building, structure, edifice or other thing is of such size, weight or dimensions as will result in any damage to the city pavements, curbs or sidewalks or shall be so large as to be impracticable of being moved without gross injury to shade trees or other property. He shall not approve any permit, unless he shall find that the applicant has all the necessary equipment, in a good condition, that may be necessary to move the building, structure, edifice or other thing and that the applicant is a person of such experience and ability that it is reasonable to expect the transportation of such building or other structure to be accomplished by him within the time prescribed in the permit. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for the removal of any building exceeding 22 feet in height after such building is loaded upon the equipment used in the removal of the building or for any building of over 32 feet in width or 50 feet in length. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued to move any building until the sewer service line from such building to be moved has been plugged by a licensed plumber at the riser at a point not less than four feet deep from the surface of the ground. The owner of any property from which the building is moved shall immediately clean up the lot from which the building was moved by filling all holes and removing any debris and trash from the premises. Such owner shall deposit with the building inspector, before removing the building, an amount as described in the city fee schedule as a guarantee that the lot will be cleaned up, as stated in this subsection. If the owner does not clean up such lot within ten days after the removal of the building, the building inspector is authorized to clean up the lot and expend all or such portion of the deposit to clean up the lot. If the lot is cleaned up by the owner, the building inspector will refund the deposit. 
(Code 1986, § 7-27; Code 2002, § 7-716) 
Sec. 7-717. - Time limits for completion of moving. 
    At the time of application for a permit required under this division, it shall be the duty of the mover of any building or structure to estimate the reasonable time required for the moving of the building from its present location to its proposed location, and the applicant shall state in his application for a permit what he deems to be such reasonable time. The route and time allowed for the moving of the building shall be determined and fixed by the public works director. The permit shall especially provide that, from the time any part of the street is used for the moving of the building or structure, such building or structure shall be cleared from any of the city streets within a number of days specified therein, Sundays and holidays excepted. The mover shall bind himself to pay an amount as describe in the city fee schedule per day for each day or any part of which such building or structure remains on the street in excess of the number of days allowed in the permit, and his cash deposit shall, in addition to his bond, be secondarily liable for the payment of such amount. Nothing but the act of God shall be a defense against the payment of such sums. 
(Code 1986, § 7-28; Code 2002, § 7-717) 
Sec. 7-718. - Sundays and holidays excluded from time limits. 
    No permit required under this division shall be issued for any day which, according to the estimated number of days required to move the building or structure, shall, when counted from the date of the permit, include a Sunday or legal holiday, provided that this shall apply only where the permit provides that the person moving the building or structure shall begin the moving of the building or structure on the day of issuance of the permit. When a day is set on which the person moving the building shall begin to move the building and such day is different from the date of issuance of the permit, no permit shall be issued in such a way as to include a Sunday or holiday within the time allowed for moving the building. Where the number of days exceeds five, this section shall not apply. 
(Code 1986, § 7-29; Code 2002, § 7-718) 
Secs. 7-719-7-749. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - DOWNTOWN PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 7-750. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Downtown Property Maintenance Code. 
(Code 2002, § 7-750; Ord. No. 2564NS, § 2, 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 7-751. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards and regulations to safeguard life, health, safety, property and public welfare by regulating the maintenance of structures in downtown Shawnee. 
(Code 2002, s 7-751; Ord. No. 2564NS, § 3, 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 7-752. - Scope and applicability. 
    This code shall apply to all properties zoned C-4: central business district. Every owner or tenant of property in the downtown area shall maintain property in compliance with this code. All buildings, structures and premises regulated by this code, both existing and new, shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe, and good condition, so as not to constitute a blighting influence on the city nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration of downtown Shawnee. 
(Code 2002, § 7-752; Ord. No. 2564NS, § 4, 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 7-753. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Downtown property means any property zoned C-4: central business district. 
    Owner means any person or entity claiming, or in whom is vested the ownership, dominion or title of real or personal property. 
    Tenant means any person or entity who occupies a structure or property, but who is not the owner. The term "tenant" includes, but is not limited to, a renter or lessee. 
(Code 2002, § 7-753; Ord. No. 2564NS, § 5, 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 7-754. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Exterior of building and grounds. 
(1)  Pest control. Properties shall be maintained free of insects, bats, rodents, ants, vermin and other pests considered contrary to public health and safety and having an adverse effect on adjacent property. All exterior surfaces of the building shall prevent access by pests and vermin, including broken windows, loose or missing windows or doors, damaged or decayed wood, missing siding or other situation that allows such access and harboring. 
(2)  Sanitation. All exterior grounds shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and clean condition, free of trash and debris or unwanted items considered contrary to public health and safety and/or the overall appearance, visibility and vitality of the downtown area. 
(3)  Structural members. Structural elements of any structure in the downtown area must be maintained free of deterioration and decay, and fully capable of bearing the dead and live loads placed upon them. 
(4)  Foundation walls. Foundation walls in the downtown area shall be able to carry the dead or live weight placed upon them. 
(5)  Exterior walls. All exterior walls, surfaces, and facades must be maintained free of holes, breaks, loose or decayed boards, loose plaster, peeling paint, leaks or other condition which might admit weather into this structure or an adjacent structure. Where an existing painted wall surface has areas of chipping, peeling, scaling or missing paint equal to or greater than 20 percent of the painted area, then such surface shall be repainted, or stripped or all paint and given a water-resistant coating if necessary. 
(6)  Roofs. The roof on every structure downtown shall be maintained structurally sound and free of leaks that pose a risk of causing substantial damage to the subject property or adjacent property. All roofs shall have an approved covering free of holes, cracks or excessively worn surfaces, which will prevent entrance of moisture into the structure and provide reasonable durability. Roof drainage, roof leakage, and roof runoff must not cause leaks, seepage or dampness to the interior or exterior of an adjacent structure. 
(7)  Decorative features. Cornices, corbels trim, facings, moldings, and other exterior trim shall be maintained free of decay and securely attached and surface coated to prevent decay. 
(8)  Exterior attachments. All awnings, stairs, marquees, signs, turnbuckles, fire escapes, conduit, standpipes, stacks, gutters, overhangs and similar attachments or extensions shall be maintained free of major decay and damage, securely attached and surface coated to prevent deterioration. Excessive weathering, ripping, discoloration, or holes shall be prohibited. Any item by reason of location above ground level that constitutes a danger of falling on persons or personal property in the vicinity thereof shall be removed or property secured. It shall be the duty of the owner to keep the premises free of loose and overhanging objects which by reason of location above ground level constitute a danger of falling on persons or personal property in vicinity thereof. 
(9)  Windows. Window glass shall be unbroken and shall be fitted into their frames in such a manner so as to secure, weather-proof and exclude pests and vermin. Windows that have minor chips or cracks that do not pose a safety hazard may remain. Windows kept open permanently for ventilation must be fitted with screens to exclude vermin. Windows shall not be covered with bars. Storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be prohibited in window display areas or other areas ordinarily exposed to public view unless said areas are screened from public view. It shall not be permitted to replace glass with plywood or other non-translucent material on the ground floor of a building except on an emergency basis (30 days or less) or during the duration of a building project operating under an approved building permit. On all floors above ground level, an entire window unit may be replaced with an opaque material provided that the sash and frame are removed and replaced with a building material suitable for exterior use and finished to match the adjacent wall surfaces. Nothing in this section provides relief, where particular windows, window coverings, or the absence of window coverings are required by the adopted building and fire code. 
(10)  Screening and visible walls (from sidewalk/public right-of-way). All screening of interiors shall be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in a good state of repair. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit window displays which are in good condition and appropriately maintained. All walls and other portions of buildings and structures exposed to public view shall be kept in a good state of repair and shall be painted or finished in such a manner as to present a clean, neat, attractive and maintained appearance. 
(11)  Doors. Door glass shall be unbroken and shall be fitted into their frames in such a manner so as to secure, weather-proof and exclude pests and vermin. 
(12)  Dumpsters and garbage disposal. Dumpsters and garbage disposal shall be done in the alleyways downtown and not along Main Street or other public streets. Dumpsters and garbage receptacles shall not block vehicle traffic or maneuverability and shall be placed and stored on private property whenever possible. The owner or tenant shall provide or make provisions for regular pickup and disposal based on occupancy and use and shall provide, upon request by the city, proof of service for solid waste disposal. Shared or group service is permissible and encouraged to reduce the number of dumpsters downtown. 
(13)  Sidewalks. It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner or tenant to keep the sidewalk areas in front of their property clean, sanitary and free from excessive litter, grime, grease or debris. 
(b)  Interior of building. 
(1)  General. The interior of any structure downtown including any equipment and fixtures therein shall be maintained in a sound, safe and sanitary manner, so as to not pose a substantial threat to public health, safety and welfare to occupants or adjacent structures. 
(2)  Structural members. The structural members of every building downtown shall be maintained sound, and free of any major deterioration and fully able to bear the live and dead weight placed upon them. 
(3)  Damp. The entire structure, including cellars, crawl spaces, walls, and floors shall be maintained in such a way that they are kept reasonably free from, and are not conducive to, damp, decay and rot, including rising damp, seepage from party walls and inadequate plumbing. 
(4)  Applicable codes apply. All applicable building codes apply to downtown structures including, but not limited to, those addressing sanitation, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, building, zoning and other rules. 
(5)  Junk and trash. The interior of every structure downtown shall be maintained free of waste, rubbish, refuse, garbage, debris, and unlawful storage. 
(6)  Pests. All structures downtown must be free of, and maintained in a manner that excludes, insects, rodents, bats, rats, birds and other vermin. 
(Code 2002, § 7-754; Ord. No. 2564NS, § 6, 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 7-755. - Enforcement process. 
(a)  The enforcement authority for this code shall be the community development director or their designee. 
(b)  Vacant or occupied structures included in the scope of this code that have violations or suspected violations of this code are subject to inspection by the city during regular business hours. Where there are violations or suspected violations that are not in plain view, the city may pursue issuance of a warrant to inspect the property if an owner or tenant does not provide right of entry. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a citation and penalty as set forth in subsection (e) of this section, the city shall notify the owner of the property in writing of suspected violations to this article. The owner shall have 15 calendar days to respond and begin the necessary repairs. Up to two additional 15-calendar day extensions may be granted administratively by the city if a good-faith effort is being made and the repairs are extensive or if there have been weather delays. An owner may submit reports from third party experts to demonstrate compliance with this code and the city is authorized to require such reports in accordance with adopted codes. The submittal of such reports does not guarantee acceptance and approval by the city. 
(d)  Exception. Should an owner or tenant of the property and structure have an active building permit, they shall be given the appropriate time set forth in the building code to complete repairs or the remodel project. However, under no circumstance, shall an owner or tenant allow a violation of this code to persist greater than 12 months, unless written authorization from the community development director is provided. 
(e)  Violations of this article and associated penalties shall follow the process set forth in section 7-2. Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the city from pursuing other code enforcement action allowed by other provisions of the Shawnee Municipal Code. 
(Code 2002, § 7-755; Ord. No. 2564NS, § 7, 5-18-2015) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES, PERMITS AND LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Occupational license taxes and regulations, 11 O.S. §§ 22-106, 22-107; riots and disturbances, 11 O.S. § 22-110; Sunday to be observed, 21 O.S. § 907; false increase of weight, 21 O.S. § 1505; false weights and measures, 21 O.S. § 1551 et seq.; employment of children, 40 O.S. § 71; taxation of coin-operated music or amusement devices, 68 O.S. § 1511. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Bonds and insurance. 
    Notwithstanding any section in this Code to the contrary, all bonds and insurance required as conditions precedent to the issuance of any licenses and permits by the city may be approved by the city manager or designee rather than the city commission. The amounts of all bonds, insurance and fees related to the issuance of licenses and permits set out in this chapter shall be set by resolution of the commission. 
(Code 1986, § 14-1; Code 2002, § 8-1; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 1, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-2. - Suspension and revocation of licenses and permits. 
(a)  The city manager is delegated the power to suspend summarily any license or permit issued by the city without notice and without hearing when it is necessary for the protection of the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare. Licenses or permits suspended as provided in this section may be revoked in the manner provided in this section. 
(b)  All licenses or permits issued by the city shall be subject to revocation by the city commission. Whenever it appears that any of the terms and conditions under which a license or permit is issued by the city have been violated or whenever it appears that it may be necessary for the protection of the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare that a license or permit issued by the city should be revoked, the city commission shall direct the city clerk to give written notice to the holder of such license or permit requiring him to appear before the city commission to show cause, if any there may be, why such license or permit should not be revoked. The notice shall set forth the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing and shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for the proposed revocation. The notice shall be served by sending it by certified mail to the licensee or permittee at the address shown on the current city license or permit records. The hearing shall not be less than five days from the date the notice is mailed. At the hearing the licensee or permittee shall have the right to be represented by counsel or by himself and to present evidence and testimony in his behalf. If the city commission determines that the license or permit should be revoked, it shall order revocation thereof. The city clerk shall record the order in the minutes of the hearing. 
(c)  The city commission, in its discretion, may revoke a license or permit by default if the license or permit holder fails to appear at such hearing. 
(d)  No license or permit fee or tax or any portion thereof shall be refunded if such license or permit is revoked or suspended. 
(Code 1986, § 14-2; Code 2002, § 8-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Reports of pawnbrokers, auction houses, salvage shops and junk dealers. 
    Every pawnbroker, auction house, salvage shop and junk dealer shall furnish the chief of police or his designated representative a full and complete list every day of every article taken in pawn or bought by such dealer in a manner prescribed by the chief of police, giving a full description of the article and the brand name, model numbers, serial numbers, engravings or any other identifying mark or feature on the article so pawned or bought by such dealer. Such dealer shall also keep accounts giving descriptions [of those] from whom such articles are received. Each description shall include the full name, address, date of birth, sex, race, height, hair and eye color. Such dealer shall have the goods arranged in stock so as to be inspected by the police department. When it becomes necessary to visit such dealer, the chief of police or his designated representative shall perform such duty, and no such business shall refuse to admit such officer to his place of business for the purpose of such a visit. Such dealer shall freely and fully permit the officer to make examinations as are necessary to acquire the desired information. The conviction of any such pawnbroker or other dealer of a violation of this section shall result in an immediate revocation of the license of the offender. 
(Code 1986, § 14-9; Code 2002, § 8-3; Ord. No. 2224NS, § 1, 11-21-2005) 
Secs. 8-4-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm industry means the sale, installation, alteration, repair, replacement, service, inspection or maintenance of alarm systems or service, as provided in 59 O.S. § 1800.2 et seq., involving receipt of alarm signals for the purpose of employee response and investigation of such signals or any combination of such activities, except inspections on one- and two-family dwellings are exempt. 
    Alarm system means one or more devices designed either to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion or entry or to signal a fire or other emergency condition, which signals are responded to by public law enforcement officers, fire department personnel, private guards or security officers. 
(Code 1986, § 18-111; Code 2002, § 8-31) 
Sec. 8-32. - Alarm permits required. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated an alarm system designed to activate upon a break-in, vandalism, or robbery or to detect or draw attention to the presence of a fire or any residential dwelling or premises, business, or storage structure without first having obtained a permit. Failure to have a permit upon an alarm activation followed by a response by the police or fire department shall constitute an offense. 
(b)  No person or company in the business of installing alarm systems shall install or cause to be installed any alarm system designed to activate upon a break-in, vandalism or robbery of any residential dwelling or premises, business, or storage structure without first having obtained a state license as required by 59 O.S. § 1800.1 et seq. Failure to have a state license for alarm installation shall constitute an offense. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be an offense punishable by a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs, upon first conviction and by a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs for each subsequent conviction. Each day that this section is violated shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 2002, § 8-32; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 1, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-33. - Requirements for alarm permit. 
    The application for an alarm permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full name, address and telephone number of both the owner or lessee on whose premises the system will be installed, operated, connected or maintained. 
(2)  The name of the person or state-licensed alarm system business installing, maintaining or servicing the system, as well as the type (fire, burglar, etc.) of system to be installed, operated or maintained. 
(3)  The applicant will identify by name, address and telephone number (for day and night) two contact individuals or representatives that are able to physically respond to any such alarmed location in a reasonable time (30 minutes or less). 
(4)  Such application shall also contain additional information as the chief of police or fire chief shall reasonably deem necessary for the evaluation and proper processing of the application. 
(5)  Whenever a change occurs relating to the written information required on the permit application, listing requirements, or other documents filed with the city pursuant to this article, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice of said change to the police department within ten days. 
(6)  Any changes of ownership at a location formerly or currently utilizing an alarm system shall be construed as a new installation and shall require the necessary permit and fee. 
(Code 2002, § 8-33; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 2, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 8-34. - Alarm fees required. 
(a)  The initial registration and application administrative processing fee shall be set by resolution of the commission. 
(b)  A renewal license may be applied for any time within one year from the issuance of the initial permit. A renewal license application shall have an administrative fee set by resolution of the commission. 
(c)  The fee for reinstatement after an alarm permit revocation or suspension shall be set by resolution of the commission. 
(Code 2002, § 8-34; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 3, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-35. - False alarms. 
(a)  Any owner that allows excessive false alarms to occur at any location shall be deemed to have committed an offense, which may be punishable, upon first conviction, by a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs. Each subsequent offense shall be punishable by a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs. Each day any violation of the article continues constitutes a separate offense. Excessive alarms within a short period of time as determined by the police department, or more than three alarm activations through mechanical failure, malfunction, the negligence of the owner or user of the alarm or otherwise which elicits a response by a law enforcement agency or the fire department within a calendar year will constitute an offense. 
(b)  Exceptions. An alarm will not be considered a false alarm if it is determined that the alarm was the result of: 
(1)  A natural or manmade catastrophe, or an act of God. Such events include tornadoes, floods, utility line mishaps, thunderstorms, earthquakes or other similarly violent conditions, clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer, owner or user. 
(2)  Vandalism causing physical damage to the premises. 
(3)  Attempted entry of a location causing visible, physical or other evidence of damage to such location. 
(4)  Severe weather causing physical damages to the premises. 
This section shall not apply to testing during installation and regular maintenance when the user notifies the police in advance and receives permission for the test. 
(Code 2002, § 8-35; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 4, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-36. - Revocation or suspension of permits; excessive alarms. 
(a)  In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the violation of certain provisions of this article, permits issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the city manager and/or his designee after notice by mail to the last known address, for any, but not limited to the following reasons: 
(1)  Willful failure of the owner or operator of the alarm system to respond to a verbal or otherwise request to appear at the destination of the activated or previously activated alarm upon a request from the police or fire department. 
(2)  Failure to have the alarm serviced or checked by an alarm company having a state license as required by 59 O.S. § 1800.1 et seq., or failure to correct deficiencies in equipment or operation after a verbal, written or otherwise request from the police chief and/or his designee. 
(3)  Excessive alarms within a short period of time as determined by the police department, or more than six alarm activations through mechanical failure, malfunction, the negligence of the owner or user of the alarm or otherwise which elicits a response by a law enforcement agency or the fire department within a calendar year. 
(4)  Tendering a false or bogus check with request to obtain an alarm system permit. 
(5)  Failure to comply with the regulations and requirements of this article or as otherwise established in the Code. 
(b)  Any owner or operator of a premises with a revoked permit at which an alarm is activated and the police or fire department respond shall be deemed the same as a person with no alarm permit. 
(Code 2002, § 8-36; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 5, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 8-37. - Appeal from the denial, suspension or revocation of alarm permit and user fees. 
(a)  An appeal may be made to the city manager or their designee for the denial, suspension or revocation of an alarm permit. 
(b)  Any permit holder may petition the city manager for a hearing on user fees based on a change in circumstances or repairs made to an alarm system. 
(c)  Appeals shall be made to the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 8-37; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 6, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 3, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-38. - Confidentiality of records. 
    The names, addresses, alarm descriptions and other information required of those individuals having secured a permit under this section shall remain confidential and shall not be released to the public. 
(Code 2002, § 8-38; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 7, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 8-39. - Governmental entities. 
    Alarms in buildings owned and operated by governmental entities are required to be registered pursuant to this article. However, governmental entities are exempt from fees required pursuant to this article. 
(Code 2002, § 8-39; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 8, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 8-40. - Enforcement. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs for a first offense. Each second and subsequent offence shall be punished by a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs. Each day a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2002, § 8-40; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 9, 9-7-2010; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-41. - Effective date. 
    Commencing on October 1, 2010, citizens will be allowed to register with the city code enforcement office for alarm permits. The penalty provisions of this article shall become effective for nonresidential alarms on January 1, 2011, and for residential alarms on July 1, 2011. 
(Code 2002, § 8-41; Ord. No. 2445NS, § 10, 9-7-2010) 
Secs. 8-42-8-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal license tax on hawkers, peddlers and merchants, 11 O.S. § 22-106; itinerant merchants, 47 O.S. § 421 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coupon book seller means any individual traveling by foot or any means whatsoever from place to place, from building to building, from house to house or from street to street or contacting persons by telephone, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of coupon books which are to be used for discounts or free goods, wares, merchandise, personal property of every nature whatsoever for future delivery, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes a sample of the coupon book for sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
    Itinerant merchant/transient street vendor means any person engaged in the business or occupation of selling any merchandise, products or services from a temporary indoor or outdoor location obtained from an owner or leaseholder or obtained by occupying the location without permission or by occupying a location on a street right-of-way as provided in 47 O.S. § 421(7). Itinerant merchant/transient street vendors will not include the following: 
(1)  Participants in wholesale trade shows or convention-sponsored events, trade fairs or flea markets. 
(2)  Sellers of Bibles, agricultural goods, including Christmas trees and firewood, or crafts or items made by hand. 
(3)  Participants in fairs and convention center activities conducted primarily for amusement or entertainment. 
(4)  Participants in residential garage sales. 
(5)  Civic, church and educational groups that are located in the local trade area. 
    Peddler includes the terms "hawker" and "huckster" and means any person who travels by foot or by any type of conveyance from place to place or from street to street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise of whatever nature, offering and exposing the goods, wares or merchandise for sale; or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the goods, wares or merchandise for sale from any vehicle or conveyance. 
    Solicitor or canvasser means any individual traveling by foot or any means whatsoever from place to place, from building to building, from house to house or from street to street or contacting persons by telephone, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property of every nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample or the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. 
(Code 1986, § 14-61; Code 2002, § 8-191) 
Sec. 8-192. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any section of this article, either by doing anything that is prohibited or by failure or refusal to do anything that is commanded, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine set by resolution of the commission plus costs, provided that each transaction shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 14-74; Code 2002, § 8-192; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-193. - Exemptions for farmers' products and disabled veterans. 
(a)  The term "ex-service person" as used in this section shall be construed to mean such honorably discharged persons as served in any branch of the military service of the United States during the period of any war in which the United States participated as a belligerent. 
(b)  The hawking and peddling of farm products sold by farmers are exempted from the sections of this article pertaining to produce raised and grown exclusively by such farmers. 
(c)  Any needy, disabled ex-service person who has been a citizen and resident of this state for one year may engage in what is known as hawking and peddling, to give illustrated lectures and such other like entertainment without paying a city license or tax for the privilege of so doing. Before any ex-service person shall be entitled to any of the privileges set out in this section, he shall make an affidavit in writing, before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths, that he is a citizen and resident of this state and has been for one year previous, that he served in the military of the United States as provided in subsection (e) of this section and was honorably discharged therefrom and that he is in genuine financial need of the privileges conferred by this section. 
(d)  A certificate of the judge of the district court of the county that he is in entitled to the benefits and privileges set out in this section shall be sufficient proof of the need or disability of such ex-service person and of such ex-service person's service in the military of the United States. Such certificate shall be of public record in the office of the city clerk and shall also be of record in the police department. No single certificate shall be effective for a period in excess of 60 days. 
(e)  The privileges granted by this section shall not be assignable or transferable to or used by any other person except those persons to whom certificates have been issued as provided. 
(Code 1986, § 14-62; Code 2002, § 8-193) 
State Law reference- Hawking and peddling by ex-service persons, 72 O.S. § 1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-194. - Fraud and other offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor or coupon book seller to: 
(1)  Harass, threaten, coerce or otherwise unreasonably apply duress to any citizen or otherwise breach the peace while attempting to perform the services of a solicitor or coupon book seller. 
(2)  Fail to provide any goods or services that have been paid for in full or in part. 
(3)  Defraud, trick, cheat or otherwise mislead any person into subscribing for or purchasing any goods or service when the solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor or coupon book seller knows or should know that the goods or service will not be provided or delivered. 
(Code 1986, § 14-63; Code 2002, § 8-194) 
Secs. 8-195-8-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-221. - Required; appeal of denial. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor or coupon book seller without first having obtained a license, except persons soliciting on behalf of newspapers of general circulation; public schools; or educational, religious, disabled veterans', farmers' or eleemosynary institutions located or affiliated within the city. 
(b)  Any person denied a license may appeal to the city commission by filing notice thereof with the city clerk within five days of the denial. The city commission shall render a decision at its next regular meeting. 
(Code 1986, § 14-64; Code 2002, § 8-221) 
Sec. 8-222. - Exception for interstate commerce. 
    If any individual, whether a solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor or coupon book seller, is engaged in interstate commerce, the individual must bring in proof of the interstate commerce nature of his business to the city clerk. The city clerk will make a determination of whether or not the business does involve interstate commerce. If it does, a license will be issued, and the fee will be waived. If not, the individual can be licensed pursuant to this division. A denial of the interstate commerce exemption of the fee process may be appealed to the city commission pursuant to the procedures established in section 8-221(b). 
    (Code 1986, § 14-73) 
Sec. 8-223. - Application. 
    An application for a solicitor's, peddler's, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor's or coupon book seller's license shall be sworn to and filed with the city clerk. It shall contain the following: 
(1)  Full name, description, birth date and social security number of each individual applicant. 
(2)  Addresses, both permanent and local. 
(3)  Nature of the business and kinds of goods to be sold and, if the applicant is a farmer or truck gardener, whether such goods are produced by him on land he owns, cultivates and controls. 
(4)  If employed by another, the name and address of the applicant's employer, together with a brief description of credentials showing the exact relationship. 
(5)  Fingerprints of the applicant. 
(6)  Description and license number or other identification of any vehicle to be used. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(8)  Verification of payment of sales tax to the state tax commission, providing the sales tax number. 
(9)  Whether the merchandise or goods are tax exempt and exemption from the state sales tax claimed. 
(10)  The names of at least two reliable property owners in the city; provided, however, for the itinerant merchants/transient street vendors, two reliable property owners from within the state who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility or other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant will suffice. 
(11)  For coupon book sellers, a copy of all contracts with merchants for the delivery of goods and services. For solicitors and coupon book sellers, a copy of the sales pitch shall be furnished the city if one is to be made over the telephone. 
(12)  Itinerant merchants shall supply a document from the county clerk's office that establishes that the business has complied with state law, in particular the requirement of posting bond pursuant to 19 O.S. § 1608. This subsection is to apply only to itinerant merchants/transient street vendors. 
(Code 1986, § 14-65; Code 2002, § 8-223) 
Sec. 8-224. - Fee. 
    No person shall be issued a solicitor's, peddler's, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor's or a coupon book seller's license until he pays a license fee set by resolution of the commission to the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 14-67; Code 2002, § 8-224; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-225. - Bond. 
(a)  Every person applying for a license to engage in the business of peddling goods, wares or merchandise or canvassing for the sale of such shall, before such license is issued, enter into a bond with the city with approved sureties in the penal sum set by resolution of the commission. The bond shall be conditioned that such applicant: 
(1)  Will strictly and faithfully observe all city ordinances, regulations and requirements in relation to peddlers, solicitors, canvassers, itinerant merchants and itinerant vendors, coupon book sellers or to such applicant's business and will pay all costs, fines or penalties incurred on account of his failure or neglect in that behalf; 
(2)  Will at all times do all work and perform all services relating to or arising from such canvassing, soliciting and peddling in a good and workmanlike manner; 
(3)  Shall fully indemnify and hold whole and harmless the city from any expenses or damages to real or personal property or personal injury done to any person or property in the performance of such work or the performance of such services that may arise out of or be occasioned in the performance of such work or services and that he will cause all property damaged by him to be repaired and put in the same condition as it was before the work was done; and 
(4)  The applicant will pay all costs, expenses or damages arising from any misrepresentation to any person to whom such applicant shall make any sale. 
(b)  Licenses issued and bonds filed under this division shall cover the applicant and all of his agents, servants, employees and representatives. 
(Code 1986, § 14-68; Code 2002, § 8-225; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-226. - Investigation and issuance or denial. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application for a solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor or coupon book seller license, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business background to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall so endorse on the application and return it to the city clerk's office, and no license shall be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's business responsibility is found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall so endorse on the application and return it to the city clerk's office who shall then issue the license upon payment of the required fee. 
(Code 1986, § 14-66; Code 2002, § 8-226) 
Sec. 8-227. - Term. 
    Any license issued pursuant to this division shall expire one year from the date of its issuance, except itinerant merchant/transient street vendor licenses. An itinerant merchant/transient street vendor licenses is valid for a period of 90 days from the date of its issuance. Such licenses may be renewed for an additional 90-day period. 
(Code 1986, § 14-70; Code 2002, § 8-227) 
State Law reference- Duration of municipal licenses, 11 O.S. § 22-107. 
Sec. 8-228. - Display. 
    Every solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor and coupon book seller and any employee of a solicitor, peddler, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor and coupon book seller shall exhibit the license issued at the request of any person. 
(Code 1986, § 14-71; Code 2002, § 8-228) 
Sec. 8-229. - Transferability. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1986, § 14-72; Code 2002, § 8-229) 
Sec. 8-230. - Grounds for suspension or revocation; liability of employer for acts of employee. 
    For purposes of the suspension or revocation of a solicitor's, peddler's, itinerant merchant/transient street vendor's or coupon book seller's license, it shall be sufficient to show that any solicitor or seller in the employ of such license holder has violated any section of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-69; Code 2002, § 8-230) 
Secs. 8-231-8-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SNOW CONE MERCHANTS 

Sec. 8-256. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any section of this division, either by doing anything that is prohibited or by failure or refusal to do anything that is commanded, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs, provided that each transaction shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 14-75(g); Code 2002, § 8-256; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-257. - License required; appeal of denial of license. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of selling snow cones from either a temporary or permanent structure without first having obtained a special license. 
(b)  Any person denied a license may appeal to the city commission by filing notice thereof with the city clerk within five days of the denial. The city commission shall render a decision at its next regular meeting. 
(Code 1986, § 14-75(a); Code 2002, § 8-257) 
Sec. 8-258. - Application for license. 
    An application for a snow cone merchant's license shall be sworn to and filed with the city clerk. It shall contain the following: 
(1)  Full name, description, birth date and social security number of each individual applicant. 
(2)  Addresses, both permanent and local. 
(3)  Verification of payment of sales tax to the state tax commission, providing the sales taxes number. 
(4)  The names of at least two reliable property owners in the city who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility or other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant. 
(5)  A valid zoning clearance permit. 
(Code 1986, § 14-75(b); Code 2002, § 8-258) 
Sec. 8-259. - License fee and term; compliance of licensee. 
    No person shall be issued a snow cone merchant's license until he pays a license fee set by resolution of the commission to the city clerk. Any license issued pursuant to this division shall expire 150 days from the date of its issuance. The licensee shall at all times conform to all relevant state health code regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 14-75(c); Code 2002, § 8-259; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-260. - Removal of structure after expiration of license. 
    Once the snow cone merchant's license has expired, if the licensee is operating from a portable structure, the structure is to be removed promptly from its location and stored privately by its owner. For purposes of this section, a portable structure is any structure not attached to a permanent foundation. 
(Code 1986, § 14-75(d); Code 2002, § 8-260) 
Sec. 8-261. - Display of license. 
    A snow cone merchant shall exhibit his license at the request of any person. 
(Code 1986, § 14-75(e); Code 2002, § 8-261) 
Sec. 8-262. - Transferability of license. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1986, § 14-75(f); Code 2002, § 8-262) 
Secs. 8-263-8-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Solicitation of charitable contributions, 18 O.S. § 552.1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-291. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any section of this division, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 14-81; Code 2002, § 8-291; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-292. - License required. 
    Any person who wishes to engage in or do public charitable work within the city and who desires to solicit donations of money or other assistance for such purposes shall procure from the city clerk a license authorizing such person to solicit for money or other assistance for charitable purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 14-82; Code 2002, § 8-292) 
Sec. 8-293. - License prerequisites and issuance. 
    No license required under this division shall be issued by the city clerk until the applicant has made application to and procured from an officer of the chamber of commerce of the city a letter of credit and endorsement, in which letter the names of the solicitors shall be given, and it shall be stated therein the purpose for which such solicitor is authorized to solicit donations. The letter of credit shall be filed with the city clerk for the approval of the city manager. If so approved the city clerk is authorized to issue to such person a license as provided in this article. Such license shall be issued without any charge. 
(Code 1986, § 14-83; Code 2002, § 8-293) 
Sec. 8-294. - Weekly reports. 
    All associations doing public charitable work in the city may be requested to file a report each week, on Monday, showing the amounts and character of all donations collected during the previous week; how such donations were disbursed; and the number, names and residences of all persons so aided and assisted. 
(Code 1986, § 14-84; Code 2002, § 8-294) 
Sec. 8-295. - False representation of charitable purposes. 
    No person shall collect or receive any money or property by falsely representing that such money or property is being collected for charitable or church purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 14-85; Code 2002, § 8-295) 
State Law reference- False representations, 18 O.S. § 552.18. 
Sec. 8-296. - Telephone solicitation. 
    No person may solicit contributions by telephone for a charitable nonprofit organization unless that organization has complied with the provisions of the Oklahoma Solicitation of Charitable Contributions Act, 18 O.S. § 552.1 et seq. Such person may charge a reasonable fee for his services, which shall not exceed ten percent of the net receipts of the solicitation; provided, however, that if the fee charged is based upon a predetermined flat fee, this shall not apply. All sums shall be paid directly to the nonprofit organization. 
(Code 1986, § 14-86; Code 2002, § 8-296) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1861. 
Secs. 8-297-8-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Art. IV has been deleted at the request of the city, and pursuant to the Court Order filed on Dec. 21, 2016, in Case No. CIV-15-0805-F, (W.D. Okla. 2015). Formerly, Art. IV, §§ 8-325-8-339, pertained to pawnbrokers and derived from §§ 14-101-14-108 of the 1986 Code; §§ 8-325-8-339 of the 2002 Code; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, adopted April 7, 2014; Ord. No. 2569NS, §§ 1-11, adopted June 15, 2015; and Ord. No. 2582NS, §§ 1-11, adopted June 20, 2016. 

Secs. 8-325-8-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUCTIONEERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal license tax on auctioneers, 11 O.S. § 22-106; Oklahoma Public Auction Law, 59 O.S. § 990 et seq. 

Sec. 8-361. - Applicability of article. 
    No section of this article shall be considered to apply to sales made pursuant to 59 O.S. § 990. 
(Code 1986, § 14-126; Code 2002, § 8-361) 
Sec. 8-362. - License required; compliance by licensee. 
    No person shall engage in the business or occupation of auctioneering of any goods, wares and merchandise in the city unless he first procures a license therefor and complies with all the sections of this Code and any other city ordinances relating thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 14-127; Code 2002, § 8-362) 
Sec. 8-363. - Fees. 
    All auctioneers regulated by this article shall pay a license fee set by resolution of the commission per annum. Such auctioneers may pay, in lieu of the annual fee, set by resolution of the commission per day, per week or per month. 
(Code 1986, § 14-128; Code 2002, § 8-363; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-364. - Bond. 
    A license required under this article shall not be issued to any auctioneer until he has given a good and sufficient bond to the city in the sum set by resolution of the commission, to be approved by the city manager or designee, conditioned upon such auctioneer observing the laws of the state and the city relating to such occupation and that he shall pay any damages which result from any misrepresentation made by him in the auctioneering of any goods, wares or merchandise of a material nature and upon which the purchaser of the goods, wares or merchandise relied as being true. 
(Code 1986, § 14-129; Code 2002, § 8-364; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-365. - Bids by agents. 
    No auctioneer shall authorize any person to act as his agent, servant or co-principal and in such capacity to make any bid on any goods, wares and merchandise offered at public auction by such auctioneer. In addition to being subject to the penalties provided by this Code for violations, the license of any auctioneer violating this section shall be revoked and no other license shall be issued within one year. 
(Code 1986, § 14-130; Code 2002, § 8-365) 
Sec. 8-366. - Reservation of power to refuse bids. 
    No auctioneer shall reserve any power to refuse any bid made for any goods, wares and merchandise put up by him to be sold to the highest and best bidder, unless a public announcement of such reserved right is made expressly at the time such goods, wares and merchandise are first offered for sale and before any bid is made on the goods, wares and merchandise. 
(Code 1986, § 14-131; Code 2002, § 8-366) 
Secs. 8-367-8-395. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESIDENTIAL SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-396. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Residential sale means any sale of what is held out to be or is commonly known as a garage, porch, room, yard or patio sale; estate sale not conducted pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or any other type of general sale conducted from or on any premises not located in a zoning district which permits such sales where goods or articles of any type are held out for sale to the public. The term "residential sale" does not include a situation where specific items are held out for sale and all advertisements of such sale specifically name the items to be sold. 
(Code 1986, § 14-166) 
Sec. 8-397. - Enforcement. 
    The police department will have the authority to enforce the sign and permit requirements under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-172; Code 2002, § 8-397) 
Sec. 8-398. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the sections of this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine set by resolution of the commission, plus costs, for each offense. Every article sold and every day a sale is conducted in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 14-167; Code 2002, § 8-398; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-399. - Exempted persons. 
    This article shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auctions. 
(Code 1986, § 14-168; Code 2002, § 8-399) 
Sec. 8-400. - Interval between sales. 
    No person shall hold, conduct, engage in or participate in any manner or allow a residential sale to be held or conducted on premises under his control or ownership more than three times in any calendar year, subject, however, to the exceptions allowed in sections 8-431 and 8-433. 
(Code 1986, § 14-169; Code 2002, § 8-400) 
Sec. 8-401. - Signs. 
(a)  One advertising sign per sale. Not more than one sign or other device used for the purpose of advertising or otherwise calling attention to a residential sale shall be allowed for each residential sale licensed under this article. 
(b)  Signs must be removed within 24 hours of the completion of the residential sale. Signs may not be placed closer than 13 feet of the curbline. Only the sign approved and issued by the city may be used. Signs may not be placed in the right-of-way, on any utility poles or street signs or on any private property without the permission of the property owner. 
(Code 1986, § 14-170; Code 2002, § 8-401) 
Sec. 8-402. - Display of goods. 
    The sale area of any residential sale shall be confined to the premises for which the license has been issued. 
(Code 1986, § 14-171; Code 2002, § 8-402) 
Secs. 8-403-8-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-431. - Required; compliance; limitations on number issued. 
(a)  No person shall hold, conduct, engage in or participate in any manner in a residential sale without obtaining a license as provided in this division. 
(b)  The issuance of a license under this division shall not exempt such person from the terms and provisions of other applicable sections of this Code or other ordinances. 
(c)  A separate license shall be required for each location at which a residential sale is to be held. No location shall be eligible for more than three licenses in any calendar year, unless there has been a change in the ownership of such location or unless licenses for such locations have been issued to nonprofit organizations, associations or corporations. No nonprofit organization, association or corporation may be issued more than three such licenses in any calendar year. 
(Code 1986, § 14-186; Code 2002, § 8-431) 
Sec. 8-432. - Application. 
    An applicant for a license for a residential sale shall furnish the city clerk with the following information: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location at which the proposed residential sale is to be held; 
(3)  The serial or identification number of each article to be sold, if it is obtainable; 
(4)  The date upon which the sale shall be held; and 
(5)  An affidavit from the applicant to the effect that all goods to be sold at the residential sale are owned by the applicant and have not been obtained for the purpose of reselling them at the sale. 
(Code 1986, § 14-187; Code 2002, § 8-432) 
Sec. 8-433. - Issuance; term; investigation. 
(a)  The city clerk is authorized to grant a license for a residential sale for a period not to exceed two consecutive days to any person applying who otherwise complies with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  If a residential sale is not held on one or both of the dates for which the license is issued, the city clerk may issue another license to the applicant for a residential sale to be conducted at the same location within 30 days from the date when the first sale was to be held, for no additional fee. 
(c)  Before issuing a residential sale license, the city clerk may conduct such investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-188; Code 2002, § 8-433) 
Sec. 8-434. - Fees. 
    The fee for a residential sale license shall be set by resolution of the commission, which shall include three signs which shall be in compliance with section 8-401. 
(Code 1986, § 14-189; Code 2002, § 8-434; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-435. - Revocation; refusal. 
(a)  Any license issued under this division may be revoked or any application for issuance of a license may be refused by the city clerk if the application submitted by the applicant or license holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement. 
(b)  If any person is convicted of an offense under this article, the city clerk is instructed to cancel any existing residential sale license held by the person convicted and not to issue such person another residential sale license for a period of two years from the time of conviction. 
(Code 1986, § 14-190; Code 2002, § 8-435) 
Secs. 8-436-8-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Taxicabs, 11 O.S. §§ 22-106, 22-118; financial responsibility of taxicab operators, 47 O.S. § 8-104. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-461. - Purpose and scope. 
    It is the intent of this article to regulate the operation of motor vehicles for hire that originate trips within the corporate limits of the city, excepting any trips, the regulation of which are preempted by state and/or federal law. A trip "originates" within the corporate limits of the city if any of its passengers are picked up within the corporate limits of the city for transportation for hire. Said regulation is done pursuant to the authority granted by 11 O.S. § 22-118 and any duly enacted legislation amendatory, complementary or supplementary thereto, including the city's police powers for the protection of the public's health, safety and/or welfare. 
(Code 2002, § 8-461; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-462. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Autobus means a self-propelled motor vehicle not operated on fixed tracks, with a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of seven or more passengers, operating over a fixed route, between fixed termini and/or on trips pursuant to a published bus schedule; which transports passengers in exchange for compensation; and said vehicles are regulated by the state corporation commission. 
    Carriage means any animal-drawn carriage, pedicab, bicycle carriage, and any other form of animal-drawn and/or human-powered vehicle used to transport persons for any compensation, including tips only. Neither motor-assisted nor electric-assisted carriages shall be used to transport persons for hire on city streets. 
    Certificate of public convenience and necessity/business license means the authority granted by the city to operate a vehicle for hire on the streets of the city. 
    Cruising means the driving of a vehicle for hire on the streets, alleys or public places of the city, in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
    Driver means every person who drives or operates a vehicle for hire. 
    Licensee means every person who is licensed under this chapter to operate a vehicle for hire company which originates trips within the city. 
    Motor vehicle for hire means an automobile, bus, truck, van, limousine or any other form of motor vehicle which is used to transport persons for any amount of compensation, including tips only, in exchange for said transportation. The term "motor vehicle for hire" shall not include school buses used for transporting students to and from school; vehicles used for ride sharing/carpooling when the seating capacity of the motor vehicle used does not exceed 15; funeral home limousines used exclusively for customers of the funeral home; autobuses; or courtesy vehicles which are provided by hotels or other businesses/companies free of charge to the individual customers of the hotel/business and which are not open to use by the general public. 
    Owner means every person, firm, partnership, association or corporation having proprietary use, ownership or control of any vehicles for hire or fleets of vehicles for hire. 
    Person includes both singular and plural, and shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association for business purposes. 
    Street means any street, road, alley, avenue, boulevard, public way, lane or highway within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Taxicab or taxi or cab means a motor vehicle for hire designed to carry ten persons or less, operated upon any street or on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for transportation for hire between such points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported, and equipped with a taximeter, for compensation fixed by a taximeter. 
    Taximeter means a mechanical and/or electronic device attached to a taxicab, which mechanically calculates the authorized charge on the basis of distance traveled, waiting time, or a combination of both. Charges shall be indicated upon such mechanical device in dollars and cents. 
    Vehicle for hire inspector means the community development director or their designee charged with the responsibility of ensuring compliance with all the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 8-462; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 2, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-463. - Compliance with this article and state/federal law. 
    No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle for hire, solicit passengers for transportation in such vehicle, collect fares from prospective passengers for transportation in such a vehicle, or hold himself out to the public as ready and willing to furnish transportation in such a vehicle without having first complied with all applicable provisions of state law and this article and any applicable federal laws and regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 8-463; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 3, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-464. - Certificate/business license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, company, firm, partnership, owner, association or corporation to engage in the business of operating any motor vehicle for hire which picks up any passengers within the city limits, without having first obtained from the city commission a certificate of public convenience and necessity/business license. In addition, individual drivers are required to be licensed pursuant to section 8-510. 
(Code 2002, § 8-464; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 4, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-465. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Every person, including an owner; licensee; employee of a licensee; independent contractor of an owner or licensee; agent of an owner or licensee; and/or driver of a motor vehicle for hire who violates any of the provisions of this article, or who neglects or fails to comply with the same, shall be deemed guilty of a Class "B" offense, and except in cases where another penalty has been fixed and prescribed shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine set by resolution of the commission. Each day's violation of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 2002, § 8-465; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 5, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-466. - Responsibility for vehicles under certificate/business license. 
(a)  Ownership of all vehicles licensed under this article shall be at the option of the licensee, and vehicles may be owned by the licensee, leased by the licensee and/or independently owned by a person other than the licensee. However, the licensee shall be responsible for all vehicles operating under the authority of its certificate/business license. Any violation of any provisions of state law or this article by any driver, who is an employee, independent contractor and/or agent of the licensee, may be deemed a violation by the certificate/business license holder, if other requirements of this article are met, as specifically set forth herein. 
(b)  No licensee shall allow any person to drive a motor vehicle for hire under the authority of licensee's license if said person has failed a drug or alcohol test administered to said person pursuant to the licensee's drug and alcohol testing policies. 
(c)  No licensee shall knowingly permit any person to drive a motor vehicle for hire if the licensee or any of licensee's managers, owners, officers, agents or employees is aware that the driver is under the influence of alcohol or any drug that could impair that person's ability to drive a motor vehicle for hire. 
(Code 2002, § 8-466; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 6, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-467. - Seating capacity not to be exceeded. 
    No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a motor vehicle for hire than the rated seating capacity of such vehicle. 
(Code 2002, § 8-467; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 7, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-468. - Advertising on vehicles for hire. 
    No licensee, vehicle owner or driver or any other person shall permit any banner or other advertising matter to be affixed to or painted onto a motor vehicle for hire, except advertising matter which may be desired for advertising his system of motor vehicles for hire, and except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 2002, § 8-468; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 8, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-469. - Unlawful refusals for service. 
(a)  No person working pursuant to the authority of a licensee shall refuse a passenger or shall refuse to dispatch a motor vehicle for hire to provide service to a passenger, based on race, color, religion, ancestry, sex, national origin, age or disability of said passenger. 
(b)  Persons working pursuant to the authority of a licensee shall provide service to passengers using wheelchairs who are requesting service, if said person would provide services to others under the same circumstances. Drivers are required to transport passengers using wheelchairs and to stow wheelchairs in the trunk or back of the vehicle. Drivers are required to assist passengers who use wheelchairs in entering and exiting the vehicle when necessary but are not required to carry or lift such passengers. Drivers are required to assist with simple assembly or disassembly of wheelchairs where necessary to load or unload the chair into and out of the vehicle. Drivers are not required to assemble or disassemble wheelchairs where such assembly or disassembly would require the use of tools. No extra fees or surcharges shall be accessed to any passenger for offering the services enumerated herein to a disabled person. 
(c)  Persons with disabilities may be accompanied by service animals when using motor vehicle for hire services. No extra fees or surcharges shall be accessed to any passenger accompanied by a service animal. 
(Code 2002, § 8-469; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 9, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-470. - Smoking prohibited. 
    Smoking within motor vehicles for hire shall be prohibited while passengers are present. 
(Code 2002, § 8-470; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 10, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-471. - Taximeter required. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate any taxicab in the city unless and until such vehicle is equipped with a taximeter, and each such taximeter shall be maintained in good, serviceable condition so that it shall correctly indicate the correct charge for the distance traveled and waiting time. The taximeter shall be inspected by the vehicle for hire inspector at the annual inspection. The chief of police or their designee is hereby authorized at their discretion, or upon complaint of any person, to investigate or cause any taximeter to be investigated, and upon discovery of any inaccuracy in such taximeter, to suspend the driver's permit for operation of the taxicab and/or suspend the vehicle decal, until the vehicle for hire inspector determines such taximeter shall have been correctly adjusted. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, independent contractor, driver or operator of a taxicab in the city to charge any sum in excess of the amount shown on the dial of the taximeter for conveyance in the taxicab, exclusive of sales tax. Every taximeter shall be equipped so as to register the cost of transportation of passengers in the city, and the taximeter shall be so placed in the taxicab that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged may be readily seen by the passengers in the taxicab. 
(Code 2002, § 8-471; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 11, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-472. - Posting of rates, filing with city, receipts on request. 
    The following rate requirements shall be followed: 
(1)  Rates and charges shall be posted in each motor vehicle for hire in a place visible to passengers. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any vehicle for hire in the city to fix, charge or collect for service a rate more than that specified in the rate schedule then in effect and on file with the city and posted within the vehicle. The holder of the business license/certificate shall file a notice of rate adjustments with the city concurrent with obtainment of their annual license, setting forth the proposed rates or charges then in effect, the proposed rates or charges and the dates upon which said proposed rates or charges are to become effective. The vehicle for hire inspector has the discretion to take any rate increase to the city commission for approval. 
(3)  If requested, every driver shall give a receipt upon payment of the correct fare or charge. 
(4)  A taxicab business shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open 24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. Additionally, calls for service may be received by the individual driver, but the driver shall notify dispatch if the driver is accepting said passenger for service. 
(Code 2002, § 8-472; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 12, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-473. - Vehicle identification. 
    In addition to the other requirements of this article, a taxicab shall also bear the following identification: its city-issued identification number on at least three sides of the vehicle and the licensee's telephone number upon the outside panel of the vehicle. All lettering shall be at least 21/4 inches in height. 
(Code 2002, § 8-473; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 13, 11-18-2013) 
Secs. 8-474-8-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE LICENSE 

Sec. 8-501. - Required. 
    No person shall operate any taxicab or other vehicle for hire, for the transportation of passengers of commodities for hire, in the city until such person and firm has procured the necessary licenses from the city. Vehicle for hire companies are licensed separately from individual drivers as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 8-501; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 14, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-502. - Application for certificate/business license. 
    Applicants for a certificate/business license shall file with the city a verified application setting forth the following: 
(1)  Name, business address, business name, and any established place of business of the applicant; including address and location of dispatcher (if applicable); 
(2)  Names of all owners; officers, and managers of the applicant; 
(3)  Number of motor vehicles for hire for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity/business license is desired and manufacturer's rated seating capacity of each vehicle; 
(4)  Description of the proposed color scheme, insignia or any other distinguishing characteristics of the motor vehicle for hire; 
(5)  Schedule showing the passenger fares to be charged; and the meter rate (for taxis) per mile or fraction thereof; 
(6)  Description of type and extent of service to be rendered (e.g., airport shuttle, medical service van, taxicab, limousine, party bus, etc.); 
(7)  With said application, applicant shall attach a copy of applicant's drug and alcohol testing policies. 
(Code 2002, § 8-502; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 15, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-503. - Criteria for granting a certificate of convenience and necessity/business license. 
    In determining whether the applicant has met the requirements of this article, the commission shall investigate and consider the following: 
(1)  Ability of the applicant to comply with the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Whether the fares and/or rates to be charged are reasonable and nondiscriminatory; 
(3)  Whether applicant has available for operation adequate vehicles and equipment; 
(4)  Whether the demands of pubic convenience and necessity require additional taxicab service within the city; 
(5)  Whether applicant has a unique color scheme and/or trademark and/or name different from any other motor vehicle for hire licensee so that a reasonable person would not confuse the different licensees; 
(6)  Other relevant facts as the city commission and police department may determine advisable or necessary; and 
(7)  Whether applicant has attached a drug and alcohol testing policy that meets the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 8-503; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 16, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-504. - Public hearing required. 
    No more than 45 days after the filing of the fully completed application for the certificate of public necessity and convenience/business license, the city commission shall hold a public hearing thereon for the purpose of determining whether the applicant has met the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 8-504; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-505. - Issuance of certificate of convenience and necessity/business license. 
(a)  If the city commission shall find that an applicant has met the requirements of this article for a certificate of public convenience and necessity/business license, a certificate/license to that effect shall be issued to the applicant by the city, setting forth the number of vehicles for hire allowed under the certificate/business license. Before the city shall issue any certificate/license, the applicant shall pay a fee set by resolution of the commission, unless otherwise modified by the general schedule of fees, for the initial certificate/license. The annual renewal fee shall be set by resolution of the commission. 
(b)  Each vehicle to be operated under the authority of the licensee shall be inspected by the city before it can be used as a vehicle for hire. The vehicle title, tag, insurance verification, and state corporation commission decal or USDOT/UCR number where applicable, shall be provided to the vehicle for hire inspector at the time of inspection. 
(c)  Licenses issued by the city expire every December 31 and must be renewed. All renewals not affecting the number of licensed vehicles may be handled administratively. Any renewals requesting an increase in the number of vehicles for hire shall require approval of the city commission. 
(d)  Every driver operating under the business license shall be licensed in accordance with section 8-510 and separate fees paid in accordance with section 8-511. 
(e)  Upon application for renewal of the vehicle decals, the licensee shall submit the following information in writing to the vehicle for hire inspector, along with a copy of the vehicle title; tag; insurance verification; and state corporation commission decal or USDOT/UCR number where applicable, for each vehicle to be used in such business: 
(1)  The licensee's name, the business owner's name (or names of officers if company is a corporation); and 
(2)  The company address; and for taxis only, the location of dispatcher. 
(Code 2002, § 8-505; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 18, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-506. - Transfer of certificate/business license prohibited. 
    No certificate of public convenience/business license may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred by the person or company to whom issued except upon approval of the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 8-506; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 19, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-507. - Revocation or suspension of certificate/business license. 
    The city commission may at any time, pursuant to the revocation or suspension proceedings as hereinafter described, revoke or suspend the certificate of convenience and necessity/business license granted under this article, if it makes any of the following determinations of violations by: 
(1)  Any owners, operators, managers, partners, officers or employees of the licensee; or 
(2)  An independent contractor or agent operating under the authority of licensee if the licensee has knowledge of, reasonably should have had knowledge of or supported the violations committed by the independent contractor or agent: 
a.  If vehicles operated under the authority/endorsement of the licensee are not operated in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
b.  If vehicles are operated within the corporate limits of the city at a rate or fare greater than that specified in the rate schedule then in effect and on file with the vehicle for hire inspector; 
c.  If a motor vehicle for hire is operated but is not insured as required by this article; 
d.  If the certificate/business license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact, or a fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the time of application and such fact would have constituted just cause for refusal to issue the certificate/license; 
e.  If those persons, owners, operators, managers, partners, officers, employees, independent contractors, and/or agents operating motor vehicles for hire pursuant to the licensee's authority have violated any provisions of the article, or have committed any other acts, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the licensee to offer public services; 
f.  If those persons, owners, operators, managers, partners, officers, employees, independent contractors or agents operating vehicles for hire pursuant to licensee's authority have failed to maintain adequate and properly operating equipment as required by this article. 
(3)  In order to initiate revocation or suspension proceedings, the city shall provide written notice to said licensee that a public hearing will be held thereon by the city commission. Such notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing and shall specify the grounds upon which revocation or suspension proceedings will be conducted. At such public hearing the city commission shall consider all relevant testimony before making its determinations thereon. 
(4)  The city is authorized to maintain a complaint log and such records may be used in support of the revocation or suspension of any certificate of convenience and associated business license and/or driver's license. 
(Code 2002, § 8-507; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 20, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-508. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  The city shall not issue any license to any person, firm or corporation authorizing such person, firm or corporation to operate said taxicab within the municipality unless such person, firm or corporation first files with the vehicle for hire inspector proof of financial responsibility. 
(b)  Every person, firm or corporation engaging or intending to engage in the business of transporting passengers outside the city shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the corporation commission in accordance with 47 O.S. § 230.24 and the rules of the corporation commission. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "proof of financial responsibility" means a certificate of any insurance carrier or risk retention group, as defined in 36 O.S. § 6453, authorized to do business in the state certifying that there is in effect a policy of liability insurance insuring the owner and operator of the taxicab business, his agents and employees while in the performance of their duties against loss from any liability imposed by law for damages, including damages for care and loss of services because of bodily injury to or death of any person and injury to or destruction of property caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, use or operation of such taxicab or taxicabs, subject to minimum limits, exclusive of interest and cost, with respect to each such motor vehicle as follows, unless otherwise increased by state law: 
(1)  Because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident and, subject to said limit for one person: set by resolution of the commission. 
(2)  Because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident: set by resolution of the commission. 
(3)  Because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident: set by resolution of the commission. 
(Code 2002, § 8-508; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 21, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-509. - Recordkeeping requirements of certificate/license holders. 
    Each licensee shall maintain all records of motor vehicle for hire service orders for the previous 90-day period. These records will be produced upon request to the vehicle for hire inspector. 
(1)  All vehicles to be licensed shall be in good operating condition and meet all safety standards required by state and federal law. 
(2)  All motor vehicles for hire shall: 
a.  Have a current license tag issued by the state; 
b.  Comply with all safety standards now or hereafter required by the state, the city and any applicable federal regulations, and be maintained in a safe operating condition with adequate lights; 
c.  Be equipped with doors opening directly into the seats to be occupied by the passengers, which doors shall be in addition to those provided for the use of the driver. No motor vehicle having less than three doors in good working order shall be used as a vehicle for hire in the city; 
d.  Have a knob or handle on the inside of each door opening out of the compartment in which the passengers are carried, by which said door may easily be opened from the inside; 
e.  Contain adequate space for baggage that is separate from the seats of the passengers; 
f.  Be operated by a driver duly licensed as herein provided; and 
g.  Be covered by adequate insurance as provided for herein. 
(3)  The chief of police or their designee may remove any vehicle from service that does not meet the operating requirements set forth herein or that does not obtain the required inspections. 
(Code 2002, § 8-509; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 22, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-510. - Driver permit required. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle for hire without having obtained a license to do so from the city. Applications shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name (including all aliases or previously used names) and date of birth of the applicant. 
(2)  Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony which reasonably and directly indicates a risk to the public such as: 
a.  Any offense involving violence; 
b.  Any sex offense; 
c.  Any drug or alcohol-related offense; and the date of such conviction. 
(3)  Whether or not, within the five years prior to the application, the applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor which reasonably and directly indicates a risk to the public such as: 
a.  Any offense involving violence; 
b.  Any sex offense; 
c.  Any drug or alcohol-related offense; and date of such conviction. 
(4)  The number, class and expiration date of State of Oklahoma driver's license. Upon submission of a completed application to the police department, the applicant is required to provide a copy of his current three-year driving record, issued by either the state department of public safety, a state tag agency or an accredited background company. The applicant must provide a current record every year upon renewal of the driver's permit. The driving record is considered current if it is dated no more than 30 days prior to the date on which the applicant submits a completed application to the vehicle for hire inspector. 
(5)  Whether a driver's license issued to the applicant by any state has ever been revoked or suspended, and the reason for such revocation or suspension, and date of such. 
(6)  The applicant is required to provide a copy of his or her current criminal record unless otherwise obtainable by the city, from the state bureau of investigation or an accredited background agency, upon submission of his or her application to the police department. The applicant must provide a current record every year upon renewal of the driver's permit. The criminal record is considered current if it is dated no more than 30 days prior to the date on which the applicant submits a completed application to the vehicle for hire inspector. 
(b)  No driver's permit shall in any manner be assignable or transferable, and each such permit issued shall terminate on December 31 of each year. Upon renewal of a driver's permit, the applicant must complete a new application and is required to meet the same standards set forth in this article for the initial permit. 
(c)  The driver's permit shall be on a form prescribed by the city. The driver's permit shall also contain the driver's name, license number and the expiration date of said license. The driver's permit shall be displayed in a place within the motor vehicle for hire that is visible to all patrons of that vehicle. 
(Code 2002, § 8-510; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 23, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-511. - Driver's permit issuance; notice of termination of driver required. 
(a)  Upon approval of an application for a driver's permit and upon payment of a fee set by resolution of the commission unless otherwise modified by the general schedule of fees, the vehicle for hire inspector shall issue a driver's permit to the applicant. The fee for renewal shall be set by resolution of the commission unless otherwise modified by the general schedule of fees. 
(b)  Upon the termination of any driver, the licensee for whom the driver has been operating a vehicle, shall immediately give the vehicle for hire inspector written notice of such termination, and the reasons therefore, unless the reasons are confidential pursuant to either state or federal law. 
(Code 2002, § 8-511; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 24, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2542NS, § 2, 4-7-2014) 
Sec. 8-512. - Grounds for denial of driver's license, reapplication process. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a driver's permit, the vehicle for hire inspector and chief of police shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and, on the basis of such investigation, shall either approve or deny the application. No driver's permit shall be issued to any of the following persons: 
(1)  Any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  Any person convicted of any felony, violent or sexual offense. 
(3)  Any person convicted of hit-and-run driving. 
(4)  Any person convicted of reckless driving within five years prior to the application. 
(5)  Any person not possessing a valid state driver's license, unless specifically exempted herein. 
(6)  Any information which is omitted from the driver's application will be grounds for denial of a permit. 
(7)  Any person who cannot produce a certificate from a physician of the city stating that the applicant is capable of safely performing the essential functions of the job of driving a vehicle for hire. 
(8)  Any person lacking an endorsement letter from a licensee. 
(b)  Anyone who is denied a permit shall not reapply for such a permit until after a period of six months. 
(c)  The restrictions in this section shall apply both to persons possessing a driver's permit and to persons seeking renewal of such permit. 
(Code 2002, § 8-512; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 25, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 8-513. - Revocation and suspension of driver's permit. 
(a)  A driver's permit may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police or vehicle for hire inspector for any of, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Upon conviction of operating a vehicle for hire while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or while under the influence of any drug or substance which renders an individual incapable of safely operating the motor vehicle for hire. 
(2)  Upon conviction of leaving the scene of an accident. 
(3)  Upon conviction of hit-and-run or reckless driving, any offense involving violence, any sex offense, and/or any drug or alcohol-related offense. 
(4)  For permitting any other person to use his vehicle for hire driver's permit. 
(5)  Upon conviction of a third moving traffic violation during any one permit year. 
(6)  Misrepresentation of any material facts by a driver in his application for a taxi driver's permit. 
(7)  Upon cancellation of insurance or revocation or suspension of state driver's license. 
(8)  For failure to travel the most convenient, direct route in the routing of passengers, unless so authorized by the passenger(s). 
(9)  Refusal of service in violation of this article. 
(10)  Three or more infractions of any traffic law other than those designated as moving traffic violations during any one permit year. 
(11)  Driving a motor vehicle for hire without the insurance coverage required pursuant to this chapter and state statutes or applicable federal laws. 
(b)  Whenever the vehicle for hire inspector intends to deny an application or revoke or suspend a permit for driving a vehicle for hire, he shall give the applicant or permit holder written notice of intent to deny such application or to revoke or suspend such driver's permit. The notice shall set forth the grounds upon which such denial or revocation or suspension is contemplated. 
(c)  No person whose permit has been revoked shall be eligible to receive a new permit until the year from the date of the revocation. The chief of police or their designee may suspend a driver's permit for any period of time not to exceed 90 days. 
(d)  The chief of police may require that the permit holder obtain an updated medical evaluation and/or complete a driver's training program, prior to reapplying for a driver's permit. 
(Code 2002, § 8-513; Ord. No. 2521NS, § 26, 11-18-2013) 
Secs. 8-514-8-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2641NS, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VIII, §§ 8-514-8-517. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. VIII, §§ 8-541-8-543. 

Sec. 8-541. - Definitions. 
    Commercial marijuana grower means the planting, growing, harvesting, and storage of one or more marijuana plants or any part thereof in any location. 
    Commercial marijuana research facility means a facility that conducts potency and contaminants testing and research for medical marijuana business licensees. 
    Marijuana processor means any method used to prepare marijuana or its byproducts for commercial sale, including but not limited to: drying, cleaning, curing, packaging, and extraction of active ingredients to create marijuana related products and concentrates. 
    Retail marijuana dispensary means a building, room, or other area that is open to the public, upon the licensed retailer premises in which cannabis goods are sold or displayed. 
(Ord. No. 2641NS, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 8-542. - Medical marijuana establishments. 
(a)  All commercial marijuana growers, commercial marijuana processors, commercial marijuana transporters, retail marijuana dispensaries, licensed packagers, wholesale facilities, and research facilities are required to obtain a permit from the city clerk or their designee. These establishments are defined as any medical marijuana establishment licensed by the State of Oklahoma. 
(b)  The city commission will establish by resolution a fee to obtain the permit for each of the above described entities. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of the above described entities. 
(c)  Only commercial marijuana processors, commercial marijuana growers limited to indoor growing only, and retail marijuana dispensaries shall be located in areas zoned C-3 and C-4. 
(d)  Commercial marijuana research facilities may be located in areas zoned C-3 and C-4 by conditional use permit. 
(e)  Only commercial marijuana processors, commercial marijuana growers, commercial marijuana research facilities, licensed packagers, and wholesale facilities shall be located in areas zoned I-2 and I-3. 
(f)  Commercial marijuana growers shall be prohibited from being located in areas zoned A-1. Only marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use shall be located in areas zoned A-1. 
(g)  Only commercial marijuana dispensaries shall be located in areas zoned CP. 
(h)  A permit will not be granted to any applicants where the proposed location would be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following uses: 
(1)  Private or public preschool, elementary, middle, high school, secondary, vocational or trade school, college or university; 
(2)  Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center; 
(3)  Any commercial daycare facilities. 
(i)  For the distance requirements outlined in this article, the distances described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest property line of the parcel of land on which the use described in paragraph (d) is located to the nearest property line of the building or unit in which the proposed retail marijuana establishment would be located. 
(j)  Buildings or transportation vehicles where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off premises. 
(k)  Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the permit, and a fine of $200.00 per day while the violation exists. 
(l)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to: 
(1)  Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public nuisance, or 
(2)  Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2641NS, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 8-543. - Marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use; security. 
(a)  All owners of marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use are required to register with the city clerk. 
(b)  The city commission will establish by resolution a fee to register as a marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to the administration of the registry. Those on fixed income or disability may apply to the city clerk to have the registration fee waived. 
(c)  All marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use shall be subject to security provisions as stated herein prior to registration. Failing to comply with security provisions as stated herein will be treated as a violation of city Code and applicable state law. 
(d)  Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property. 
(e)  The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is grown shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, eating, sleeping and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress and egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation will impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping or sanitation/bathing. 
(f)  Growing marijuana for personal use without first obtaining a license from the State of Oklahoma and registering with the city clerk is punishable by a fine of $200.00 per day while the violation exists. 
(Ord. No. 2641NS, § 1, 9-17-2018) 
Chapter 9 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Basic service rates and charges. 
(a)  The city will follow the Federal Communications Commission rate regulations, as may be amended from time to time by the Federal Communications Commission, in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company (Falcon Cable Media) and any other cable television system operating within the city's jurisdiction, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties by: 
(1)  Making available for public inspection, at a time and location to be specified by public notice, a copy of any rate filing submitted by the company to the city; 
(2)  After public notice, accepting written comments submitted by interested parties and convening a public hearing within 20 days of the submission of such rate filing by the company; and 
(3)  Accepting additional public comments and/or convening further public hearings as the city deems necessary or desirable in carrying out its rate regulatory function in a fair and efficient manner which ensures adequate public participation (for example, if the city avails itself of the additional 90- or 150-day periods permitted by the Federal Communications Commission to complete its review of the company's rate filing). 
(c)  In connection with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city will comply with all state and local requirements that apply to public participation in the city's regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating within the city's jurisdiction. 
(Code 1986, § 7.5-1; Code 2002, § 9-1) 
Secs. 9-2-9-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SHAWNEE CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State constitution reference- Franchises, OK Const. Art. 18, § 5 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attorney means the city attorney. 
    Cable act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act 1992, and such future legislation as may amend or supersede it. 
    Cable television advisory commission means the designee of the city commission for the purpose of proposing and reviewing regulations, terms and conditions under which cable television systems shall operate in the city. 
    Cable television system or cable TV system means any nonbroadcast facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal reception, transmission and control equipment that is designed to distribute to subscribers audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals and other equipment designed to provide a cable service or other lawful service to subscribers and users. 
    Channel means a band of frequencies, in the electromagnetic spectrum, capable of carrying one six-megahertz audio-video television signal. 
    Converter means a device used to convert television signals into standard VHF channels. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Grantee means the person selected by the city commission to hold a nonexclusive permit pursuant to this article. 
    Gross revenue, as the term is used in calculating permit fees, means all revenues actually received by, rather than merely billed by, the grantee or its affiliates derived from the operation of its cable television system within the permit area after deducting the following: 
(1)  Any fees or assessments levied on subscribers or users of the system which are collected by the grantee for payment to a governmental entity. 
(2)  Permit fees paid by the grantee to the city. 
(3)  State or local sales or property taxes imposed on the grantee and paid to a governmental entity. 
    Other lawful service means any service other than cable service provided through electric or electronic signals or which utilizes any facility or equipment of the cable system. 
    Permanent pavement means any pavement which, when installed, met the then-existing pavement standards of the city. If a conflict arises as to what constitutes permanent pavement, the city engineer's opinion shall prevail. 
    Permit means the rights granted pursuant to this article to construct, own and operate a cable television system along the public ways in the city or within specified areas in the city. 
    Permit area means that portion of the city for which a permit is granted under the authority of this article. If not otherwise stated in an exhibit to this article, the permit area shall be the legal and geographic limits of the city, including all territory which may be annexed to the city. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Premium channels means add-on pay channels consisting primarily of first-run movies and special event programming. 
    Public way or right-of-way means the surface, the airspace above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway or other public right-of-way, including public utility easements or rights-of-way, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon held by the city, which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's cable television system. 
    School means any recognized educational institution, including elementary and secondary schools, vocational-technical schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities. 
    Subscriber means any person who receives monthly cable service provided by the grantee's cable system. 
(Code 2002, § 9-31; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 2, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-32. - Selection of grantee and criteria for evaluation. 
(a)  Selection of grantee. Selecting a grantee pursuant to this article is subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(b)  Criteria for evaluation of negotiation with grantee. Negotiations with Falcon Cable Media or any other cable television applicant shall be evaluated according to the following criteria: 
(1)  Service package. The city commission requires the grantee to provide a total service package to the citizens of the city and to all the integral components thereof. 
(2)  Installation plan. The city commission requires the grantee's installation plan to provide flexibility needed to adjust to new technological developments, maintenance practices and services that would be available to the subscriber and to the community immediately and in the future. 
(3)  Financial soundness and capability. The financial capabilities of the applicant and its guaranteed commitment to make the necessary investment to erect, maintain and operate the cable TV system for the duration of the permit term. In order to ensure that any prospective grantee does have the requisite current financial capabilities, the city may request equity and debt financing commitment letters, current financial statements, bonds, letters of credit or other documentation to demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that the requisite funds to construct and operate the proposed system are available. 
(4)  Demonstrated experience in operating cable system under city permit. Evidence of the grantee's experience in operating a cable system under city permits confirms the ability of the grantee to furnish sufficient and dependable service to public and private users. 
(5)  Character, legal, technical and other qualifications. The evidence of character, legal, technical and other qualifications of the grantee required by state and local law to operate a cable system in the city and to extend the system as the state of the art progresses ensures its subscribers of high quality service. 
(Code 2002, § 9-32; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 3, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-33. - Term of nonexclusive permit. 
    The nonexclusive permit issued under this article and the rights, privileges and authority thereby granted shall take effect and be in full force from and after final passage thereof by the city commission and shall continue in force and effect for a term of 12 years from the date of the filing with the city a written acceptance by the grantee, subject to the city's right to terminate the permit as provided in this article and further subject to public hearings before the city commission at the end of the third year for the purposes of reviewing the grantee's compliance with the terms of the permit and the needs for any amendments thereto, as provided in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 9-33; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 4, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-34. - Execution of permit agreement. 
    Within 30 days after the date of passage by the city commission of the ordinance granting a nonexclusive permit pursuant to the terms of this article, the grantee shall execute a permit agreement whereby the grantee will promise to comply with and abide by the provisions, terms and conditions of both this article and the proposals submitted by the grantee to the city. 
(Code 2002, § 9-34; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 5, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-35. - Nature of nonexclusive permit and extension of service to unserved areas. 
(a)  There is granted by the city to the grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the city poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the city of a cable system. 
(b)  The right to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purpose set forth in this section shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of the streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the term of this nonexclusive permit. 
(c)  A grantee that is not already serving the entire permit area shall provide service to all portions of the permit area reaching a minimum density of 30 dwelling units per linear strand mile, as measured from the nearest system trunk line, within 12 months after the grant of a permit. 
(d)  The grantee shall provide aerial or buried drop lines to new subdivisions within the permit area at the request of the developer, provided that the developer contracts and agrees with the grantee to pay the cost of the extension of the service. 
(e)  The grantee shall extend and make cable television service available to any resident within the permit area who requests connection at the standard connection charge if the connection to the resident would require no more than a standard 150-foot aerial drop or a 100-foot buried drop line or extension from the nearest feeder cable. With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or buried drop line in excess of the maximum standard distance, the grantee shall extend and make available cable television service to such residents at a connection charge not to exceed its actual costs for the distance exceeding the standard 150 feet of aerial or 100 feet of buried drop line. 
(f)  In areas with fewer than 30 residential units per proposed cable-bearing strand mile, the grantee shall offer a cost-sharing arrangement with residents. A dwelling unit will be counted for this purpose if its lot fronts a street. The cost-sharing arrangement shall consist of the following: At the request of a resident desiring service, the grantee shall determine the cost of the plant extension required to provide service to the potential subscriber from the closest point on the cable system where it is technically feasible. The cost of construction shall be allocated based on the following formula: 
(1)  If a request for extension of service into a residential area requires the construction of a cable plant which does not pass at least 30 potential subscribers per proposed cable-bearing strand mile, the grantee and residents who agree to subscribe to cable service will each bear their proportionate share of construction costs. For example, if there are five dwelling units per proposed cable-bearing strand mile, the grantee's share will equal 5/30 or one-sixth of the construction cost. 
(2)  Should additional residents actually subscribe to cable television service in areas where subscribers have already paid a proportionate share under the extension cost-sharing formula, subscribers who have previously paid a proportionate share under the extension formula shall be reimbursed pro rata for their contribution or a proportional share thereof. In such case, the pro rata shares shall be recalculated and each new subscriber shall pay the new pro rata share, and all subscribers who previously paid a proportionate share shall receive pro rata refunds. If such subscribers or prior subscribers have been disconnected or have moved and owe the grantee money which has not been recovered, the grantee shall have the right to first apply the refund to amounts owed the grantee and give the balance, if any, to the subscriber. At such time as there are 30 potential subscribers per cable-bearing strand mile, the subscribers shall receive their pro rata share of construction costs. In any event, one year after the completion of a project, subscribers who have paid a share of line extension costs are no longer eligible for refunds, and the amounts paid in construction costs will be credited to the plant account of the grantee. 
(Code 2002, § 9-35; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 6, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-36. - Territorial area involved. 
    The nonexclusive permit in this article relates to the present territorial limits of and within the city and to any area added thereto during the term of the nonexclusive permit. 
(Code 2002, § 9-36; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 7, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-37. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(a)  The nonexclusive permit granted under this article shall be subject to all applicable sections of the laws of the state and city ordinances and any amendment thereto, provided that such amendments do not alter the material terms and conditions of this article. 
(b)  The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this nonexclusive permit, be subject to all lawful powers of the state and the city and to such reasonable regulation as the state and city shall provide. 
(c)  The grantee shall conform to all city zoning and platting requirements prior to the commencement of any and all construction work. 
(d)  Plans for system upgrades including overhead cables, underground cables and head-end tower shall be prepared and shall be submitted to the city engineer and must receive his approval prior to the commencement of any construction work, providing that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(e)  The grantee shall obtain building permits for all buildings constructed and shall pay all building permit fees, tap charge fees and all other fees as required by this Code or other city ordinances and at the rates that are in full force and effect at the time the building permits are applied for. 
(f)  Any and all pavement cuts of permanent or nonpermanent pavement shall be approved by the city engineer and shall be shown on the plans submitted to the city engineer prior to the commencement of construction. All pavements cuts shall be restored in accordance with applicable sections of this Code and city ordinances and shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(g)  If the grantee disturbs any pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface so disturbed in as good condition as before the work was commenced. 
(h)  If at any time during the period of this permit the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change any street, alley, easement or other public way requiring the relocation of the grantee's facilities, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay and relocate the facilities at its own expense. However, where public funds are available for such relocation pursuant to law, the grantee shall not be required to pay the cost. 
(i)  The grantee will provide written notification to the city 30 days prior to offering any other lawful service, and the grantee shall file with the city a copy of its authority to provide such service, if any has been obtained. 
(Code 2002. § 9-37; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 8, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-38. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  Under this article, the grantee shall pay and, by its execution of the permit agreement, the grantee specifically agrees that it will pay all damages and penalties which the city may legally be required to pay as a result of granting this nonexclusive permit. The damages and penalties shall include but shall not be limited to any and all claims and suits for damages or other relief filed by third parties arising out of copyright infringements and all other damages arising out of construction, installation, operation or maintenance of the cable television system authorized, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this nonexclusive permit. 
(b)  The grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of this nonexclusive permit specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself. Expenses shall include attorney fees and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his assistants or any other city employees. 
(c)  Commencing with city approval of the permit, the grantee shall maintain throughout the term of this nonexclusive permit liability insurance insuring the city and the grantee and their officers, private subcontractors, agents and employees, whether elected or appointed, against any and all claims, injury or damage to person or property, both real and personal, caused by the installation, construction, erection, operation or maintenance of any aspect of the cable television system. The amount of such insurance shall not be less than the amount as established in the city fee schedule. 
(d)  In no event shall the limits of such insurance be in amounts less than the maximum liability of the city as set forth in the Governmental Claims Act, as amended. 
(e)  Workers' compensation insurance shall also be provided as required by the laws of the state, as amended. 
(f)  All such insurance coverage shall provide a ten-day notice to the city clerk for material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in such policies prior to the date the material alteration or cancellation shall become effective. If the grantee fails to maintain any insurance as required in this section, the city may, at its option, obtain and keep such insurance in full force and effect, and the grantee shall reimburse the city for such insurance costs. The city may request all cable television installation, construction and maintenance cease until insurance coverage is verified. 
(g)  Copies of all policies required under this section shall be furnished to and filed with the city clerk, concurrently with the issuance of certificate of compliance or the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be. 
(h)  The insurance policies and bonds obtained by the grantee in compliance with this section must be approved by the city attorney, and such insurance policies, along with written evidence of payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the city clerk. 
(i)  Neither the subsections of this section nor any bonds accepted by the city commission pursuant to this section nor any damage recovered by the city thereunder shall be construed to excuse unfaithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under this article or the permit liability of the grantee under this article or the permit for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Code 2002, § 9-38; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 9, 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 9-39-9-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 9-66. - Channel capabilities and technical upgrade of system. 
(a)  The grantee's cable distribution system shall comply with all Federal Communications Commission requirements. 
(b)  The grantee's cable distribution system shall be capable of both one-way and two-way transmission. At the time of permit approval, the grantee will have in place trunk and feeder lines capable of delivering 36 channels. Within three years of the approval of the permit agreement, the cable system will be rebuilt utilizing fiber-to-the-servicing-area architecture at 750 MHz, with activation of 550 MHz, or 83-channel capability, to occur immediately upon system completion. The system will feature an additional reserve capacity of 200 MHz, thus allowing for the accommodation of future services. In order to further minimize technical problems, each fiber node will be powered by an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) that will utilize backup batteries in case of power outages. The main head-end will utilize a gas-powered generator in case of power outages and a UPS for data services. A performance bond in an amount as described in the city fee schedule will be provided to ensure the completion of the rebuild within three years from the acceptance of the permit by the grantee and city. 
(c)  The grantee shall provide a two-way closed system to the county courthouse and a safehouse for the use of live testimony from the safehouse to the courthouse as needed to provide a safe environment for victims the court has allowed such environment. The maximum amount to be spent by the grantee for such system is to be set at $10,000.00. The system is to include all necessary components (modulators, camera, cable, electronics, etc.) up to the maximum allowance. System maintenance is to be the responsibility of the city. 
(d)  The grantee will provide converters capable of receiving all programming offered. The system will be capable of handling data transmission and providing HDTV frequencies when they become authorized by the Federal Communications Commission. The grantee will provide stereo audio for at least 20 percent of all the channels in the system. The grantee will meet or exceed Federal Communications Commission technical specifications for a signal-to-noise. 
(Code 2002, § 9-66; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 10, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-67. - Compliance with Federal Communications Commission standards. 
(a)  Under this article, the grantee shall comply fully with all technical standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commission as related to cable television systems. 
(b)  No later than 120 days after the end of each fiscal year or 60 days following the required filing date with the Federal Communications Commission, whichever is later, the grantee shall maintain and make available for public inspection, at its office in the city, a file containing all forms required to be kept by the Federal Communications Commission, any state agency or the city. 
(c)  The grantee shall file with the city copies of all complaints, petitions, orders of the Federal Communications Commission, EEOC, FAA or other federal or state regulatory commissions or agencies having jurisdiction; other lawsuits or proceedings in which the grantee is a named party; and the proceedings, litigations or filings which involve the grantee's operations within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 9-67; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 11, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-68. - Erection, removal and common use of poles. 
(a)  Under this article, no poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the city engineer with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest, and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the city engineer determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(b)  Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing for use in serving the city are available for use, the city engineer may require the grantee to use such poles and structures, if he determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and reasonable. 
(c)  Where a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee, but agreement therefor with the grantee cannot be reached, the city commission may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the city commission shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the city commission determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations. 
(d)  The grantee shall comply with the pole attachment agreement provisions in section 9-109. 
(Code 2002, § 9-68; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 12, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-69. - Operations and maintenance of system. 
(a)  Under this article, the grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during the periods of minimum use of the system. 
(b)  The grantee shall maintain an office in the city, which shall be open during all usual business hours, which shall have a listed local telephone, and such telephone service shall be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. The grantee shall maintain a complete recordkeeping system of complaints received, and upon request the grantee shall furnish complaint records to the city. 
(Code 2002, § 9-69; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 13, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-70. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
    Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee under this article shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. There shall be no charge made to the subscriber for the removal and/or disconnection of the facilities and equipment. 
(Code 2002, § 9-70; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 14, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-71. - Subscriber rates. 
(a)  Except as preempted by applicable law and as authorized by the Constitution and laws of the United States, including regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and other governing agencies, the city reserves the right to regulate rates and charges made by the grantee to subscribers and customers under this article. Rate regulations, if exercised by the city, shall be in accordance with applicable laws and regulations and a formal policy adopted by the city which shall provide for a public hearing. 
(b)  All charges to subscribers shall be consistent with a schedule of fees for services offered and established by the grantee. Rates shall be nondiscriminatory in nature and uniform to persons of like classes. 
(c)  The grantee may offer different or discounted rates at its discretion in order to meet competition or for promotional purposes. 
(d)  The grantee shall inform each new subscriber of all applicable fees and charges for providing cable television service. 
(e)  The grantee will provide one cable television drop with free installation and free monthly basic service to nonprofit operated public and quasipublic buildings and installations as follows: 
(1)  Public and parochial schools. 
(2)  The police station. 
(3)  Fire stations. 
(4)  City commission chambers. 
(5)  Colleges and universities. 
(6)  Municipal facilities. 
(f)  Furthermore, the grantee shall be permitted to recover from the nonprofit agency the direct cost of installing cable service, when requested to do so, in order to provide more than one outlet, inside wiring or a service outlet requiring more than 200 feet of drop cable. 
(Code 2002, § 9-71; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 15, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-72. - Subscriber refunds on termination of services. 
    Under this article, any advance payments of a subscriber shall be refunded on a pro rata basis when the subscriber requests discontinuation of service and provides a forwarding address. 
(Code 2002, § 9-72; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 16, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-73. - Carriage of signals. 
    Under this article, the grantee shall receive and distribute radio and television signals which are of primary interest to the general public. Whenever reasonable, the grantee shall give priority to local broadcast stations, especially the Oklahoma City DMA (designated market area), over distant stations with the same network affiliation. Additional cable, satellite and broadcast programming shall be carried and assigned to channels as allowed by Federal Communications Commission regulations consistent with community interests. 
(Code 2002, § 9-73; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 17, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-74. - Channels for public, educational and governmental use. 
(a)  At the effective date of the permit issued under this article, the grantee shall set aside two access channels for public, educational and governmental (PEG) use. One additional access channel for educational use shall be set aside five years after the effective date of the permit. All PEG channels shall be free from any editorial control or supervision by the grantee, except as may be required by law. The cable television advisory commission will develop specific rules governing the use of PEG channels within 90 days of the effective date of the permit with city commission confirmation. 
(b)  The system will be designed so that all PEG programming entities can share capacity on one or more channels. Channel location, use and time slots shall be decided by the cable television advisory commission, who will develop specific rules governing the use of PEG channels, pursuant to section 611(d) of the Federal Cable Act, within 90 days of the effective date of the permit. All PEG channels shall be free from any editorial control or supervision by the grantee, except as may be required by law. 
(c)  Public/government channel. The public/government channel will be capable of being modulated from both the cable television system head-end and the city hall commission room to allow live and videotaped cablecasts of official city government meetings. Public programming will consist of community service announcements, local information, public interest, sports and entertainment of a noncommercial nature. The grantee shall provide a videotape playback and recording equipment, camera and graphics generator for use on the public/government channel. The grantee's personnel will assist users of television production equipment. 
(d)  Educational channels. One educational channel will be modulated at a site to be determined by the city commission. Initially it will be from Oklahoma Baptist University. Programming will consist of instructional, educational and public affairs of a noncommercial nature. The grantee shall provide modulating and demodulating equipment and cable for channel access at OBU. Area educational institutions may provide videotapes of educational programs for playback on the educational channel. Five years after the effective date of the permit, a second educational channel shall be provided. The cable television advisory commission will develop a recommendation regarding the modulation site for the second channel. Modulating and demodulating equipment and cable will be furnished and installed by the grantee upon city approval of the cable television advisory commission's recommendation. 
(Code 2002, § 9-74; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 18, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-75. - Program alteration. 
    Subject to applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations, all programs of broadcasting stations carried by the grantee under this article shall be carried in their entirety as received, with announcements and advertisements and without additions. 
(Code 2002, § 9-75; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 19, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-76. - Emergency use of facilities. 
    In an emergency or a disaster, declared by either the mayor, vice-mayor, governor of the state or President of the United States, the grantee under this article shall, upon request of the mayor or his designee, make available its facilities to the city for use during the emergency or disaster period. The grantee shall provide an emergency warning system to make voice announcements simultaneously over all television and music channels on the cable television system. This is to be a 24-hour "hot standby" system which will preempt the sound on all channels. The city will test the system at least once every 30 days. 
(Code 2002, § 9-76; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 20, 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 9-77-9-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RULES GOVERNING GRANTEE AND ASSIGNS 

Sec. 9-106. - Other business activities. 
(a)  Neither the grantee under this article nor any principal or employee of the grantee shall engage in the business of buying, selling, repairing, trading or installing television receivers, radio receivers or accessories for such receivers or referring services within the city during the term of the nonexclusive permit, and the grantee shall not allow any of its principals or employees to so engage in any such business. This subsection shall not prevent the grantee and its employees or agents from installing and servicing set top converters or other equipment belonging to the grantee. This subsection shall not prohibit a principal from selling television receivers if the business in which the principal is engaged does not relate primarily to the television business, and such sales are only of an incidental nature. 
(b)  The nonexclusive permit authorizes only the operation of a cable television system as provided for in this article and does not take the place of any other license or permit which might be required by law of the grantee, its employees or agents. 
(Code 2002, § 9-106; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 21, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-107. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  Under this article, the grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  The grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of current professional electrical codes as adopted by the city and all applicable state and local laws and in such a manner that they will not interfere with any city installations or of a public utility serving the city. 
(c)  All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, along, across, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public ways or places of the city, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition and in good order and repair. 
(Code 2002, § 9-107; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 22, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-108. - Amendment powers. 
    The city commission shall have full amendment powers, and it shall be the prerogative of the city commission to liberally amend the nonexclusive permit issued under this article, upon application of the grantee, when necessary to enable the grantee to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of television and radio signals which will afford it an opportunity to service its subscribers more effectively, efficiently or economically; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to require the city commission to make any amendment or to prohibit it from unilaterally changing its stated policy. 
(Code 2002, § 9-108; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 23, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-109. - Pole agreements; regulations. 
(a)  All transmission and distribution structures and equipment erected by the grantee under this article within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the grantee to obtain the necessary pole attachment agreements from the city and/or private utility companies using poles within the city. All pole attachment agreements: 
(1)  Obtained from private utility companies shall meet the written approval of the city engineer and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(2)  With the city shall be negotiated with the mayor or designee and approved by the city commission. 
(c)  Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(d)  The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires to permit the moving of buildings shall be paid by the person requesting such, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(e)  The grantee shall have the authority to prudently trim trees upon and overhanging city streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways and places so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee, or, at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by the city or under its supervision at the expense of the grantee. 
(f)  In all sections of the city where all cables, wires or other like facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground. 
(Code 2002, § 9-109; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 24, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-110. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    Under this article, the grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage. 
(Code 2002, § 9-110; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 25, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-111. - Transfer of nonexclusive permit. 
    The grantee shall not transfer ownership of the nonexclusive permit issued under this article to another person without prior approval of the city commission, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any approval by the city of the transfer of ownership of this nonexclusive permit will also include the right of the city to renegotiate any or all sections of the permit agreement with the new owners. 
(Code 2002, § 9-111; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 26, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-112. - Transactions affecting ownership of facilities. 
(a)  In order that the city may exercise its option to acquire the facilities and property of the cable television system authorized in this article upon forfeiture of the rights and privileges of the grantee under the nonexclusive permit, as is provided for in this article, the grantee, except as required for its reasonable financing, shall not make, execute or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, conditional sales contract or any loan, lease, pledge, sale, gift, merger or consolidation or similar agreement concerning any of the facilities and property, real or personal, of the cable television system without prior approval of the city commission upon its determination that the transaction proposed by the grantee will not be inimical to the rights of the city under the nonexclusive permit. However, this section shall not apply to the disposition of worn out or obsolete facilities or personal property in the normal course of carrying on the cable television system. 
(b)  The grantee shall at all times be the full and complete owner of all facilities and property, real and personal, of the cable television system unless loaned, leased or pledged pursuant to commission authorization under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2002, § 9-112; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 27, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-113. - Change of control of grantee. 
    Prior approval of the city commission, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, shall be required where ownership or control of more than 30 percent of the right of control of the grantee under this article is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 30 percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively. By its execution of the permit agreement, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the city commission shall constitute a violation of this article by the grantee. 
(Code 2002, § 9-113; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 28, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-114. - Filings and communications with regulatory agencies. 
    Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting, directly or indirectly, the cable television system operations authorized pursuant to the nonexclusive permit issued under this article shall also be submitted simultaneously to the mayor or designee. 
(Code 2002, § 9-114; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 29, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-115. - City rights in nonexclusive permit. 
(a)  The right is reserved to the city or the city commission to adopt, in addition to the sections contained in this article and in existing applicable sections of this Code or other city ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful powers. However, such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights granted in this article. 
(b)  The grantee shall make available at its local offices, upon 30 days' written notice by the city, financial information from its corporate offices as may be needed by the city in order to determine that correct permit fees have been paid and that other financial reporting to the city has been properly performed. The mayor or designee shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps, plans, federal and state income tax returns and other like materials pertaining directly to the nonexclusive permit granted under this article at any time during normal business hours. 
(c)  The city shall have the right, during the life of the nonexclusive permit, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wire and pole fixtures that do not interfere with the cable television system operations of the grantee. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the nonexclusive permit and other pertinent provisions of the state and local law. If such inspection reveals that the grantee has failed, in the city's judgment, to fulfill its obligation under the terms of the nonexclusive permit, the city shall notify the grantee, in writing, of its specific deficiencies. Absent commencement of corrective action by the grantee within 48 hours of receipt of such notification, the city, upon the direction of the city commission, may undertake the necessary repairs or restoration at the grantee's sole expense. 
(e)  Upon cancellation, as provided in this article, the city commission may require the grantee to continue operations for a period not to exceed 12 months from the date of the city commission's decision. If such nonrenewal occurs, the grantee shall have two years from the date it ceases operations to remove, at its own expense, all portions of its system from all public ways within the city and to restore the public ways to a condition reasonably satisfactory to the city. 
(f)  Upon cancellation, as provided for in this article, the city, at its option and upon the payment of a sum equal to the fair market value to the grantee, shall have the right to purchase and take over the cable television system in its entirety. Upon the exercise of this option, the payment of such sum by the city and service of an official notice of such action by the city upon the grantee, the grantee shall immediately transfer to the city possession and title to all facilities and property, real and personal, of the cable television system, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the city in lieu of some portion of the purchase price set forth, and the grantee shall execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the city as shall be necessary for this purpose. The grantee shall make it a condition of each contract entered into by the grantee, with reference to its operation under the nonexclusive permit, that any such contract shall be subject to the exercise of this option by the city and that the city shall have the right to succeed to all privileges and obligations thereof upon the exercise of such option. 
(g)  Upon the exercise of the option by the city to purchase and take over the cable television system in its entirety, the fair market value to the grantee of the cable television system shall be determined by three disinterested parties: one of such parties to be selected by the mayor, another to be selected by the grantee and the two parties so selected shall mutually agree upon a third party. When all three parties have been selected, they shall proceed to appraise the cable television system and determine the fair market value to the grantee; such determination shall be binding upon the city and the grantee. If the two parties selected by the city and the grantee are unable to agree upon a third party, upon petition by either party, the district judge of the county or his designee shall serve as the third party. The party selected by the mayor shall be with the approval of the city commission. However, if the city no longer desires to acquire the cable television system after its value is determined, the city may, without penalty or waiver of future rights to acquire the cable television system, abandon its intention to acquire the cable television system. The cost of the appraisal shall be shared equally between the city and the grantee. 
(Code 2002, § 9-115; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 30, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-116. - Maps, plats and reports. 
(a)  Under this article, the grantee shall file with the city engineer true and accurate maps or plats of all existing and proposed installations. The grantee shall, simultaneously with the execution of the permit agreement, file a map of the city showing the proposed construction schedule of the grantee. 
(b)  The grantee shall file annually with the city clerk, not later than 90 days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, a copy of its report to its principals (if it prepares such a report), an income statement applicable to its operations during the preceding 12-month period, a balance sheet and a statement of its properties devoted to cable television system operations. These reports shall be prepared or approved by a certified public accountant, and there shall be submitted along with them such other reasonable information as the city commission shall request with respect to the grantee's properties and expenses related to its cable television system operations within the city. Such report can be given to the city on a pro rata basis in accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(c)  The grantee, in order to ensure full disclosure, shall keep on file with the city clerk a current list of all owners, officers and operators of the proposed cable television system together with the manager for this nonexclusive permit, whether it be individual, association of individuals, general or limited partnership, or corporation, and such list shall reflect the extent or percentage of ownership of each such person, including all stockholdings of two percent or more. 
(Code 2002, § 9-116; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 31, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-117. - Payment to city. 
    The grantee shall pay to the city monthly on or before the 15th day of each month, an amount equal to three percent of the gross revenue from cable television system operations within the city, from monthly or other recurring charges for basic subscriber services, other leased channel services, advertising and program production services. If the amount of any payment of the grantee to the city shall not comply with applicable Federal Communications Commission standards, the amount otherwise due to the city shall be computed on the basis of such percentages and annual gross revenue amounts as the Federal Communications Commission might approve. This payment shall be in addition to any other fees or payments made to the city by the grantee. 
(Code 2002, § 9-117; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 32, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-118. - Forfeiture of nonexclusive permit; notice of violations and opportunity to cure. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by virtue of the nonexclusive permit issued under this article or otherwise, the city reserves the right to terminate and cancel the nonexclusive permit and all rights and privileges of the grantee under this article if the grantee substantially breaches the material terms of its permit and fails to cure such breach following written notification by the city, in that the grantee: 
(1)  Violates any section of this article or any rule, order or determination of the city commission made pursuant to the nonexclusive permit, except where such violation is without fault or through excusable neglect. 
(2)  Becomes insolvent or unable to pay its lawful debts or is adjudged bankrupt. 
(3)  Violates or attempts to evade any of the provisions of the nonexclusive permit or practices any fraud or deceit or gross negligence upon the city or its citizens. 
(4)  Attempts to dispose of any of the facilities or property of its cable television system to prevent the city from purchasing such as provided for in this article. 
(5)  Fails to make timely reports or payments required in this article. 
(b)  Such termination or cancellation shall be by ordinance duly adopted after 30 days' notice via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the grantee before final reading of the ordinance and shall in no way affect any of the city's rights under the nonexclusive permit or any provision of law. If such termination or cancellation depends upon a finding of fact, such finding of fact as made by the city commission or its representative shall be conclusive; provided, however, that before this nonexclusive permit may be terminated and cancelled under this section, the grantee must be provided with an opportunity to be heard in a due process hearing or proceeding before the city commission. 
(c)  Prior to commencing any action to terminate the permit, the city commission shall notify the grantee in writing of any alleged violation of its permit or failure to meet any of the terms or conditions of the permit or other applicable law or regulation. The grantee shall be given 30 days from the date of receipt of such notice to respond in writing, stating its explanation for the alleged violations or what actions, if any, have been taken to cure the alleged violation. Upon receipt of the grantee's response, the city commission may accept the grantee's explanation and/or remedy proposed. Alternatively, if the city commission believes the alleged violation will not be properly cured within a reasonable period of time, it shall notify the grantee of its intent to seek termination of the permit. 
(d)  The city commission shall thereafter hold a hearing providing due process at which testimony and evidence shall be taken concerning the alleged breach. Representatives of the city and the grantee shall be permitted to address the alleged violation and related issues at the hearing. The grantee may submit evidence to the city commission showing that it is taking action to cure the alleged violation or may provide evidence showing that the alleged violation is due to circumstances beyond the grantee's control (force majeure), which prevent the grantee from curing the alleged breach until some future date. Such showings, if adequate in the determination of the city commission, shall be sufficient to relieve the grantee of penalties or termination of its permit. The city commission may require the grantee to provide periodic reports to update the city commission of progress being made to cure any unresolved problem. 
(e)  If, following the evidentiary hearing, the city commission believes that the grantee has substantially violated the material terms of the permit and has failed to cure the violation, it may issue a notice of intent to take action as determined by Federal Communications Commission regulations or terminate its permit. The grantee shall be given a period of 15 days from the date of the issuance of the notice to cure the alleged violation. If the alleged violation is not cured within the specified period, the city commission may then take the appropriate steps necessary to penalize the grantee or terminate the permit; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall limit or restrict the grantee's right to appeal the city's actions in federal or state court. 
(Code 2002, § 9-118; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 33, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-119. - City's right of intervention. 
    The grantee under this article agrees not to oppose intervention by the city in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a party. 
(Code 2002, § 9-119; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 34, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-120. - Further agreement and waiver by grantee. 
    The grantee under this article agrees to abide by all sections of this article and further agrees that it will not at any future time set up, as against the city or the city commission, the claim that the sections of this article are unreasonable, arbitrary or void. 
(Code 2002, § 9-120; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 35, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 9-121. - Protection of privacy. 
    Except as provided by law, the grantee shall not, under penalty of forfeiture of its nonexclusive permit rights and privileges granted under this article, without the express prior approval of the city commission, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, give, sell or exchange to any person any information concerning subscribers, except with the subscriber's consent, subscriber viewing habits or preferences. The purpose of this section is to ensure that the right of privacy of each subscriber shall be fully protected. 
(Code 2002, § 9-121; Ord. No. 1708NS, § 36, 12-19-1994) 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cemeteries generally, 8 O.S. § 1 et seq.; deposit of funds with county, 8 O.S. § 111 et seq.; municipal cemeteries, 11 O.S. § 26-101 et seq.; violating sepulture and remains of the dead, 21 O.S. § 1151 et seq.; location of cemeteries, 50 O.S. § 42 et seq.; dead bodies, 63 O.S. § 91 et seq.; vital statistics, 63 O.S. § 1-301 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Violations. 
    Any person who will violate any section of this chapter, either by doing that which is prohibited or by failing or refusing to do that which is commanded, upon conviction, will be punished by a fine in the amount provided in the city fine schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation will be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1; Code 2002, § 10-1; Ord. No. 2527NS, § 1, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 10-2. - Supervision of cemetery. 
    The city manager will appoint an individual to exercise supervision of the cemetery, insuring that all rules, regulations and ordinances are enforced and maintaining the cemetery premises in good conditions. Wherever the term "cemetery sexton" appears in this Code, it will mean that individual or his designee. 
(Code 1986, § 8-2; Code 2002, § 10-2; Ord. No. 2527NS, § 2, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 10-3. - Cemetery register. 
    The city clerk shall keep and maintain a cemetery register in which shall be entered, in a systematic method, the number of every lot and the block in which it is located. The cemetery register shall show the name of the owner of every lot, by whom purchased, the date of purchase, the amount charged for the lot and the amount paid. The city clerk shall attest all deeds to lots in the cemetery and record the deeds in the cemetery register. 
(Code 1986, § 2-126(6); Code 2002, § 10-3) 
Sec. 10-4. - Records and reports. 
    The cemetery sexton shall keep a record of the facts relating to any burial, deposit in a tomb or vault or cremation in the municipal cemetery, and weekly he shall file with the city clerk such record of all burials that have taken place in the cemetery during the preceding week, together with all permits that he has received from the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 8-4; Code 2002, § 10-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Authority of employees. 
    The cemetery sexton or any employee under him shall not authorize or permit any matter or thing to be done in or about the municipal cemetery that will conflict with the sections of this chapter or any rule or regulation approved and adopted by the city for the management of the municipal cemetery. 
(Code 1986, § 8-14; Code 2002, § 10-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - False statements or reports. 
    No person charged with the duty of reporting or making any report required in relation to the municipal cemetery, affecting any health requirement, shall write or make any false or misleading statement therein calculated to conceal any fact relative to any of such requirement. 
(Code 1986, § 8-15; Code 2002, § 10-6) 
State Law reference- Cemetery care fund, 11 O.S. § 26-108. 
Sec. 10-7. - Care of grounds and property generally. 
(a)  The city shall perpetually care for and maintain all roads, walks, pathways, grass, grounds, shrubbery and improvements belonging to the municipal cemetery. 
(b)  All lot or grave section owners shall care for and maintain all monuments, mausoleums and markers erected on their respective lots or grave sections and existing shrubs, flowers, trees and other plants which require special maintenance. 
(c)  All work and special care other than that which is done by the owner will be performed by the city and paid for at the rates set out the city's fee schedule. No city employee will receive any money or other fee or consideration for any services performed in or upon the municipal cemetery; all fees and considerations for special services will be paid to the city at the business office of the cemetery. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3; Code 2002, § 10-7; Ord. No. 2209NS, § 1, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 2527NS, § 3, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 10-8. - Landscape plan; rules. 
(a)  The Landscape Plan of Fairview Municipal Cemetery, prepared by Christian Jensen, architect, and approved by the city and on file in the office of the city clerk, is approved and adopted as the official plan for the landscape in the municipal cemetery. The landscape plan shall govern all landscaping, ornamentation, beautification, care and maintenance of lots and premises in the cemetery insofar as its provisions may apply. 
(b)  All deeds to lots in the cemetery shall contain the following clause: "Subject to the rules and regulations of Fairview Cemetery". 
(c)  The city manager is authorized and directed to compile rules and regulations governing the operation, management and control of the cemetery. A printed copy of such rules shall be at all times kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and the rules shall be the official rules and regulations for the operation of the cemetery and shall be available to the public at all times for inspection. 
(Code 1986, § 8-5; Code 2002, § 10-8) 
Sec. 10-9. - Sale of lots. 
    The business office of the cemetery will keep a file of all lots in the cemetery showing the lots by plat, together with the cost for which each lot will be sold. The price for lots will be as set forth in the city fee schedule. Such lots will be sold on the same equal terms to applicants upon request to the business office of the cemetery and upon payment of the price fixed for the lots without discrimination. Lots and grave plots in the municipal cemetery will be conveyed to the purchaser by proper conveyance subject to the rules and regulations of the city in reference to such cemetery and the laws of the state. All lots and plots in the municipal cemetery will be held in accordance with and subject to the rules and regulations of the city and state. 
(Code 1986, § 8-6; Code 2002, § 10-9; Ord. No. 2435NS, § 1, 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2527NS, § 4, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 10-10. - Interments generally. 
(a)  Before interments in the municipal cemetery are made, a deed for the lot shall have been obtained from the city clerk and placed upon the city clerk's records, and a permit issued by the city clerk for opening the grave shall be delivered to the sexton. The permit shall show the lot number to be used for the grave, the name of the person and the age and sex. No permit shall be issued until the cost of preparing the grave is first deposited with the city clerk. 
(b)  A schedule of charges shall be prepared by the city manager and kept on file with the city clerk for the sale of lots and preparation of graves in Fairview Cemetery. Such charges shall include the price for which lots shall be sold and the charges sufficient to cover the cost of opening and closing the graves and other miscellaneous charges including special care, overtime charges and other details. Such charges shall be based on the size and location of such graves and such other factors that have any bearing on the cost. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the cemetery sexton or his authorized representative to attend every funeral and exercise supervisory control over the funeral insofar as is necessary to preserve proper decorum, respect and order appropriate to the occasion and to enforce the rules of the city governing the cemetery. 
(d)  Two interments in one grave will not be permitted, except for a mother and infant child, twin children or two children under ten years of age buried at the same time. 
(Code 1986, § 8-7; Code 2002, § 10-10) 
State Law reference- Issuance of burial transit permit by local registrar of vital statistics, 63 O.S. § 1-319. 
Sec. 10-11. - Preparation and closing of graves; fees. 
    Only those persons with whom the city contracts will open and close graves in a municipal cemetery. However, the city may open and close graves and provide chapel or graveside services when the city deems it expedient to do so. If the city elects to provide such services, it will charge applicable fees in the amount provided in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 8-8; Code 2002, § 10-11; Ord. No. 2164NS, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 2435NS, § 2, 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 2527NS, § 5, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 10-12. - Disinterments. 
    No undertaker or other person shall open or permit to be opened any grave, tomb or vault for the purpose of exhuming or removing any body which has been placed in the municipal cemetery for interment without a permit from the state commissioner of health. 
(Code 1986, § 8-9; Code 2002, § 10-12) 
State Law reference- Removal of remains from unmarked grave, 11 O.S. § 26-112; interference with places of burial, 21 O.S. § 1161 et seq.; permit for disinterment, 63 O.S. § 1-319; exhuming of bodies buried without proper certification of death, 63 O.S. § 946. 
Sec. 10-13. - Personal conduct. 
(a)  All cemetery employees and other persons, when engaged on the cemetery grounds, shall at all times when meeting and conversing with people show the utmost courtesy, respect and accommodation. 
(b)  No person shall engage in any profane language, loud talking or smoking while in the cemetery. 
(c)  No person shall visit or enter the cemetery at any time, except the hours which are prescribed for visit or entrance, except by special permission of the cemetery sexton. 
(d)  No person shall pick any flowers or cut any branches from shrubs or trees or injure or destroy any article, plant or mounting in the cemetery. 
(Code 1986, § 8-13; Code 2002, § 10-13) 
State Law reference- Disturbing funerals, 21 O.S. § 1166. 
Chapter 11 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 11-26. - Intent, purpose and authority. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The purpose of this article is to create a department of emergency management for the city to aid in mitigation and preparedness before a disaster and to alleviate injury or damage through a coordinated response and recovery from damages resulting from disaster, nuclear or conventional weapons attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by other disaster or major emergency as defined herein, and to protect the lives and health of the citizens of Shawnee, their property and property rights, whether public or private, in any emergency or disaster event endangering the lives and property of the people of the city. 
(b)  Authority. Nothing in this article shall be construed as power or authority to abridge or lessen the legislative and administrative powers of the mayor and city commission, unless such is specifically granted herein. 
(Code 2002, § 11-26; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized persons means all state, county and municipal police and fire personnel; hospital and ambulance crews; National Guard, and civil defense personnel ordered into a disaster area by proper authority; federal civil and military personnel on official business; persons who enter a disaster area to maintain or restore facilities for the provision of water, electricity, communications or transportation to the public; and such other officials as have valid reason to enter a disaster area. 
    Civil defense means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions pertaining to enemy attack or sabotage, other than functions for which the military services are primarily responsible. Those functions included without limitation: air raid warning service, radiological, chemical and other special weapons of defense, evacuations of persons from stricken areas, and emergency welfare services. 
    Civil emergency means a riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence of any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting together. All powers, duties and regulations relating to a disaster shall also apply to a civil emergency. 
    Curfew means a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property, or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, except persons officially designated to duty with reference to the civil emergency. 
    Disaster means and includes, but is not limited to, actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, any manmade or natural fire, flood, severe storm, epidemic, earthquake or explosion within the city limits resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measure must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
    Disaster area means the scene or location of any disaster or civil emergency. 
    Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions of the emergency management department and other city departments through a coordinated use of existing organized governmental functions and to provide other necessary governmental and non-governmental functions, as listed herein, to mitigate, prepare, respond, and otherwise aid the citizens of the city to recover from injury and damages caused by the effects of unusual natural or manmade disaster caused by fire, flood, tornado, earthquake, or other "acts of God"; the effects of a technological accident; the effects of any acts of war; and the effects of any riot or insurrection developing to such an extent as to cause an extreme emergency situation to arise which by declaration of the mayor jeopardizes the welfare of the citizens of the city. 
    Emergency management director ("director") means the individual appointed by the city manager to carry out the functions set out in this article. 
    Emergency management forces means the employees, equipment and facilities of all city institutions and commissions; and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons or agencies. 
    Emergency management volunteer means any person duly registered, trained, identified and appointed by the director and assigned to participate in the disaster activity. 
    Enemy attack means a direct or indirect assault against the city, its government, its environs, or of the nation, by the forces of a hostile nation or the agents thereof, including assault by bombing, radiological, chemical or biological warfare, sabotage or terrorism. 
    Oklahoma Department of Emergency Management (OEM) means the department of emergency management, as created in 63 O.S. § 683.4. 
    Public shelter managers means those persons appointed by the emergency management director to supervise public shelters. 
    Regulations means and includes plans, programs, and other emergency procedures deemed essential to emergency management. 
    Volunteer means the contribution of a service, equipment or facilities to the emergency management system and assigned for use in a disaster/exercise activity. 
(Code 2002, § 11-27; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-28. - Organization and appointments. 
    The city manager is authorized and directed to create an organization for emergency management utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within the city. The city manager, as executive head of the municipal government, shall be the supervisor of the emergency management forces of this city and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operations. The organization shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The city manager shall appoint an emergency management director to be a head of the emergency management department and such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the property functioning of the organization. The director shall be a person trained in planning operations involving the activities of many different agencies which will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the event of danger from enemy action or disaster as defined in this article. The director shall meet the qualifications promulgated by the state department of emergency management (OEM). 
(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and commissions will participate in emergency management/civil defense activity as needed. Duties assigned to a city department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the department. 
(3)  Volunteer persons and agencies offering services to, and accepted by, the city. 
(Code 2002, § 11-28; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
State Law reference- Appointment of director, 63 O.S. § 683.11. 
Sec. 11-29. - Emergency powers and duties of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his general powers and duties as defined in article V of the City Charter. When in the judgment of the city manager it is necessary to invoke the emergency powers provided herein, he shall immediately seek the concurrence of the mayor, who shall make the decision whether or not to declare an emergency. If the mayor is not available, the decision shall be made by the vice mayor; if he is not available, the decision shall be made by the senior commissioner available. In the event the mayor and city commission are not available to act, then the city manager shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke the powers provided herein. In the absence of the city manager as the final judge of an emergency declaration, the emergency management director shall make the determination. Whether the mayor, the deputy mayor, a commissioner, the city manager or the director declares an emergency, such action shall not be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the mayor and city commission as defined in the Charter of the city. Thereafter the mayor and city commission may convene to perform their legislative and administrative powers, and shall receive reports relative to emergency management activities. 
(b)  During any period when disaster threatens or when the city has been struck by disaster or major emergency, within the definition of this article, the city manager may promulgate such regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles to facilitate the work of emergency forces or the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the city. 
(2)  Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster. 
(3)  Regulations restricting the movement of persons upon the streets at particular times of days and in particular areas. 
(4)  Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
(5)  Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and uttered by newspaper, television and radio. These regulations will have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the city clerk and violations will be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(6)  The city manager shall order emergency forces to the aid of other communities when required in accordance with the statutes of the state, and he may request the state, as a political subdivision of the state, to send aid to the city in case of disaster or emergency when conditions in the city are beyond the control of the local emergency forces. 
(7)  The city manager may obtain vital supplies and equipment needed for the protection of health, life and property of the people. When obtaining formal approval would result in delay of attack-relief activity, the city manager may, until the mayor and city commission convene, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials, facilities, and expenditures of existing funds. The mayor and city commission are also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(8)  Whenever the city manager finds that any condition in the city has attained, or threatens to attain, the proportions of a disaster or emergency, he may assemble and utilize emergency management forces and may prescribe the manner and conditions of their use. When he deems it in the public interest, may send defense emergency forces of the city to the aid of other communities stricken by disaster or emergency when such disaster or emergency is affecting the health, welfare or security of the stricken community; however, after the mayor and city commission convene, the further continuance of any such relief and the period thereof shall be subject to their action and approval. 
(9)  After proclamation of an emergency, the city manager may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as he deems advisable, and the curfew shall be applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. After the mayor and city commission convene, such order is subject to their approval. 
(10)  After the proclamation of an emergency, the city manager may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of orders he deems necessary, including without limitation the following orders: 
a.  Any person being on the public streets, or in the public parks or at any other public place during the hours declared by the city manager to be a period of curfew; 
b.  A designated number of persons, as designated by the city manager, from assembling or gathering on the public streets, parks, or other open areas of this state, either public or private; 
c.  The manufacture, transfer, use, possession or transportation of a molotov cocktail or any other device, instrument or object designed to explode or produce uncontained combustion; 
d.  The transporting, possessing or using of gasoline, kerosene or combustible, flammable or explosive liquids or materials in a glass or uncapped container of any kind except in connection with the normal operation of motor vehicles, normal home use or legitimate commercial use; 
e.  The sale, purchase or dispensing of alcoholic beverages; 
f.  The sale, purchase or dispensing of other commodities or goods, as the city manager reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace; 
g.  The use of certain streets, highways or public ways by the public; 
h.  Impersonation of a city official or emergency management volunteer; 
i.  Unauthorized use of any insignia of the city; 
j.  Unauthorized entry into any disaster area; 
k.  Following an emergency or disaster vehicle, or purposely driving to any location on or near a roadway where a disaster or emergency area exists; 
l.  Proceeding to or remaining at a disaster area for the purpose of being a bystander, spectator, sightseer, or souvenir hunter, or disturbing any material objects, equipment, or thing directly or indirectly relating to or pertaining to the disaster; 
m.  Obstructing, hindering, or delaying any public official, shelter manager, or other authorized individual in the enforcement of any rules, regulations or executive orders issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter; 
n.  Failing to obey rules, regulations or official orders within a shelter; 
o.  Failing to obey any executive order issued under this chapter; 
p.  Unauthorized use of a siren or other devices so as to simulate any alert or take-cover signal or the termination of an alert or take-cover signal; and 
q.  Such other activities as the city manager reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace. 
(11)  The closing of any establishment engaged in the above activities. 
(12)  After the mayor and city commission convene, all orders are subject to their approval. 
(13)  The city manager may require emergency services of any city officer or employees. If regular city forces are determined inadequate, the city manager may require the services of such other personnel as he can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law, the city Charter and ordinances for regular city employees and other registered and identified emergency management and disaster workers and, upon demand, may receive appropriate compensation for their emergency employment. 
(14)  The city manager will cause to be prepared by the emergency management director a basic emergency and disaster operations plan herein referred to and to exercise his ordinary powers as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by the city Charter and this Code, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, or any other lawful authority. 
(15)  The city manager shall be empowered to accept any gifts, grants and loans from the federal government, from the state, or from any person, firm or corporation, as set out in the Oklahoma Civil Defense and Emergency Resources Management Act of 1967, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(16)  In the event the city manager is unable to assume emergency duties for any reason, the normal succession as designated in the emergency and disaster plan by the city manager shall take effect. In the event those individuals are unable to assume the city manager duties, the mayor and city commission shall designate an acting city manager. 
(Code 2002, § 11-29; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014; Ord. No. 2577NS, § 1, 10-19-2015) 
Sec. 11-30. - Firearms and ammunition. 
(a)  Notwithstanding this section or any other law of this state, neither the city manager nor any official of a municipal or state entity shall prohibit or suspend the sale, ownership, possession, transportation, carrying, transfer and storage of firearms, ammunition and ammunition accessories during a declared state of emergency, that are otherwise legal under state law. 
(b)  Any individual aggrieved by a violation of subsection (a) of this section may seek relief in an action at law or in equity for redress against any person who subjects such individual or causes such individual to be subjected to an action prohibited by subsection (a) of this section. In addition to any other remedy at law or in equity, an individual aggrieved by the seizure or confiscation of a firearm or ammunition in violation of subsection (a) of this section may bring an action for the return of such firearm or ammunition in the district court of the county in which that individual resides or in which such firearm or ammunition is located. In any action or proceeding to enforce the provisions of this section, the court shall award the prevailing plaintiff costs and reasonable attorney fees. 
(Code 2002, § 11-29.1; Ord. No. 2577NS, § 2, 10-19-2015) 
Sec. 11-31. - Duties and emergency powers of the emergency management director. 
    The emergency management director shall be responsible to the city manager in regard to all phases of emergency management or disaster activity. Under the supervision of the city manager, he shall be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of emergency management/civil defense activity (disaster services) in the city. Under the supervision of the city manager, he shall maintain liaison with the state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions as to insure the most effective operations of the emergency management program. His duties shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Coordinate the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for disaster purposes; 
(2)  Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property; protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for public health, safety and welfare; 
(3)  Coordinate the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for disaster purposes; 
(4)  Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for emergency purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters; 
(5)  Through public informational programs, educating the civilian population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property in case of enemy attack, or disaster, as defined herein, either impending or present; 
(6)  Conducting practice exercises to insure the efficient operation of emergency and disaster forces and to familiarize disaster workers and residents with disaster regulations, procedures and operations; 
(7)  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any disaster activity, real or implied; and 
(8)  Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the city manager may direct to promote and execute the emergency and disaster plan. 
(Code 2002, § 11-30; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
State Law reference- Responsibility of director, 63 O.S. § 683.11. 
Sec. 11-32. - Emergency and disaster operations plan. 
(a)  A comprehensive emergency and disaster operations plan shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the city commission upon the recommendations of the city manager. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency and disaster plan shall be considered supplementary as to this chapter and have the effect of law whenever a disaster, as defined in this article, has been proclaimed. 
(b)  The emergency management director shall prescribe in the plan those positions within the disaster organization, in addition to his own, for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the emergency manager a current list of three persons as successors to their position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible designate persons capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions. 
(c)  Each service chief and department head assigned responsibility in the plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned city employees and volunteers. Each chief or department head shall formulate the standard operating procedures and guidelines necessary to carry out the assigned duties and functions. 
(Code 2002, § 11-31; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-33. - Authority of shelter managers during emergencies. 
    In time of emergency or when an emergency is threatened as determined by the emergency management director, the director shall appoint public shelter managers, who shall: 
(1)  Open public shelters; 
(2)  Take charge of all stocks of food, water and other supplies stored in such shelters; 
(3)  Admit the public according to the city's shelter use plan; and 
(4)  Take whatever control measures are necessary for the protection and safety of the occupants. Shelter managers are authorized to use reasonable restraint against those who refuse to cooperate with the routine of shelter living under emergency conditions. No person shall refuse to carry out the orders of the shelter manager and his appointed staff. 
(Code 2002, § 11-32; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-34. - Amendments to emergency and disaster operations plan. 
    Amendments to the emergency and disaster operations plan shall be submitted to the city manager. If approved, the city manager will submit the amendments to the city commission with his recommendation for their approval. Following city commission approval, such amendments shall take effect 30 days from the date of approval unless an emergency exists and declared at which time the approved amendments shall become effective immediately. If action is taken by the city commission's disapproving a part of the city manager's submission or in the event an amendment is pending at the time a disaster is proclaimed under provisions of this article, and the terms of the amendment are critical to that specific disaster operations by the city manager, the amendment may be considered immediately and will remain effective until specifically revoked by the city commission until termination of the disaster declaration. Further consideration by the city commission of the amendment would then occur through normal process of law. 
(Code 2002, § 11-33; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-35. - Assistance of persons outside city government. 
    When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the city government, the appropriate department head in consultation with the city manager is authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and after the occurrence of a disaster until revoked by the city manager. Such services from persons outside of government may be accepted by the city on a volunteer basis or through charges agreeable to the city and contractor. Volunteers obtained to fill said needs shall be enrolled as emergency management volunteers in cooperation with the heads of city departments affected. 
(Code 2002, § 11-34; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-36. - No municipal or private liability. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the city through its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, nor its agents and representatives or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of said activity. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or disaster shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any persons on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 2002, § 11-35; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-37. - Violation of regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization as herein defined, in the enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulation or plan issued thereunder. 
(Code 2002, § 11-36; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-38. - Penalty. 
    Violation of any section of this article is a Class C offense. 
(Code 2002, § 11-37; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014; Ord. No. 2577NS, § 3, 10-19-2015) 
Sec. 11-39. - Violation of Emergency Price Stabilization Act. 
    The city manager, upon the concurrence of a majority of the city commission, shall bring an action against any person, firm or individual that violates the Emergency Price Stabilization Act, as outlined in 15 O.S. § 777.1 et seq. 
(Code 2002, § 11-38; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Sec. 11-40. - Emergency management advisory committee. 
    There is hereby created an emergency management advisory committee, composed of the emergency management director, the fire chief, the police chief, the city attorney, the community development director, the utilities director and the floodplain administrator for the city. The purpose for the emergency management advisory committee shall be to provide advice and guidance to the emergency management director and city manager on emergency management issues and to facilitate coordination of programs and policies concerning emergency management. 
(Code 2002, § 11-39; Ord. No. 2528NS, 1-21-2014) 
Secs. 11-41-11-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - 911 EMERGENCY NUMBER 

Sec. 11-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency telephone service means a telephone system utilizing a three-digit number, 911, for reporting to the appropriate public agency in police, fire, medical or other emergency situations. 
    Emergency telephone tax means a tax to finance the operation of emergency telephone service. 
    Local exchange telephone company means any company providing exchange telephone services to any service user in this city. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, copartnership, joint venture, association, cooperative organization, private corporation, whether organized for profit or not, fraternal organization, nonprofit organization, estate, trust, business or common law trust, receiver, assignee for the benefit of creditors, trustee or trustee in bankruptcy, the state and any political subdivision of the state, state agency, department, commission, board, bureau or any other service user. 
    Public agency means any city, town, county, municipal corporation, public district or public authority located within this state which provides or has authority to provide firefighting, law enforcement, ambulance, emergency medical or other emergency services. 
    Service user means any person not otherwise exempt from taxation, who is provided exchange telephone service in this city. 
    Tariff rate means the rate billed by the local exchange telephone company stated in tariffs applicable for such company, as approved by the state corporation commission, which represents the recurring charges of such local exchange telephone company for exchange telephone service or its equivalent, exclusive of all taxes, fees, licenses or similar charges whatsoever. 
(Code 1986, § 18-124; Code 2002, § 11-126) 
Sec. 11-127. - Established. 
    There is established in the city a 911 emergency number service. 
(Code 1986, § 18-121; Code 2002, § 11-127) 
Sec. 11-128. - Purpose; findings. 
    It is the purpose of this article to establish the number 911 as the primary emergency telephone number for use throughout the city in order to expedite the response of police, fire, medical rescue and other emergency services to any person calling the telephone number 911. The city commission finds and declares that: 
(1)  It is in the public interest to shorten the time required for a citizen to request and receive emergency aid. 
(2)  Numerous different emergency telephone numbers currently exist throughout the city. 
(3)  Provision of a single, primary three-digit emergency number through which emergency services can be quickly and efficiently obtained would provide a significant contribution to law enforcement and other public safety efforts by making it less difficult to quickly notify public safety personnel. 
(Code 1986, § 18-123; Code 2002, § 11-128) 
Sec. 11-129. - Amendments. 
    This article may be amended as the city commission deems necessary for the purpose of improving emergency service or administration or for the purpose of bringing the article into conformance with amendments made by the state legislature to the Nine-One-One (911) Emergency Number Act. 
(Code 1986, § 18-129; Code 2002, § 11-129) 
Sec. 11-130. - Emergency telephone service and tax. 
(a)  The city commission provides for the operation of an emergency telephone service within the city and levies an emergency telephone tax for such service in areas within the city for which emergency telephone service has been contracted. The city commission levies such tax in an amount not to exceed three percent of the tariff rate in areas within the city for which emergency telephone service has been contracted. The exact rate of the tax to be levied for each calendar year shall be established by the city commission as provided for by section 11-132. The tax imposed shall be for a period of three years, after which the city commission may renew the levy of such tax for no longer than three years at a time. This article shall not take immediate effect, but shall become effective only upon approval thereof by a majority of the votes cast at an election called by the city commission for submission of such question to city voters. 
(b)  The proceeds of the tax shall be utilized to pay for the operation of emergency telephone service as specified in this article and may be collected at any time subsequent to execution of a contract with the provider of such service at the discretion of the city commission. Collection of such tax shall not begin prior to 90 days before operation of the emergency telephone service. 
(c)  The emergency telephone tax shall be imposed only upon the amount received from the tariff for exchange telephone service or its equivalent within the city. No such tax shall be imposed upon more than 100 exchange access lines or their equivalent per person per location. 
(d)  Every billed service user shall be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this article until it has been paid to the local exchange telephone company. 
(e)  The duty to collect any tax imposed pursuant to the authority of this article from a service user shall commence 90 days before operation of the emergency telephone service; provided, however, no such tax shall ever be levied against any service user within any area of the city for which such service has not been contracted as anticipated in subsection (b) of this section. Taxes imposed pursuant to the authority of this article and that are required to be collected by the local exchange telephone company shall be added to and may be stated separately in the billings to the service user. 
(f)  The local exchange telephone company shall have no obligation to take any legal action to enforce the collection of any tax imposed pursuant to authority of this article. The local exchange telephone company shall annually provide the city commission with a list of amounts uncollected along with the names and addresses of those service users who carry a balance that can be determined by the local exchange telephone company to be nonpayment of any tax imposed pursuant to the authority of this article. 
(g)  Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges for exchange telephone service in accordance with the regular billing practice of the local exchange telephone service. The tariff rates determined by or stated in the billing of the local exchange telephone company shall be presumed to be correct if such charges are made in accordance with the business practices of the local exchange telephone company. The presumption may be rebutted by evidence which establishes that an incorrect tariff rate was charged. 
(Code 1986, § 18-125; Code 2002, § 11-130) 
Sec. 11-131. - Collection of emergency tax, establishment of rate of tax. 
(a)  The tax imposed pursuant to authority of this article and the amounts required to be collected are due monthly. The amount of tax collected in one month by the local exchange telephone company shall be remitted to the city commission no later than 30 days after the close of the month in which such taxes were collected. On or before the last day of each month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the city commission in such form as the city commission and local exchange telephone company shall agree. The local exchange telephone company required to file the return shall deliver the return together with a remittance of the amount of the tax payable to the city treasurer-finance director for deposit into a special revenue fund. The local exchange telephone company shall maintain records of the amount of any tax collected in accordance with this article. Such records shall be maintained for a period of one year from the time the tax is collected. 
(b)  From every remittance to the city commission made on or before the date when such becomes due, the local exchange telephone company required to remit the tax shall be entitled to deduct and retain, as an administrative fee, an amount not exceeding three percent thereof. 
(c)  At least once each calendar year, the city commission shall establish a tax rate not to exceed the amount authorized by section 11-130 that, together with any surplus revenues, will produce sufficient revenues to fund the expenditures authorized by this article. Amounts collected in excess of those necessary within a given year shall be carried forward to subsequent years. The city commission shall make its determination of such tax rate each year no later than September 1 and shall fix the new rate to take effect commencing with the first billing period of each service user on or following the next January 1. Immediately upon making its determination and fixing the rate, the city commission shall publish in its minutes the new rate, and it shall, at least 90 days before such new rate will become effective, notify by certified mail every local exchange telephone company providing emergency telephone service to areas within the jurisdiction of the city commission. The city commission may at its own expense require an annual audit of the books and records of the local exchange telephone company concerning the collection and remittance of the tax authorized by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 18-126; Code 2002, § 11-131) 
Sec. 11-132. - Rate of emergency telephone tax for calendar year. 
    The rate of the emergency telephone tax for each calendar year to be established as provided for by section 11-131 shall be set by separate resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 18-127; Code 2002, § 11-132) 
Sec. 11-133. - False alarm, complaint or information. 
    No person shall call the number 911 for the purpose of making a false alarm or complaint or reporting false information which could result in the dispatch of emergency services from any public agency as defined in section 11-126. Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed an amount as established in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 18-128; Code 2002, § 11-133) 
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Constitution reference- Jurisdiction of municipal courts, OK Const. Art. 7, § 1; removal of officers, etc., for excessive use of alcoholic liquors, OK Const. Art. 2, § 11. 
State Law reference- Creation of municipal court not of record, 11 O.S. § 27-101 et seq.; warrant of arrest, 22 O.S. § 171 et seq.; removal of officers, 22 O.S. § 1181; official misconduct defined, 51 O.S. § 93. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, will have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the peace officer in charge of the city police force. 
    Clerk means the clerk of the court, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office. 
    Court means the municipal court of this city. 
    Judge means the judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge or alternate judge thereof as provided for by state statutes and this chapter. 
    This judicial district means the district court judicial district of the state wherein the government of this city is situated. 
(Code 2002, § 12-1; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 2, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-2. - Scope of chapter. 
    This chapter will govern the organization and operation of the municipal court, as continued by 11 O.S. § 27-101 et seq. To the extent of conflict between any section of this chapter and any other section of this Code or the provisions of any other city ordinance, this chapter will control. 
(Code 2002, § 12-2; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 3, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-3. - Jurisdiction. 
    The municipal court will have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the city is charged, and will exercise all jurisdiction, powers, duties and functions as provided by 11 O.S. § 27-101 et seq. Nothing in this Code will be construed to limit or impair in any manner the status, jurisdiction, powers, rights or functions of such court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-3; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 4, 10-21-2013) 
State Constitution reference- Jurisdiction of municipal court, OK Const. Art. 7, § 1. 
Secs. 12-4-12-12. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-13. - Failure to appear before the court. 
(a)  Any person who is charged with a violation of this Code and who, having been duly issued a summons or citation or having been arraigned and released on recognizance or having made a promise to appear and violates such recognizance or fails to answer the summons or citation or fails to honor a promise to appear and does not voluntarily appear before the court on the appointed date and time, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the summons or citation was originally issued, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate this section by failing to appear in the municipal court shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and costs. 
(Ord. No. 2613NS, § 1, 8-7-2017) 
Secs. 12-14-12-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MEMBERS OF THE COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Judges of municipal court, 11 O.S. § 27-104. 

Sec. 12-25. - Judges. 
(a)  The number of judges for municipal court will be determined by the commission. In addition to a chief judge, the commission may appoint such associate judges as it determines. In this chapter, the term "judge" will include "associate judge," unless the context shows otherwise. The judge will be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the commission. The name of the proposed appointee will be submitted in writing to the board at the next to the last regularly scheduled meeting prior to the day upon which the appointment is to take effect, and will be acted upon at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The judge will be licensed to practice law in the state. He will serve for a term of two years, said term expiring on June 30 of even years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless removed by the vote of a majority of all members of the commission as provided in this article. Any appointment to fill a vacancy will be for the unexpired term. Nothing in the provisions of this section will be construed to prevent the judge from engaging in the practice of law in any other court during his tenure of office, but he will not accept employment inconsistent with his duties as judge or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases within the jurisdiction of the court pending in the court or that might become the subject of proceedings in the court. He must be a resident of this city. He may serve as judge of other municipal courts, if such service may be accomplished consistently with his duties as judge of this court, with the consent of the city commission. 
(b)  The judge will be paid a salary to be fixed by the commission. The commission may, in its discretion, provide the judge with benefits offered to city employees. 
(Code 2002, § 12-25; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 5, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Salary of judges, 11 O.S. §§ 27-104, 27-106. 
Sec. 12-26. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Municipal judges will be subject to removal from office, by the city commission, for the causes prescribed by the constitution and laws of this state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal will be instituted by the filing of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by the following: 
(1)  The mayor; or 
(2)  Twenty-five or more qualified electors of this city. 
(b)  If the petition is signed by 25 or more qualified electors as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners. The city commission will set a date for hearing the matter and will cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally upon the judge at least ten days before the hearing. 
(c)  At the hearing, the judge will be entitled to: 
(1)  Representation by counsel; 
(2)  Present testimony and cross examine the witnesses against him; and 
(3)  Have all evidence against him presented in open hearing. 
(d)  So far as they can be made applicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma Administrative Procedure Act governing individual proceedings (75 O.S. §§ 309-317 and any amendments or additions thereto in effect at the time of the hearing) will govern removal proceedings under this section. Judgment of removal will be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of the city commission, in favor of such removal. 
(Code 2002, § 12-26; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 6, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Grounds for removal of judges, 20 O.S. § 1404; removal of officers generally, 22 O.S. § 1181 et seq. 
Sec. 12-27. - Prohibition on change of venue; disqualification of judge. 
(a)  No change of venue will be allowed from any municipal court, but the judge of the municipal court may be disqualified under the same terms and conditions as are now provided by law for courts of record. 
(b)  In the event of an ethical disqualification by a municipal judge, the chief judge may assign the case to an associate or alternate judge, or, if all of them are disqualified, he may appoint, on a case-by-case basis, a sitting municipal judge in another municipality within Pottawatomie County or an adjacent county to act as a special judge for the purposes of hearing the case. 
(Code 2002, § 12-27; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 7, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-105. 
Sec. 12-28. - Acting judge; alternate judge; compensation. 
    In the event of disqualification of the chief judge in a particular case, or his absence or inability to act, should there be no associate judge available, the mayor of the municipality may appoint some person, qualified as provided in this chapter, as acting municipal judge of the court in the place of the judge during his absence or inability to act or in a case wherein the judge is disqualified; or, in its discretion, the municipal governing body may provide by ordinance for the appointment of an alternate judge of the court, in the same manner and for the same term as the judge and possessing the qualifications prescribed by section 12-25, who will sit as acting judge of the court in case of the absence, inability or disqualification of the judge. If both the judge and the alternate judge are unable to sit, the mayor may appoint an acting judge as provided in this section. The commission, by resolution, will provide for the compensation of an acting judge of the court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-28; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 8, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Acting or alternate judge, 11 O.S. § 27-106. 
Sec. 12-29. - Vacancies in office of judge. 
    Vacancies in the office of the judge will be filled in the same manner as provided for the appointment of the judge in the first instance. 
(Code 2002, § 12-29; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 9, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-107. 
Sec. 12-30. - Municipal attorney as prosecuting attorney. 
    The city attorney, or some other attorney licensed to practice law in the state as he may appoint, will be the prosecutor. The prosecutor will have full power to prosecute for the violations of any ordinance of Shawnee and will have the power to prosecute and resist appeals and proceedings in error and review from the court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-30; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 10, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-108. 
Sec. 12-31. - Clerk of court; duties. 
(a)  The municipal clerk of any municipality where a municipal court is established, or a designated deputy will be the clerk of the municipal court unless the governing body establishes or authorizes a position of chief municipal court officer to serve as court clerk. 
(b)  The court clerk will have authority to carry out the duties of the position as required by law; provided, that the person who serves as court clerk may separately perform other duties for the municipality. The clerk of the court will: 
(1)  Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court, preparation of writs, processes or other papers; 
(2)  Administer oaths required in judicial or other proceedings before the court; 
(3)  Be responsible for the entry of all pleadings, processes and proceedings in the dockets of the court; 
(4)  Perform such other clerical duties in relation to the proceedings of the court as the judge will direct; 
(5)  Receive and give receipt for and disburse or deliver to the municipal treasurer all fines, forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of money properly payable to the municipal court. Such funds and sums of money while in the custody of the clerk will be deposited and disbursed upon vouchers as directed by the municipal governing body; and 
(6)  The records of the court may be maintained electronically, including citations and complaints, pleas, judgments, endorsements and all signatures. If a notice requires a mailing by certified mail, the electronic method of certification in use by the United States Postal Service will be sufficient to prove such mailing and receipt. When a party provides an e-mail address, notifications not requiring certification may be delivered electronically. 
(Code 2002, § 12-31; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 11, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Clerk of court generally, 11 O.S. § 27-109. 
Sec. 12-32. - Court marshal; duties. 
    The municipal governing body, upon the recommendation of the judge of the municipal court, may designate any appropriate person who is a resident of the municipality to serve as marshal, and in the absence of such a designation, the chief of police or corresponding officer of the municipality will be ex officio marshal of the court. The marshal will execute any writs and other process directed to him, except as herein otherwise provided, and such duty may be performed by any deputy marshal or by any members of the police force of the municipality, as the case may be. 
(Code 2002, § 12-32; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 12, 10-21-2013) 
Secs. 12-33-12-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOND OF CLERK AND JUDGE; FEES, FINES AND FORFEITURES 

Sec. 12-53. - Bond of clerk and judge; form. 
(a)  The clerk and all deputy clerks and marshals, will give a bond, in an amount fixed by the commission by resolution, to the city. The bond will be approved by the commission and will be in substance as follows: 
I, ____________ , ____________ of the Municipal Court of the City of Shawnee, State of Oklahoma, and ____________ and ____________ , sureties, do jointly and severally agree to pay on demand each and every person who may be entitled thereto, all such sums of money as the ____________ may become liable to pay, on account of any moneys which may come into his hands, by virtue of his office. 
Dated at ____________ , this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ (Signed) 
(b)  The commission may provide that all judges, alternate judges, and an acting judge, or any of them, will give a bond to the city. If a bond is required, it will be in an amount to be fixed by resolution of the commission. It will be conditioned in the same manner as the bond that is required of the clerk of the court, and it will be approved by the governing body. 
(Code 2002, § 12-53; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 13, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-54. - Fees, fines and forfeitures; dispositions. 
    All of the fees, fines and forfeitures which come into the court will be paid by the clerk of the court to the city treasurer. The treasurer will credit such deposits to the fund designated by the commission. The court clerk will make duplicate receipts for the fees, fines and forfeitures collected by him, one copy of which will be retained by the municipal treasurer together with a detailed statement of all costs, the style of the case in which they were paid, and the name of the party paying the same. 
(Code 2002, § 12-54; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 14, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-55. - Procedure; judicial notice of statutes and ordinances; writs and process; service of arrest warrant. 
    Except as otherwise provided for by law, the code of procedure in the municipal court will be the same as is provided for by law for the trial of misdemeanors. The court will take judicial notice of state statutes and the ordinances of the city. Writs and processes of the court may be issued by the judge or clerk thereof to any proper officer. All writs and processes of the court in which a violation of a municipal ordinance is charged will be directed to the chief of police, a county sheriff, or to some other appropriate peace officer. A law enforcement officer of the city or county sheriff may serve an arrest warrant issued by the municipal court any place within this state. If the warrant is served by a county sheriff, the city will pay the sheriffs service fee account a fee as described in the city fee schedule, unless such fee is waived by the sheriff. 
(Code 2002, § 12-55; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 15, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. §§ 27-113, 27-115, 22 O.S. § 172. 
Sec. 12-56. - Issuance of summons. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of an ordinance, the municipal judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has given bond for appearance, will issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his address or place of residence if known, stating the offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the court on a day certain, containing a provision for the official return of the summons and including such other pertinent information as may be necessary. 
(b)  The summons will be served by delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant will be issued for his arrest, as provided by this article. 
(Code 2002, § 12-56; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 16, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-57. - Issuance of warrant; summons. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or other city ordinances, upon the filing of a complaint approved by endorsement by the city attorney or by the municipal judge, there will be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form: 
"The City of Shawnee, Oklahoma, to the Marshal of the Municipal Court of Shawnee, Oklahoma. Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the offense of (naming the offense in particular but in general terms) has been committed and accusing (name of defendant) thereof, you are commanded therefore forthwith to arrest the above-named (name of defendant) and bring ____________ (insert him, her or them as appropriate) before me, at ____________ (naming the place). Witness my hand this ____________ / ____________ / ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 
____________ 
Judge of the Municipal Court of Shawnee, Oklahoma" 
(b)  It will be the duty of the marshal, personally or through a duly constituted member of the police force or through any other persons lawfully authorized to so act, to execute such warrant as promptly as possible. 
(Code 2002, § 12-57; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 17, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-58. - Rules of conduct for court business. 
    The judge of the court may prescribe rules, consistent with the provisions of this article, for the proper conduct of the business of the court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-58; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 18, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-59. - Prosecutions by verified complaint; style. 
    All prosecutions commenced in the court will be by complaint which will be subscribed by the person making the complaint and will be verified before a judge, the court clerk, a deputy court clerk, or a police officer. No warrant for arrest will be issued until the complaint has been approved by the judge of the court. All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances will be styled, "The City of Shawnee vs. ____________ (naming the person or persons charged)". 
(Code 2002, § 12-59; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 19, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-60. - Properly verified citation or ticket. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of law, when a law enforcement officer issues a citation or ticket as the basis for a complaint or information, for an offense against a municipal ordinance which is declared to be a misdemeanor, the citation or ticket will be properly verified if: 
(1)  The issuing officer subscribes the officer's signature on the citation, ticket or complaint to the following statement: 
"I, the undersigned issuing officer, hereby certify and swear that I have read the foregoing information and know the facts and contents thereof and that the facts supporting the criminal charge stated therein are true." 
Such a subscription by an issuing officer, in all respects, will constitute a sworn statement, as if sworn to upon an oath administered by an official authorized by law to administer oaths; and 
(2)  The citation or ticket states the specific facts supporting the criminal charge and the ordinance or statute alleged to be violated; or 
(3)  A complainant verifies by oath, subscribed on the citation, ticket or complaint, that he has read the information, knows the facts and contents thereof and that the facts supporting the criminal charge stated therein are true. For purposes of such an oath and subscription, any law enforcement officer of the state, county or municipality of the state issuing the citation, ticket or complaint will be authorized to administer the oath to the complainant. 
(Code 2002, § 12-60; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 20, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-61. - Arraignment; fines in lieu of appearance. 
    The arraignment will be made by the court. The judge or the prosecuting attorney will read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. The commission, by ordinance or public resolution, may prescribe a schedule of fines which the defendant may pay in lieu of his appearance before the municipal court and such payment will constitute a final determination of the cause against the defendant. 
(Code 2002, § 12-61; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 21, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Arraignment, 11 O.S. § 27-116. 
Sec. 12-62. - Pleas. 
    There will be four kinds of pleas to a complaint in the municipal court: 
(1)  Guilty. 
(2)  Not guilty. 
(3)  Nolo contendere, subject to the approval of the court. The legal effect of such plea will be the same as that of a plea of guilty, but the plea may not be used against the defendant as an admission in any civil suit based upon or growing out of the act upon which the criminal prosecution is based. 
(4)  A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged, which must be specially pleaded, either with or without the plea of not guilty. 
(Code 2002, § 12-62; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 22, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 22 O.S. § 513. 
Sec. 12-63. - Postponement of trial. 
    Before trial commences in the municipal court, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof. 
(Code 2002, § 12-63; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 23, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-64. - Presence of defendant. 
    The defendant must be present in person at the trial in the municipal court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-64; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 24, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-65. - Guilty plea; conviction. 
    If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, the municipal court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinance and imposing sentence accordingly. 
(Code 2002, § 12-65; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 25, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-66. - Bail; amount and conditions; temporary cash bond. 
(a)  If a resident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer for the violation of any traffic ordinance for which section 12-67 does not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a non-traffic ordinance, the officer will immediately release said person if the person acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it. Provided, however, the arresting officer need not release said person if it reasonably appears to the officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others or damage to property if released, that the person will not appear in response to the citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or property. If said person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant will be issued for his arrest and his appearance will be compelled. 
(b)  If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided for in this subsection, he will be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or will be released on personal recognizance. The city may prescribe a fine for up to the maximum amount authorized by law for failure of a person to have a valid driver's license when charged with a traffic violation. 
(c)  If a nonresident of a municipality served by a municipal court is arrested by a law enforcement officer for a violation of any ordinance for which section 12-67 does not apply, the defendant will be eligible to be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment. 
(d)  The amount and conditions of bail granted pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section will be determined by the judge who will prescribe rules for the receipt of bail and for the release on personal recognizance. The amount of bail for each offense will not exceed the maximum fine plus court costs, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of bail will not exceed an amount as described in the city fee schedule. In the event of arrests at night, emergencies, or when the judge is not available, a court official, the chief of police or his designated representative may be authorized by the judge, subject to such conditions as will be prescribed by the judge, to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the accused. The cash bond will not exceed the maximum fine provided for by ordinance for each offense charged, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of the cash bond will not exceed an amount as described in the city fee schedule. The court official, chief of police, or his designated representative is authorized, subject to such conditions as will be prescribed by the judge, to release a resident of the municipality on personal recognizance. 
(Code 2002, § 12-66; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 26, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Arrest, signing citation, bail, 11 O.S. § 27-117. 
Sec. 12-67. - Release on personal recognizance. 
    If a resident or nonresident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a traffic ordinance, other than an ordinance pertaining to a parking or standing traffic violation, and the arrested person is eligible to sign a written promise to appear and be released upon personal recognizance, as provided for in 22 O.S. § 1115.1, then the procedures provided for in the State and Municipal Traffic Bail Bond Procedure Act as applied to municipalities, will govern. A municipality, by ordinance, may prescribe a bail bond schedule for this purpose and may provide for bail to be used as payment of the fine and costs upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, as provided for in 22 O.S. § 1115.1. Absent such ordinance, the municipal court may prescribe a bail bond schedule for traffic offenses. The amount of bail will not exceed the maximum fine and costs provided by ordinance for each offense, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of bail will not exceed an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 2002, § 12-67; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 27, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-68. - Failure to appear according to terms of bond; forfeiture. 
(a)  If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, given by a bail bondsman as defined in 59 O.S. § 1301, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or judgment, or upon any other occasion when the presence of the defendant in court or before the judge may be lawfully required: 
(1)  The court will perform the procedures set forth in 59 O.S. § 1332, whereby the court clerk will issue the required notices; or 
(2)  a.  The judge will issue an order declaring the bond to be forfeited on the day the defendant failed to appear and stating the reasons therefor; and 
b.  Within five days of the order of forfeiture, the court clerk will file a certified copy of the order with the district court in the county. The district court clerk will treat the certified order of forfeiture as a foreign judgment and proceed in accordance with the provisions of 59 O.S. § 1332. A surety will have all remedies available under the provisions of 22 O.S. § 1108 and 59 O.S. §§ 1301-1340. 
(b)  Court costs will be collectible from the proceeds of a forfeited bond. 
(Code 2002, § 12-68; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 28, 10-21-2013) 
Secs. 12-69-12-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JURY 

Sec. 12-89. - Jury trials; qualifications of jurors. 
    In all prosecutions in the municipal court for any offense for which the city, with the concurrence of the court, seeks imposition of a fine of more than the amount as described in the city fee schedule, excluding court costs, or imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment, a jury trial will be had unless waived by the defendant and the municipality, provided that the municipality has compiled its penal ordinances in accordance with the provisions of 11 O.S. §§ 14-109 and 14-110. If the municipality has not compiled its ordinances as provided by law, the fine will not exceed an amount as described in the city fee schedule. In prosecutions for all other offenses, or in cases when a jury trial is waived by the defendant and the municipality, trial will be to the court. A jury in the municipal court will consist of six jurors, five of whom may return a verdict. Jurors will be good and lawful men or women, citizens of the county in which the court sits, having the qualifications of jurors in the district court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-89; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 29, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Jury trials, 11 O.S. § 27-119. 
Sec. 12-90. - Selection and summons of jurors. 
    Jurors in the municipal court will be selected pursuant to this section under the same terms and conditions as are provided for by law for the district courts, or in the alternative, pursuant to 38 O.S. § 18.1. Upon written request of the judge of the municipal court for a stated number of jurors to the chief judge of the appropriate district court, it will be the duty of the clerk of the district court to draw from the jury wheel a requested number of jurors in the same manner as is provided by law for the district court until the number requested, who from their addresses appear to reside within the corporate limits of the city, is drawn, and to prepare a list of names drawn and certify such list to the judge of the municipal court. On completion of the draw, the clerk will immediately return to the jury wheel all names drawn which are not placed on the certified list. The judge of the municipal court will make written request to the chief judge of the district court for a stated number of additional jurors if, after allowance of claimed statutory exemptions, the listed number is found to be insufficient. Summons of the prospective jurors will be issued as set out by ordinance, and may be served in person by the chief of police or any member of the police force of the city, or may be served by the court clerk by mail. 
(Code 2002, § 12-90; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 30, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Selection and summons of jurors, 11 O.S. § 27-120. 
Sec. 12-91. - Fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses. 
    The municipal governing body will determine by ordinance or public resolution the fees and mileage that will be paid to jurors and witnesses in municipal court. However, no witness fee will be paid to any police or peace officer. The jury fee and mileage due jurors and witnesses will be paid as costs taxed to the party issuing the subpoena for the witnesses or requesting the jury trial. The court may require that such fees be paid in advance. 
(Code 2002, § 12-91; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 31, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Fees and mileage of witnesses, 11 O.S. § 27-121. 
Sec. 12-92. - Misconduct of jurors. 
    Every juror or person drawn or summoned as a juror is guilty of a misdemeanor if the juror or person: 
(1)  Makes any promise or agreement to give a verdict for or against any party; or 
(2)  Willfully permits any communication to be made to him or receives any book, paper, instrument or information relative to any cause pending before him, except according to the regular course of proceeding upon the trial of such cause. 
(Code 2002, § 12-92; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 32, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Misconduct of jurors, 21 O.S. § 385; grounds for new trial, 22 O.S. § 952. 
Sec. 12-93. - Misconduct of officer in charge of jury. 
    Every officer to whose charge any juror or jury is committed by the municipal court or municipal judge is guilty of a misdemeanor if the officer negligently or willfully permits the jury or any one of the jury to: 
(1)  Receive any communication from any person; 
(2)  Make any communication to any person; 
(3)  Obtain or receive any book or paper or refreshment; or 
(4)  Leave the jury room, the jury box or his immediate custody or control, without the leave of such court or judge first obtained. 
(Code 2002, § 12-93; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 33, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 390. 
Sec. 12-94. - Attempt to influence juror. 
    Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor if the person attempts to influence a juror or any person summoned or drawn as a juror, in respect to his verdict or decision on any cause or matter pending or about to be brought before him: 
(1)  By means of any oral or written communication had with him, except in the regular course of proceedings upon the trial of the cause; 
(2)  By means of any book, paper or instrument exhibited otherwise than in the regular course of proceedings upon the trial of the cause; 
(3)  By means of any threat or intimidation; 
(4)  By means of any assurance or promise of any pecuniary or other advantage; or 
(5)  By publishing any statement, argument or observation relating to the cause. 
(Code 2002, § 12-94; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 34, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 388. 
Sec. 12-95. - Influencing false testimony by witnesses. 
    No person will attempt to influence or will influence a witness to testify falsely in the municipal court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-95; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 35, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-96. - Judgment; costs. 
(a)  At the close of trial, judgment must be rendered by the municipal judge, who will cause it to be entered in his docket. 
(b)  If the judgment is of acquittal and the defendant is not to be detained for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once. 
(c)  After conviction and sentence, the judge may suspend sentence, in accordance with the provisions of and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed by 11 O.S. §§ 27-123 and 27-124. 
(d)  If a judgment of conviction is entered, the clerk of the court will tax the costs to the defendant in a sum set by resolution of the city commission, plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses, all of which the defendant will pay, in addition to any fine that may be imposed. 
(Code 2002, § 12-96; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 36, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Costs, 11 O.S. § 27-126. 
Secs. 12-97-12-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPRISONMENT; JUDGMENTS AND SENTENCES 

Sec. 12-117. - Delivery of copy of judgment of imprisonment. 
    If, after conviction in the municipal court, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof, certified by the clerk, will be delivered to the chief of police, the county sheriff or other appropriate police officer. Such copy will be a sufficient warrant for execution of the sentence. 
(Code 2002, § 12-117; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 37, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-118. - Enforcement of payment of fines or costs by imprisonment; persons unable to pay. 
(a)  If a defendant who is financially able refuses or neglects to pay a fine or costs or both, payment may be enforced: 
(1)  By imprisonment until the same will be satisfied at the rate in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per day; or 
(2)  In the same manner as is prescribed in subsection (c) of this section for a defendant who is without means to make such payment. 
(b)  If the judge determines, after due inquiry, that the defendant is without immediate funds to pay the fine or costs, but may be able to pay over a period of time, he may order the total to be paid in installments. Failure of the defendant to make payments as ordered without showing sufficient cause why he could not pay, will result in a warrant for arrest of the defendant. 
(c)  If the judge determines, after due inquiry, that the defendant is without means to pay the fine or costs, the judge may direct the total amount due to be entered upon the court minutes and to be certified to the district court in the county where the situs of the municipal government is located, where it will be entered upon the district court judgment docket and will have the full force and effect of a district court judgment. The same remedies will be available for the enforcement of the judgment as are available to any other judgment creditor. 
(Code 2002, § 12-118; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 38, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-119. - Municipal court judgments and sentences; execution. 
(a)  All sentences of imprisonment will be executed by the chief of police, and any person convicted of a violation of any ordinance of the city and sentenced to imprisonment will be confined in the jail, farm or workhouse designated by the city, in the discretion of the court, for the time specified in the sentence; provided, however, the court may, in lieu of imprisonment, order the defendant to engage in a term of community service without compensation. If the defendant fails to perform the required community service or if the conditions of community service are violated, the judge may impose a sentence of imprisonment, not to exceed the maximum sentence allowable for the violation for which the defendant was convicted. 
(b)  The judge imposing a judgment and sentence, at the judge's discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce, suspend or defer the imposition of a sentence or any part thereof and to authorize probation for a period not to exceed six months from the date of sentence under terms or conditions as the judge may specify. Procedures relating to suspension of the judgment or costs or both will be as provided in section 12-67. Upon completion of the terms of probation, the defendant will be discharged without a court judgment of guilt, and the verdict, judgment of guilty, or plea of guilty will be expunged from the record and the charge dismissed with prejudice to any further action. Upon a finding of the court that the conditions of probation have been violated, the municipal judge may enter a judgment of guilty. 
(c)  The judge may continue or delay imposing a judgment and sentence for a period of time not to exceed six months from the date of sentence. At the expiration of this period of time the judge may allow the city attorney to amend the charge to a lesser offense. 
(d)  If a deferred sentence is imposed, an administrative fee not to exceed an amount as described in the city fee schedule may be imposed as costs in the case, in addition to any deferral fee otherwise authorized by law. 
(Code 2002, § 12-119; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 39, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-120. - Community service or remedial action in lieu of fine or in conjunction with imprisonment. 
    Whenever any person is convicted in municipal court for violation of a municipal ordinance, the court may order the defendant to a term of community service or remedial action in lieu of fine or in conjunction with imprisonment. If the defendant fails to perform the required community service or if the conditions of community service are violated, the judge may impose a sentence of imprisonment, not to exceed the maximum sentence allowable for the violation for which the defendant was convicted. 
(Code 2002, § 12-120; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 40, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-121. - Suspension of judgment or costs; reconfinement. 
    Whenever any person will be convicted in the municipal court of violating a municipal ordinance, the judge trying the cause, after sentence, may suspend the judgment or costs or both and allow the person so convicted to be released upon his own recognizance. Any person so released will be required to report at such times and to such person or officer as the judge will direct. The judge may cause a warrant to be issued for any person so released if it will be made to appear to the judge that such person: 
(1)  Has been guilty of the violation of any law after his release; 
(2)  Is habitually associating with lewd or vicious persons; or 
(3)  Is indulging in vicious habits. Upon the issuance of the warrant by the judge, the person will be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he was originally sentenced and will serve out the full term for which he was originally sentenced. 
(Code 2002, § 12-121; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 41, 10-21-2013) 
Secs. 12-122-12-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 12-142. - Traffic violation by juveniles. 
(a)  The municipal court will have and possess the original jurisdiction to hear and determine all offenses against the city traffic regulations, without previous proceedings in juvenile court, when the person informed against has attained the age of 16 years or when the person informed against is between the age of 16 and 151/2 years of age and is the holder of an operator's or restricted operator's license issued by the state department of public safety authorizing such person to operate a motor vehicle. 
(b)  All such actions will be heard and determined in the manner provided by law for the trial of all other offenses against the city ordinances in such court, and the penalty for such offenses will be the same as provided for the violation of city traffic regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 12-142; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 42, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Children charged with violating ordinances, 10 O.S. § 2-2-403; driving by minors, 47 O.S. §§ 6-103, 6-105. 
Sec. 12-143. - Supervision of juveniles on parole or probation. 
    In addition to the duties otherwise provided by law, the judge, or some other person designated by the commission, will be required to supervise all juveniles who are either on parole or serving probation terms or suspended sentences pronounced and adjudged by the municipal court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-143; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 43, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-144. - Contempt of court. 
    The judge will have power to enforce due obedience to orders, rules and judgments made by him and may fine or imprison for contempt offered to the judge while holding his court or to process issued by him in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of the state. 
(Code 2002, § 12-144; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 44, 10-21-2013) 
State Law reference- Contempt of court generally, 21 O.S. § 565 et seq. 
Sec. 12-145. - Court costs and fees. 
    Except as provided in 11 O.S. § 14-111, and subject to other limitations or exceptions imposed by law, the commission will determine by ordinance or public resolution the court costs and fees that may be charged and collected by the clerk of the court. Court costs will not exceed an amount as described in the city fee schedule plus the fees and mileage of jurors and witnesses. The clerk of the court is authorized to charge and collect the fees as determined by the municipal body. 
(Code 2002, § 12-145; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 45, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-146. - Costs of imprisonment. 
    The judge will have the power to order the defendant to pay costs associated with imprisonment, or to waive such costs. 
(Code 2002, § 12-146; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 46, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-147. - Prosecution for same offense of another court prohibited. 
    When a defendant has been in jeopardy for the same or any lesser included offense in a municipal court or district court, he will not be prosecuted in another court for the same or a lesser included offense. 
(Code 2002, § 12-147; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 47, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-148. - Writs of mandamus, prohibition and certiorari. 
    The district court in each county wherein a municipal court is established will have the same jurisdiction to issue to the municipal court writs of mandamus, prohibition and certiorari as the supreme court now has to issue such writs to courts of record. 
(Code 2002, § 12-148; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 48, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-149. - Appeals. 
(a)  An appeal may be taken from a final judgment of the municipal court by the defendant by filing in the county district court, within ten days from the date of the final judgment, a notice of appeal and by filing a copy of the notice with the municipal court in case of an appeal, a trial de novo will be had, and there will be a right to a jury trial if the sentence imposed for the offense was a fine of more than an amount as described in the city fee schedule and costs. 
(b)  Upon conviction, at the request of the defendant, or upon notice of appeal being filed, the judge of the municipal court will enter an order on the docket fixing an amount in which bond may be given by the defendant, in cash or sureties for cash in an amount of not less than an amount as described in the city fee schedule nor more than twice the amount of such fine. Bond will be taken by the court clerk. Any pledge of sureties must be approved by a judge of the court. 
(c)  Upon appeal being filed the judge will within ten days thereafter certify to the clerk of the appellate court the original papers in the case. If the papers have not been certified to the appellate court, the prosecuting attorney will take the necessary steps to have the papers certified to the appellate court within 20 days of the filing of the notice of appeal, and failure to do so, except for good cause shown, will be grounds for dismissal of the charge by the appellate court, the cost to be taxed to the municipality. The certificate will state whether or not the municipal judge hearing the case was a licensed attorney in the state. 
(d)  All proceedings necessary to carry the judgment into effect will be had in the appellate court. 
(Code 2002, § 12-149; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 49, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-150. - Orders relative to procedures and practices by supreme court. 
    The supreme court is authorized to issue orders of state-wide application relative to procedures in and practices before municipal courts and appeals therefrom, subject to the provisions of 11 O.S. §§ 27-101-27-132, and under its general superintending control of all inferior courts, will have the power and authority by and through the chief justice of the supreme court, to call annual conferences of the judges of the municipal courts of the state to consider matters calculated to bring about a speedier and more efficient administration of justice. 
(Code 2002, § 12-150; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 50, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-151. - Appeal to court of criminal appeals. 
    An appeal may be taken to the court of criminal appeals from the final judgment or order of a district court in an appeal from a final judgment of the municipal court in the same manner and to the same extent that appeals are taken from a district court to the court of criminal appeals. 
(Code 2002, § 12-151; Ord. No. 2520NS, § 51, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 12-152. - Penalty for exceeding the posted speed limit. 
    The penalty for exceeding the posted speed limit by no more than ten miles per hour upon any portion of the national system of interstate and defense highways, federal-aid primary highways, and the state highway system, which are located on the outskirts of the city, as determined by 47 O.S. § 2-117, is set at a fine of not more than an amount as described in the city fee schedule, nor court costs of more than an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 2002, § 12-152; Ord. No. 2532NS, § 3, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 12-153. - Community service allowed as a condition of probation. 
    Whenever any person receives probation for a municipal offense or is granted a deferred prosecution, a period of community service shall be allowed to be a condition of that probation or period of deferred prosecution. The number of days of community service for any person shall not exceed the maximum number of days that person could have been sentenced to serve in jail for the offense committed. 
(Code 2002, § 12-153; Ord. No. 2532NS, § 3, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 12-154. - Costs of incarceration. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, the municipal attorney shall ask the court to require a person confined in any jail, for any municipal offense to pay the costs of incarceration, both before and after conviction, upon conviction or receiving a deferred sentence. The clerk of the court shall collect the costs of incarceration. The costs of incarceration shall include booking, receiving and processing out, housing, food, clothing, medical care, dental care and psychiatric services. The costs for incarceration shall be an amount equal to or less than the actual costs of the services and shall be determined by the municipal court. The costs of incarceration shall be paid to the municipality for which the person is being held before and after conviction. Except for medical costs, incarceration costs shall not be assessed if, in the judgment of the court, such costs would impose a manifest hardship on the person, or if, in the opinion of the court, the property of the person is needed for the maintenance and support of his immediate family. 
(Code 2002, § 12-154; Ord. No. 2532NS, § 3, 3-3-2014) 
Chapter 13 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of fire prevention code by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107; regulation of fireworks, 11 O.S. § 22-110; fire hazards, 11 O.S. § 22-113; fire departments, 11 O.S. § 29-101 et seq.; volunteer fire departments, 11 O.S. § 29-201 et seq.; firefighters' pensions, 11 O.S. § 49-100.1 et seq.; contract with fire protection district, 19 O.S. § 901.25; liquefied petroleum gases, 52 O.S. § 420.1 et seq.; transportation and use of nitroglycerine, 63 O.S. § 127 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Fire limits established. 
    The city fire limits are established as follows: Commencing at the intersection of the north and south alley in block 21, with the north line of Main Street; thence north to the intersection of the east and west alley in block 21, amended plat; thence running east along the east and west alley, in blocks 21 and 22, amended plat, to the curbline on Market Street; thence north to Ninth Street; thence east to the east side of Beard Street; thence north to the north side of lot 21, block 15, amended plat; thence east along such north side of such lot 21 to the north and south alley in block 15, amended plat; thence north along such alley to 11th Street; thence east along 11th Street to Broadway; thence south along Broadway to Tenth Street; thence east along Tenth Street to a point opposite the north and south alley in block eight, Choctaw Addition; thence north along such alley through block eight and the north projection thereof to the centerline of Santa Fe right-of-way; thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of such right-of-way to a point opposite the east and west alley in block 11, Beard's Addition; thence east along such alley through block 12 to Harrison Street; thence south on Harrison Street to a point 150 feet south of Main Street; thence west along alley to Santa Fe Railroad; thence west along such alley through blocks 21, 22, 23 and 24, Choctaw Addition, to the intersection of the north and south alley in block 25, Choctaw Addition; thence south along such alley to the south line of block 26; thence south across block five, Choctaw Addition, to the right-of-way of the C. R. I. & P. Railroad Company; thence in a southeasterly direction along such right-of-way to Philadelphia Street; thence south on Philadelphia Avenue to the centerline of Rock Island right-of-way; thence along Rock Island spur track on Oakland Street to the intersection of such spur with O. C. A. & A. right-of-way; thence along the centerline of O. C. A. & A. right-of-way to the intersection of such centerline of the right-of-way with South Broadway; thence south on Broadway to Oakland; thence west on Oakland to Beard; thence south on Beard to the south line of lot 20, block 102, amended plat, of the southwest quarter; thence west along the south line of such lot 20 and along the south line of lot four, block 102, amended plat, of the southwest quarter, to South Market Street; thence north on South Market to south right-of-way line of O. C. A. & A. Railroad Company; thence east along such right-of-way line to South Beard; thence north on South Beard to the centerline of Rock Island right-of-way; thence in a northwesterly direction along such centerline of Rock Island right-of-way to a point opposite the north and south alley of block 21 and north to such point of beginning. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4; Code 2002, § 13-2) 
State Law reference- Power of city to establish fire limits, 11 O.S. § 22-113. 
Sec. 13-2. - Permit inspection and revocation. 
(a)  Permit inspections. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein and shall at all times be subject to inspection by the fire code official. The fire code official or the fire code official's designated representative shall make or cause to be made such inspection or test as necessary to assure that the use and activities for which the permit is issued complies with the International Fire Code. 
(b)  Permit revocations. The fire code official shall revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this code if, upon inspection, any violation of the code exists or if conditions of a permit have been violated or if there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to material fact in the application, data or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(Code 1986, § 10-22; Code 2002, § 13-3; Ord. No. 2133NS, § 3, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 13-3. - Permits required; application; fees. 
(a)  Permits required. It shall be unlawful to engage in any business activity involving the handling, storage or use of hazardous materials, substances or devices; or to maintain, store or handle materials; or to conduct processes producing conditions hazardous to life or property; or to install equipment utilized in connection with such activities without first notifying the fire code official and securing a permit as herein required. 
(b)  Application for permit. Application for a permit required by this section shall be made to the fire code official in such form and detail as prescribed by the fire code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the fire code official. 
(c)  Payment of fees. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the fire code official. 
(d)  Authority of permit; fees. A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials; or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property; or to install equipment utilized in connection with such activities; or to install or modify any fire protection system or equipment or any other construction, equipment installation or modification in accordance with the provisions of the International Fire Code. Such permission shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this Code or other applicable regulations or laws of the jurisdiction. Said permit shall remain in effect until revoked, or for such period of time as specified on the permit. Permits are not transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued at the rates as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 10-21; Code 2002, § 13-4; Ord. No. 2133NS, § 4, 2-2-2004) 
Sec. 13-4. - Assistance and cooperation of persons at fires. 
    Every person at or near a fire who shall conduct himself in a disorderly manner or neglect or refuse to obey promptly any order of the fire chief or assistants or who shall resist, obstruct, hinder or cause any officer of the fire department or any firefighter, in the proper discharge of his duty, shall be in violation of this Code. Any of such officers or any police officer may forthwith arrest, without warrant, and take to the police station any person so offending a member of the fire department. It shall be the duty of every police officer at a fire to keep idle and suspicious persons from the immediate vicinity of the fire and to keep back all persons who are in the way of or impeding the work of the fire department, to aid so far as possible in protecting all property placed at risk from theft or needless injury and to cooperate with the fire department in every way possible while at such fire under the direction of the chief or firefighter in charge. 
(Code 1986, § 10-50; Code 2002, § 13-5) 
State Law reference- Obstructing officer, 21 O.S. § 540; interference at fire, 21 O.S. § 1198; arrest without warrant by officer, 22 O.S. § 196. 
Sec. 13-5. - Removal of or injury to fire apparatus and equipment. 
    No person shall willfully and without proper authority remove, take away or conceal any tool, appliance or other article belonging to any fire apparatus or fire department station or anything used in any way by the fire department. No person shall willfully injure in any manner any hose, fire engine or other apparatus or any building containing such belonging to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 10-52; Code 2002, § 13-6) 
Sec. 13-6. - Right-of-way of apparatus; emergency signals. 
(a)  All drivers, engineers or conductors of railway locomotives or cars, when in the vicinity of any fire department vehicle or apparatus, when the vehicle or apparatus is on its way to or on duty at a fire, shall so manage and control such car and the motive power which moves the car as not to obstruct or delay the fire department vehicle or apparatus or any part of it in the discharge of its duties. 
(b)  All pedestrians shall clear the street in use or to be used by fire department apparatus. All such pedestrians shall remain off the right-of-way until the fire department apparatus has passed and has no further immediate use of the right-of-way for the purpose of reaching the fire. 
(c)  The drivers of all fire department vehicles and apparatus, when answering alarms of fire, shall cause the gongs or sirens upon the apparatus to be sounded upon leaving their several stations and when approaching all cross streets and street crossings and shall continue the sounding of the gongs or sirens while en route to the fire as continuously as the public safety may require. 
(Code 1986, § 10-53; Code 2002, § 13-7) 
State Law reference- Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles, 47 O.S. § 11-405; warning devices, 47 O.S. § 12-401. 
Sec. 13-7. - Interference with fire alarm system. 
    No person shall cut or sever or cause to be cut or severed or interfere with in any manner any wire of the fire alarm system or other wires or apparatus established for the purpose of dispatching fire alarms to the fire department. No person shall cut or injure any pole, crossarm, bracket or other support upon which such wires rest or in which such wires are enclosed or set up any obstruction to any instrument or means for reporting any fire alarm to the city fire department. 
(Code 1986, § 10-55; Code 2002, § 13-8) 
Sec. 13-8. - False alarm. 
(a)  No person shall willfully give or cause to be given any alarm of fire, by any means, knowing the alarm to be false. 
(b)  Whoever in this city shall give or sound a false alarm of fire, without reasonable or probable cause, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as set in the city fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission from time to time, plus costs. Each day of such violation is a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 10-56; Code 2002, § 13-9; Ord. No. 2534NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- False reporting of fire, 21 O.S. § 1851 et seq. 
Sec. 13-9. - Woodburning stoves. 
(a)  Permits and inspections. Pursuant to applicable laws, every person installing woodburning (solid fuel) stoves within the city shall be required to obtain a permit for the installation. A fee in an amount as set in the city fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission from time to time shall be charged for the permit. The permit application request shall include a diagram of the proposed location for installation along with a copy of the manufacturer's installation instructions. Permits will be issued by the bureau of fire prevention upon meeting the required safety regulations according to the manufacturer's specifications and the specifications of the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA) and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), with final discretion given to the recommendations of the fire marshal. All inspections will be performed by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(b)  Installation requirements. Requirements for installation shall be as follows: 
(1)  All installations must comply with manufacturing instructions. 
(2)  Installations are not permitted in hallways or closets. 
(3)  A minimum of 36 inches is to remain between the stove and flammable building structure materials. 
(4)  A minimum of 60 inches must separate the stove and any combustible materials such as home furnishings. 
(5)  For installation next to a wall, the wall must be fireproofed, and the stove is to be installed at least 18 inches or more away from the wall. 
(6)  Wall fireproofing may be accomplished by use of a one-fourth-inch stoveboard if 11/2 inches of air space is maintained between the shield. 
(7)  Flue pipe that extends more than six feet in height must be supported, and a maximum of two bends are permissible. 
(8)  The horizontal rise of the flue pipe must be at least one-fourth inch per foot. 
(9)  Any single pipe bend must not exceed a 45-degree angle. 
(10)  A minimum of at least one damper must be installed in the flue pipe. 
(11)  Flue pipe should be a minimum of 24-gauge thickness and must be accessible for inspection and cleaning procedures. 
(12)  Flue piping may be connected to the chimney with either a cement, tile or metal collar per the BOCA Mechanical Code. 
(13)  The stove must be at least 18 inches above the floor and have a fireproof pad underneath. The pad shall extend at least 12 inches around all sides of the stove and 18 inches beyond the fire door. The pad will be a minimum of four inches thick, constructed of an approved fireproof material: concrete, mortar, brick, stone or covered with a 24-gauge sheet metal and stoveboard. 
(14)  The location of smoke termination or chimney vent openings shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the lot line unless otherwise approved. All manufactured vent systems shall bear the label of an approved agency. 
(15)  A chimney for a factory-built fireplace shall conform to UL 127 unless it is freestanding, in which case it must conform to UL 737. 
(16)  All spaces between the chimney and floor and ceiling through which a chimney passes shall be firestopped with noncombustible material. 
(17)  Chimney height shall be at least three feet above the highest point that the chimney penetrates the roof and at least two feet higher than any portion of the building within ten feet of the chimney. Chimneys can be made of masonry or stainless steel. 
(18)  A masonry chimney must have five-eighths inch in tile lining. A stainless steel chimney must be double-walled with air insulation between. 
(Code 1986, § 10-27; Code 2002, § 13-10; Ord. No. 2534NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
Secs. 13-10-13-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of fire prevention code by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107; regulation of fireworks, 11 O.S. § 22-110; fire hazards, 11 O.S. § 22-113; fire departments, 11 O.S. § 29-101 et seq.; volunteer fire departments, 11 O.S. § 29-201 et seq.; firefighters' pensions, 11 O.S. § 49-100.1 et seq.; contract with fire protection district, 19 O.S. § 901.25; liquefied petroleum gases, 52 O.S. § 420.1 et seq.; transportation and use of nitroglycerine, 63 O.S. § 127 et seq. 

Sec. 13-36. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, as it is amended and modified from time to time, be and is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 13-37. 
(Code 1986, § 10-16; Code 2002, § 13-36; Ord. No. 2133NS, § 1, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 33, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 13, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 13-37. - Amendments. 
    The fire prevention code adopted in section 13-36, the same being the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, as it is amended and modified from time to time, is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 101.1 insert: City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
Section 109.3. Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than an amount as described in the city fee schedule or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.. 
Section 111.4 is amended by inserting the following: 
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine established in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 10-17; Code 2002, § 13-37; Ord. No. 2133NS, § 2, 2-2-2004; Ord. No. 2499NS, § 34, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 2534NS, § 1, 3-3-2014; Ord. No. 2600NS, § 14, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 13-38. - Modifications. 
    The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article upon application, in writing, by the owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon the records of the fire department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1986, § 10-20; Code 2002, § 13-38) 
Sec. 13-39. - Violations. 
(a)  Under this article, no person shall: 
(1)  Violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith; 
(2)  Violate or fail to comply with any order made under the fire prevention code; 
(3)  Build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under such code or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or 
(4)  Fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the bureau of fire prevention or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein. 
(b)  The application of a penalty for the violation of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1986, § 10-18; Code 2002, § 13-39) 
Sec. 13-40. - Enforcement; bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department, which is established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The chief in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the city manager on the basis of examination to determine his qualifications. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service, and he shall not be removed from office except for cause after public trial. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the city manager the employment of technical inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause. 
(d)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the city manager. It shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to such code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1986, § 10-19; Code 2002, § 13-40) 
Secs. 13-41-13-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Constitution reference- Firefighters' pensions, OK Const. Art. 5, § 41. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-66. - Composition; bureaus. 
    The fire department shall consist of a chief, battalion chiefs and such captains, drivers, firefighters and mechanics as, in the opinion of the city manager and the city commission, may be required to properly man the fire department. The department shall be divided into two bureaus: a bureau of fire suppression and a bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1986, § 10-41; Code 2002, § 13-66) 
Sec. 13-67. - Membership generally; dues. 
(a)  The employment process for the fire department shall be the same as for any other department of the city. Requirements for admission to the Oklahoma State Firefighters Pension System shall be applied in addition to other tests and requirements. 
(b)  The city will pay the annual dues of each member of the fire department which are payable to the State Firefighter's Association, provided that no such dues shall be paid without the recommendation of the fire chief and the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 10-44; Code 2002, § 13-67; Ord. No. 2534, § 2, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- Appointment of firefighters, 11 O.S. § 29-103. 
Sec. 13-68. - Training program. 
    A training program shall be maintained which shall instruct all recruits and members of the fire department in the various branches of firefighting and fire prevention technique, acquainting them with the regulations of the department, the laws and ordinances of the state and city affecting their official duties and familiarizing them with fire department practices, methods and the use of equipment. 
(Code 1986, § 10-46; Code 2002, § 13-68) 
State Law reference- Fire service training at Oklahoma State University, 70 O.S. § 628.9. 
Sec. 13-69. - Firefighters' pension and retirement system. 
(a)  The city adopts the state statutes with regard to the firefighters' pension and retirement system. 
(b)  The city clerk shall file on or before January 15 of each year his certificate with the state insurance department showing the following: 
(1)  The existence of the fire department; 
(2)  The number of fire engines, fire apparatus and other equipment owned and used by the fire department and the value thereof; 
(3)  The system of water supply in use in such department; and 
(4)  The number of members, with their names, dates of appointment and the dates of expiration of terms of service. 
(Code 1986, § 10-58; Code 2002, § 13-69) 
State Law reference- Firefighters' pension and retirement system, 11 O.S. § 49-100.1 et seq.; report by clerk of statistics as to fire department, 11 O.S. § 49-124. 
Sec. 13-70. - Police power; arrest authority. 
    The fire chief and members of the fire department are vested with all authority of city police officers insofar as is necessary in the exercise of their duties, and they are authorized to make arrests for interference with firefighters in the discharge of the duties of their office or for any interference or obstruction of the operations of the fire department. 
(Code 1986, § 10-47; Code 2002, § 13-70) 
Sec. 13-71. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The fire department shall be charged with the prevention of fires within the city; with the detecting, combating and extinguishing of fires when such occur; and with the protection of property and persons against damage and accident incident to such fires. The department shall aid in the preservation of order within the city and the suppression of riots when so directed by the city manager, who may grant police powers to members of the fire department. 
(Code 1986, § 10-42; Code 2002, § 13-71) 
State Law reference- Power of governing body to regulate or prohibit riots, 11 O.S. § 22-110. 
Sec. 13-72. - Response to alarms outside corporate limits. 
    The fire department may respond to fire alarms outside the corporate limits upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The fire department is authorized and directed to answer all outside calls within a distance of ten miles from the nearest fire station, unless such calls are from within the corporate limits of another city or town and unless, in the opinion of the fire chief, it is inexpedient to do so on account of another fire in the city, broken apparatus, impassable or dangerous highways or other physical conditions. However, the fire department may respond to calls within the corporate limits of other cities or towns if, in the opinion of the fire chief, response to particular calls could be accomplished within a reasonable length of time and no problems would arise with regard to fire departments of other cities and towns. In accepting the firefighting services of the city, the owners of the individual properties where such firefighting activity is conducted shall be contractually liable to the city for the reasonable value of the services performed by the city in furnishing such firefighting services. The reasonable value of such services is established to be an amount as described in the city fee schedule per hour for each firefighting vehicle used in connection with answering such alarms. Such contractual liability shall be and is imposed upon the owners of individual properties whether they, any of them, members of their families, fire departments of other municipalities or any other persons request such firefighting services, the acceptance of the benefits of the fire department being sufficient to establish such contractual liability. 
(2)  The city may enter into contractual agreements with other cities and towns or private organizations to give or receive fire protection, and the city may provide fire protection jointly with one or more municipalities or private organizations. However, any contract for fire protection entered into by the city shall expressly stipulate the terms and conditions upon and in compliance with which each party thereof is to cooperate in furnishing, maintaining and operating fire equipment for outside aid or mutual aid or making payment for such service. 
(3)  In answering such fire alarms by the fire department, the city shall not be liable in damages for any act of commission, omission or negligence while answering or returning from any fire or reported fire or doing or performing any such fire prevention work or rescue, resuscitation, first aid, inspection or any other official work. 
(Code 1986, § 10-54; Code 2002, § 13-72) 
Secs. 13-73-13-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CHIEF[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Duties of fire chief, 11 O.S. § 29-102. 

Sec. 13-102. - Control of firefighters. 
    The chief of the fire department, subject to the approval of the city manager, shall have exclusive control of the stationing and transferring of all firefighters and other officers and employees in the fire department. He shall be vested with the necessary disciplinary powers for effective subordination to authority, faithful discharge of duty and efficient performance of responsibilities with which each member stands charged. 
(Code 1986, § 10-43(a); Code 2002, § 13-101) 
Sec. 13-103. - Law enforcement. 
    The fire chief shall be charged with the administration of all sections of this Code or any other city ordinances relating to the inspection of fire risks or to the protection and safety of life and property from fire hazards. He shall control the director of fire prevention in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1986, § 10-43(b); Code 2002, § 13-102) 
Sec. 13-104. - Reports of fires. 
    The chief of the fire department shall make a monthly report to the city manager of all fires occurring in the city, the causes of each fire, the name of the occupant and owner of every building endangered by fire and such other facts as may be required by the city manager. The report shall show the work performed in each case by his department and the amount of insurance carried on each building damaged or destroyed by fire. It shall be the duty of the fire chief to maintain a register, in which shall be entered the date of every fire, the street number where it happened, the cause or apparent cause, the amount of damage and delays if any in reaching the fire, together with the obstructions or interferences which occasioned the delay. The fire chief shall make special reports on any particular fire or for any particular period of time as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 10-43(d); Code 2002, § 13-104) 
Sec. 13-105. - Inventory of property. 
    The fire chief shall keep and maintain a duplicate inventory of all property in his department, with its value and condition. He shall keep a memorandum of all the purchases and reports and shall report the information to the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 10-43(e); Code 2002, § 13-105) 
Sec. 13-106. - Working hours. 
    The chief of the fire department shall so arrange the working hours of the employees of the fire department that each employee shall work, as near as practicable, an equal number of hours per month. The chief of the fire department or his aid or assistant may, in his discretion, in an emergency or great conflagrations, require such employees for a greater period to continue on duty during such conflagration or emergency. 
(Code 1986, § 10-45; Code 2002, § 13-106) 
Sec. 13-107. - Removal or destruction of combustibles; right of entry. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department or any person specially authorized by him shall be authorized to order the removal of fences, lumber or other combustibles and the pulling down of houses, buildings or other structures at fires when, in his opinion, the public safety may require it. 
(b)  The fire chief or his authorized deputy shall have the right of ingress and egress on and into any real property within the city during reasonable hours for the purpose of discharging the duties imposed upon him. 
(Code 1986, § 10-48; Code 2002, § 13-107) 
Sec. 13-108. - Safety zones around fires; protection of private property. 
    The fire chief or his deputy in charge of any fire shall have the authority to lay off fire zones around any fire for the purpose of public safety and effective firefighting. No person shall be allowed to enter such fire zone, except under direction of the fire chief. It shall be the duty of the police to give such assistance as is necessary in maintaining such zone clear of all traffic and persons and to render such further assistance as may be necessary for the preservation of the public safety. It shall be the duty of the fire chief to establish guards around any property removed from any building on account of fire and to safely protect the property from theft or other damage until properly and lawfully disposed of. 
(Code 1986, § 10-49; Code 2002, § 13-108) 
Sec. 13-109. - Maintenance, inspection and control of equipment and apparatus. 
(a)  All necessary equipment and property for effective firefighting shall be maintained and distributed according to fire hazards. The chief shall be charged with the control of all buildings, quarters, motor vehicles and equipment used by the department. 
(b)  The fire chief shall safely and securely keep all fire apparatus, hoses and other appliances used by the fire department in extinguishing fires in the city. He shall be the legal custodian of all property purchased and assigned to the fire department for the use of the department and shall have full authority in the use of the property. He shall not permit any equipment, apparatus, tools, paraphernalia or instruments belonging to his department to be taken therefrom without a written order from the city manager. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the fire chief or some member of the fire department authorized by him to make periodical examination of all fire apparatus, including hoses and all equipment, with the view to keeping the apparatus in good working order. He shall keep a record of each examination, showing the date of the examination or tests, the equipment so examined, the character of the test or examination and whether or not the condition of such equipment is in need of any repair in the immediate or remote future. 
(Code 1986, § 10-51; Code 2002, § 13-109) 
Sec. 13-110. - Fire hydrant obstruction. 
    No person shall place or cause to be placed upon or about any fire hydrant any rubbish, building material, fence or other obstruction of any character whatsoever, nor shall any person hitch or cause to be hitched to any fire hydrant any animal or fasten to the fire hydrant any guy rope, cable or brace or back or stand any vehicle nearer than 15 feet from a fire hydrant. Any fence or other obstruction standing in violation of this subsection shall be removed by the owner or the occupant of the premises to a proper distance from such fire hydrant to admit free access to the fire hydrant. 
(Code 1986, § 10-57; Code 2002, § 13-110; Ord. No. 2534NS, § 4, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- Parking near fire hydrant, 47 O.S. § 11-1003. 
Secs. 13-111-13-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS OR PYROTECHNICS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks generally, 68 O.S. § 1621 et seq. 

Sec. 13-136. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pyrotechnics means any sparkler, squib, rocket, firecracker, Roman candle, fire balloon, signal light, railroad track torpedo, flashlight composition, firework or other device or composition used to obtain visible or audible pyrotechnic display. 
(Code 1986, § 10-23; Code 2002, § 13-136) 
Sec. 13-137. - Possession, manufacturing, selling or transporting. 
(a)  No person shall have, keep, store, use, manufacture, sell, handle or transport any pyrotechnics; provided, however, that nothing in this section or section 13-138 shall be held to apply to the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads or other common carriers requiring them. 
(b)  The bureau of fire prevention may, upon due application, issue a permit to a properly qualified person for giving pyrotechnic display of fireworks in the public parks or other open places. Such permits shall impose such restrictions as, in the opinion of the director of the bureau of fire prevention, may be necessary to properly safeguard life and property in each case. 
(c)  Nothing in this section or section 13-138 shall be held to apply to the possession, sale or use of normal stocks of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies. 
(Code 1986, § 10-24; Code 2002, § 13-137) 
Sec. 13-138. - Discharge; firing; sale. 
(a)  The discharge, firing or use of any firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, Roman candles or other fireworks or substances designed and intended for pyrotechnic display and of pistols, canes, cannons or other appliances using blank cartridges or caps containing chlorate of potash mixture is prohibited. However, the city commission may permit the public display of such when they shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the chief of police and fire chief, shall not be hazardous to surrounding property or endanger any person or property. Any violation of any subsection of this section shall be an offense. 
(b)  The sale of fireworks at retail is prohibited. The chief of police may, at his discretion, remove, at the owner's expense, all stocks of fireworks or other combustibles exposed for sale. 
(Code 1986, § 10-25; Code 2002, § 13-138) 
Sec. 13-139. - Fee and insurance for permit and display. 
    An application for a permit for a fireworks display must be submitted to the fire code official with a permit fee in an amount as set in the schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission from time to time. Prior to issuing permits for fireworks display, plans for the display, inspections of the display site, and demonstrations of the display operations shall be approved by the fire code official. Every display shall be handled by an approved competent operator, and the person or organization making application for a permit must present a general liability insurance policy in the amount as described in the city fee schedule. The fire code official is to inspect the site prior to the event for the purpose of determining if it has appropriate access for fire trucks and equipment. 
(Code 1986, § 10-26; Code 2002, § 13-139; Ord. No. 2135NS, § 1, 2-2-2004, Ord. No. 2534NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
Secs. 13-140-13-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP AND RECOVERY OF COST 

Sec. 13-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous substance or waste means any material, whether solid, liquid or gaseous in form, that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment. 
(Code 1986, § 10-91(b); Code 2002, § 13-201) 
Sec. 13-202. - Authority to abate. 
    The fire chief is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste unlawfully, accidentally, willfully or negligently released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 10-91(a); Code 2002, § 13-202) 
Sec. 13-203. - Responsibility for costs. 
(a)  The following persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the payment of all costs incurred by the city as a result of hazardous materials cleanup or abatement activity: 
(1)  The person whose unlawful, accidental, willful or negligent act or omission proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit of the hazardous substance or waste; 
(2)  The person who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release, discharge or deposit without regard to fault or proximate cause; and 
(3)  The person who owned or had custody or control of the container which held the hazardous substance or waste at the time or immediately prior to such release, discharge or deposit without regard to fault or proximate cause. 
(b)  If any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the fire chief or other city official, to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste unlawfully, accidentally, willfully or negligently released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the city, the fire chief may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement. The persons described in subsection (a) of this section shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, costs incurred by the city shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Actual labor costs of city personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead; 
(2)  Cost of equipment operation; 
(3)  Cost of any contract labor and materials; and 
(4)  Cost of any independent contractor. 
(d)  The remedies provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law or equity. 
(e)  The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department. 
(Code 1986, § 10-92; Code 2002, § 13-203) 
Sec. 13-204. - Compliance with guidelines. 
    Any person who undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the fire chief or other city official, to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance shall do so in accordance with all local, state and federal guidelines. 
(Code 1986, § 10-93; Code 2002, § 13-204) 
Chapter 14 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Floodplain management, 82 O.S. § 1601 et seq.; application of act, 82 O.S. § 1618. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-26. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
(Code 2002, § 14-26; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-27. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but not be limited to, garages and storage sheds. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the city subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation means the elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base flood or one percent chance flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    BFE means base flood elevation. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Development permit means a permit issued by the city floodplain administrator which authorizes development in a special flood hazard area in accordance with this article. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built, for a building in zones AE, A and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones AE, A and X, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures". 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed before August 4, 1972. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    FIRM means flood insurance rate map. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the city which contains floodway profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as floodway width, section area and mean velocity. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see Flood or flooding ). 
    Floodplain administrator means a person accredited by the OWRB and designated by the city commission to administer and implement laws, ordinances and regulations relating to the management of floodplains. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning codes and ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of 44 CFR 60.3. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on the city's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the city. 
    OWRB means the Oklahoma Water Resources Board. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by the city commission to a person from the terms of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements, see 44 CFR 60.6.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1988 or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 2002, § 14-27; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-28. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 2002, § 14-28; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-29. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets; and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 2002, § 14-29; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-30. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or that cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 2002, § 14-30; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-31. - Lands to which article applies. 
    The article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the city's jurisdiction. 
(Code 2002, § 14-31; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-32. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Shawnee, Oklahoma", dated September 3, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps are hereby adopted on September 3, 2010, by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 2002, § 14-32; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-33. - Compliance. 
    After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, no structure or land shall be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 14-33; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-34. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail. 
(Code 2002, § 14-34; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-35. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all sections shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit, nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 2002, § 14-35; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-36. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Code 2002, § 14-36; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-37. - Development generating wastewater restricted; waiver. 
(a)  Irrespective of any other section to the contrary in this article, from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, there shall be no new development permitted within the 100-year floodplain, as defined on the latest publication of the National Flood Insurance Program's flood insurance map for the city, which would generate wastewater to be transported to the wastewater treatment facilities of the Shawnee Municipal Authority. 
(b)  An owner/developer of property situated in the floodplain may make request, in writing, to the city for a waiver of service area restriction only when the owner/developer can sufficiently show that the natural environment in the 100-year floodplain would be preserved if the waiver was granted. The written request for a waiver of service area restriction must be submitted to the floodplain administrator who, upon review thereof, will judge whether the requested waiver is in conformance with the intent of this section. If it be found that the waiver would not be in keeping with the intent of this section, the request for a waiver of service area restriction shall be denied. Should the findings of the floodplain administrator be that the requested waiver would not violate the intent of this section or have detrimental effect upon the natural functions and values of the affected floodplain, such a request would be presented to the city commission for its consideration and possible approval. After city commission approval, the city would submit the request to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Regional Administrator for review and possible approval. It is specifically the intent of this section that the regional administrator be the final authority in all such requests for a waiver of service area restriction. 
(Code 2002, § 14-37; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 14-38-14-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-66. - Designation of floodplain administrator. 
    The city commission designates the city engineer (or his designee) as floodplain administrator to administer and implement this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 2002, § 14-66; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-67. - Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. 
    Under this article, duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for the public inspection all records pertaining to this article. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local government agencies, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344, from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the state water resources board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 14-32, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer division 3 of this article. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, must require that no new construction, substantial improvements or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within zones AE as delineated on the Pottawatomie County FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect on the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
(10)  Require the developer/applicant to determine and provide the base flood elevation on a FEMA elevation certificate as well as other data as required in order to administer the provision of division 3. 
(11)  Become accredited by the OWRB in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601-1618, as amended. 
(Code 2002, § 14-67; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-68. - Development permit. 
(a)  A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with this article. 
(b)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator or designee, on forms furnished by the administrator, and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations; existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes; and the location of such in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 14-97(2). 
(4)  A description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  A record of all such information maintained in accordance with section 14-67(a)(1). 
(c)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator or designee shall be based on all of the sections of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other land to the injury of others. 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Code 2002, § 14-68; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-69. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The zoning board of adjustment as established by the city commission shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator or designee in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator or designee shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 14-88(c) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted in subsections (a) through (f) of this section and the intent of this article, the zoning board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article in section 14-29. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances shall be as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that the criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 2002, § 14-69; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-70. - Floodplain management fee schedule. 
    The city commission establishes a floodplain management fee schedule as part of the city fee schedule approved and updated by the city commission from time to time. 
(Code 2002, § 14-70; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-71. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate or other certifications required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city commission or city attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 2002, § 14-71; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-72. - Certification. 
    It is hereby found and declared by the city commission that severe flooding has occurred in the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly occur within the future; that flooding is likely to result in infliction of serious personal injury or death, and is likely to result in substantial injury or destruction of property within its jurisdiction; in order to effectively comply with minimum standards for coverage under the National Flood Insurance Program, and in order to effectively remedy the situation described herein, it is necessary that this article become effective immediately. 
(Code 2002, § 14-72; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 14-73-14-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 14-96. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 2002, § 14-96; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-97. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 14-32 and section 14-67(8) or 14-98(c), the following are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one or more feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator or designee that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 14-68(b)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one or more feet above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. Standards for manufactured homes shall require that all manufactured homes to be placed anywhere within the city in flood zones A and/or AE on the county FIRM, shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this subsection, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. The home shall be installed by a licensed installer according to state law and compliance herewith shall be certified in writing to the floodplain administrator by said installer prior to habitation of the manufactured home. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, shall either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use or meet the permit requirements of section 14-68 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Accessory structure. Accessory structures to be placed on sites within zones A and AE on the county FIRM shall comply with the following: 
a.  The structure shall be unfinished on the interior; 
b.  The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage; 
c.  The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited activities or uses include, but are not limited to, working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom use; 
d.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be elevated to or above the BFE; 
e.  The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
f.  The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential and constructed with flood-resistance materials; 
g.  The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
h.  Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure; 
i.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below the BFE; and 
j.  The structure shall be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby structures. 
(Code 2002, § 14-97; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-98. - Subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 14-28, 14-29 and 14-30. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit requirements of section 14-68 and this division. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to sections 14-32 or 14-67(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 2002, § 14-98; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-99. - Areas of shallow flooding. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-32 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 14-97, are satisfied. 
(Code 2002, § 14-99; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 14-100. - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-32 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional flood insurance rate map and floodway revision through the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Code 2002, § 14-100; Ord. No. 2437NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2010) 
Chapter 15 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Waterworks and water supplies, 11 O.S. § 37-101 et seq.; barbers, 59 O.S. § 61 et seq.; cosmetology, 59 O.S. § 199.1; embalmers and funeral directors, 59 O.S. § 396 et seq.; vital statistics, 63 O.S. § 1-301 et seq.; disease prevention and control, 63 O.S. § 1-501 et seq.; venereal disease, 63 O.S. § 1-517 et seq.; food, 63 O.S. § 1-1101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Applicability of state law generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code or any other city ordinances, the regulation and control of contagious diseases, venereal diseases, vital statistics, undertakers, water vendors, ice cream and confections, meats, foods, hotels and roominghouses, barbershops, beauty parlors and all other health examinations, inspections and regulations relating thereto shall be governed by the state law on such subjects. 
(Code 1986, § 11-1; Code 2002, § 15-1) 
State Law reference- Municipal hospitals, 11 O.S. § 22-104; cleaning and mowing of property by city, 11 O.S. § 22-111; health in municipalities, 11 O.S. § 22-120, 63 O.S. § 1-209; public health generally, 63 O.S. § 1-101 et seq.; health nuisances, 63 O.S. § 1-1011 et seq. 
Sec. 15-2. - Food service sanitation. 
(a)  The definitions; the inspection of food service establishments; the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink; and the enforcement of this section shall be regulated in accordance with the current edition of the United Stated Food and Drug Administration "Food Service Sanitation Ordinance," one copy of which shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. However, the words "municipality of ____________ " in such ordinance shall be understood to refer to the city. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of the ordinance adopted in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee code, plus costs. Each day upon which such a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation. 
(Code 1986, § 11-2; Code 2002, § 15-2) 
Sec. 15-3. - Use of public drinking cups. 
    No person shall place any drinking cup or glass in any public place, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, show, business house or other place where the cup or glass is intended to be or may be used in common by the public at large. 
(Code 1986, § 11-3; Code 2002, § 15-3) 
Sec. 15-4. - Use of public sanitary facilities. 
(a)  No person shall use a toilet in any public place in any unclean, unsanitary or improper manner. Any use of such toilet in such a manner as to impair its usefulness for other persons, without the toilet first being cleaned and put in a sanitary condition, shall come within the intent of this section and shall be an offense. 
(b)  No person shall throw anything into or expectorate into any public lavatory or washbasin or throw paper or other matter on the floors of any public washroom or lavatory. 
(Code 1986, § 11-4; Code 2002, § 15-4) 
Sec. 15-5. - Slaughterhouses. 
    No person shall establish any slaughterhouse within the city or within one mile thereof without the consent of the city commission and without strictly complying with all regulations relating to slaughterhouses. 
(Code 1986, § 11-5; Code 2002, § 15-5) 
State Law reference- Location of slaughterhouse, 50 O.S. § 41. 
Secs. 15-6-15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency services generally, 63 O.S. §§ 330.90 et seq., 2451 et seq., 1-2511 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance means a motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed or arranged for the purpose of transporting ill, sick or injured persons which meets Oklahoma D.O.T. KKK-A 1822A specifications for a types I, II and III vehicle as designated by the state department of health. 
    Ambulance call means the act of progressing with an ambulance to the scene of need and transporting a patient to his destination. 
    Attendant means a person who has the duty of caring for a sick, ill or injured person who is being transported as a patient in an ambulance. 
    Chauffeur means every individual who shall drive an ambulance, as defined in this section, and who is registered with the state as a commercial chauffeur. 
    Code 1 call means the nonemergency type of call, slow run, convalescent call (no red lights or siren used). 
    Code 3 call means the emergency type of call. This call is made with the use of red lights and siren. 
    Department means the police department. 
    License means a license issued by the city to operate an ambulance service within the city. 
    License officer means the city clerk. 
    Operator means any person engaged in business as the owner or proprietor of ambulances, as defined in this section, requiring a license under this article. 
    Sanitation and decontamination measures means those measures necessary to ensure the health and well-being of all patients and ambulance personnel. 
(Code 1986, § 11-21; Code 2002, § 15-31) 
Sec. 15-32. - Penalty. 
    Where not otherwise stated, any person who shall violate any of the sections of this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by fine in an amount as described in the city fee code, plus costs, for each violation and subsequent prohibited act. 
(Code 1986, § 11-22; Code 2002, § 15-32) 
Sec. 15-33. - Sole provider system for ambulance service transports; exemptions. 
(a)  React EMS, an emergency medical service operated by React Ambulance Authority, a public entity, is the sole provider system for ambulance service transports within the city's geographical boundaries. 
(b)  The following types of patient transport shall be exempt from this section: 
(1)  Any ambulance owned or operated by or under contract to perform ambulance transport services for the federal or state government or any agency thereof; 
(2)  Any ambulance owned or operated by a hospital and in use to transport a patient of the owner/hospital, which patient has been admitted to and not been discharged from the owner/hospital, to or from another hospital or medical care facility at which the patient receives a diagnostic or therapeutic procedure not available at the owner/hospital; 
(3)  Any ambulance engaged in a routine transport call to transport a patient from a hospital, nursing home or dialysis center located within an EMS region or municipality to any location outside the EMS region or municipality; 
(4)  Any ambulance engaged in the transport of a patient from a location outside an EMS region or municipality to a location inside an EMS region or municipality; or 
(5)  Any ambulance engaged in the interstate transport of a patient. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed or applied to limit the operation of any emergency medical service district established and operating pursuant to OK Const. Art. X, § 9C. 
(Code 1986, § 11-49; Code 2002, § 15-33) 
Sec. 15-34. - Compliance. 
    The holder of a license issued pursuant to this article shall comply with the regulations, requirements, conditions and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 11-26; Code 2002, § 15-34) 
Sec. 15-35. - Operators, chauffeurs and attendants informed of article. 
    All ambulance operators shall be furnished with a copy of this article and shall keep their chauffeurs and attendants properly informed of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 11-25; Code 2002, § 15-35) 
Sec. 15-36. - Central place of business and telephone. 
    Each ambulance operator shall maintain a central place of business which shall be located within the city limits, at which place he shall provide a properly listed telephone for receiving all calls for ambulance services. It shall be the responsibility of every operator to keep on file with the department such business address and telephone number whereby each operator may be reached at all times. 
(Code 1986, § 11-23; Code 2002, § 15-36) 
Sec. 15-37. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every ambulance operator shall carry general and auto liability and property damage insurance with solvent and responsible insurers authorized to transact business in the state to secure payment for any loss or damage resulting from any occurrence arising out of or caused by the operation or use of any of the operator's motor vehicles. 
(b)  Each vehicle shall be insured for injuries to or death of any one person arising out of any one accident and for injuries to or death of more than one person in any one accident and for damages to property arising from any one accident with such insurance being in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  Such insurance shall be obtained and certificates of insurance shall be filed with the city clerk before a license or permit shall be issued. 
(d)  Such certificates of insurance shall be approved by the city manager or designee. 
(e)  All such certificates of insurance shall provide for a ten-day cancellation notice to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 11-24; Code 2002, § 15-37) 
Sec. 15-38. - Immediate service. 
    Every holder of a license issued under this article shall provide immediate service, 24 hours daily, every day. 
(Code 1986, § 11-27; Code 2002, § 15-38) 
Sec. 15-39. - Identification of vehicle. 
    Each ambulance shall be identified in such a manner as clearly indicates that the vehicle is used for ambulance purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 11-28; Code 2002, § 15-39) 
Sec. 15-40. - Business name on vehicle; other advertising. 
    The ambulance operator's business name shall appear on each side of the ambulance in letters not less than three inches in height and one-half inch in stroke on a metal portion of the body. No other advertising shall be used other than the term "ambulance company." 
(Code 1986, § 11-29; Code 2002, § 15-40) 
Sec. 15-41. - Prompt service. 
    Every call for ambulance service shall be answered promptly. Patients shall be loaded and transported without being subjected to unreasonable delays. 
(Code 1986, § 11-30; Code 2002, § 15-41) 
Sec. 15-42. - Clean bed linens. 
    Clean and sanitary bed linens shall be provided for each patient carried in an ambulance, and the linens shall be changed as soon as practicable after the discharge of a patient. 
(Code 1986, § 11-31; Code 2002, § 15-42) 
Sec. 15-43. - Attendants. 
    Ambulance attendants other than the driver responding to emergency calls shall, as a minimum, be emergency medical technicians/basic licensed by the state department of health. At least one person other than the driver of the vehicle shall be required on a vehicle responding to an emergency call, and such person shall be a licensed emergency medical technician. He shall remain in attendance to the patient being conveyed. 
(Code 1986, § 11-32; Code 2002, § 15-43) 
Sec. 15-44. - Person on duty. 
    Every person issued a license under this article shall, at all times, have a person who shall be required to promptly answer all calls for service, promptly dispatch ambulances and be generally responsible for the conduct of the business. 
(Code 1986, § 11-33; Code 2002, § 15-44) 
Sec. 15-45. - Driving while intoxicated. 
    No person shall operate an ambulance while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
(Code 1986, § 11-34; Code 2002, § 15-45) 
State Law reference- Driving while intoxicated, 47 O.S. § 11-902. 
Sec. 15-46. - Proper operation. 
    No person shall operate or drive an ambulance in a manner that is not in the best interest of the general public. 
(Code 1986, § 11-35; Code 2002, § 15-46) 
Sec. 15-47. - Equipment. 
    Every person issued a license under this article shall maintain in good operating condition or ready for use all of the following equipment, which shall be modern and capable of rendering a satisfactory ambulance service: 
(1)  All ambulances used for the purpose of providing ambulance service under this article shall be designed and constructed to comply with Oklahoma D.O.T. KKK-A 1822A specifications for types I, II and III vehicles as designated by the state department of health. 
(2)  Every motor vehicle used for the purpose of providing ambulance service shall have as standard equipment the following: 
a.  Four-wheel brakes in good operating condition; 
b.  Parking brake; 
c.  Front and rear bumper; 
d.  Heater and defroster sufficient to heat the interior of the ambulance in cold weather; 
e.  Air conditioner capable of cooling the interior of the ambulance in hot weather; 
f.  Left-side rear view mirror and one in the driver's compartment; 
g.  A speedometer, exposed to view, and maintained in accurate operating condition; 
h.  Power steering; 
i.  Windshield wiper and washer; 
j.  Tires with a minimum of 4/32-inch tread; 
k.  Factory recommended shock absorbers; and 
l.  Adequate two-way radio equipment. 
(3)  The body of the ambulance shall have rear loading facilities, and there shall be at least two exits from the compartment where the patient is carried. 
(4)  Each ambulance shall carry as a minimum all of the equipment designated by the state commissioner of health as needed to provide the level of care for which the operator has been licensed by the state department of health. 
(5)  All mechanical, safety and special equipment shall be subject to inspection at any time by authorized officials. 
(6)  All ambulances shall be subject to the same statutes, ordinances and rules and regulations relating to safety and operating equipment applicable to other motor vehicles in this city. 
(Code 1986, § 11-36; Code 2002, § 15-47) 
Sec. 15-48. - Refusal to transport or attend person. 
    No ambulance operator shall, without good cause, refuse to promptly transport to or attend any sick or injured person after responding to a call. 
(Code 1986, § 11-37; Code 2002, § 15-48) 
Sec. 15-49. - Compensation; receipts. 
    No person shall demand or receive compensation under this article, other than established charges, or fail to give a receipt for monies received. 
(Code 1986, § 11-38; Code 2002, § 15-49) 
Sec. 15-50. - Changes in destination. 
    No person shall induce or seek to induce a change in the destination specified by the person engaging the ambulance except in an extreme emergency when, in the judgment of the operator, chauffeur or attendant, the sick or injured person's life or health may be in peril if such person were taken to the designated hospital or place, in which case the patient shall be transported to a hospital based on the following criteria in this order: 
(1)  Patient request for a certain hospital. 
(2)  Patient injury or illness dictates a need for specialty care, facility or immediate physician's care. 
(3)  Closest medical facility. 
(Code 1986, § 11-39; Code 2002, § 15-50) 
Sec. 15-51. - Inducement to patronize certain hospital. 
    No person shall induce or seek to induce any person engaging an ambulance to patronize or retain the services of any hospital, convalescent home, mortuary, cemetery, attorney, private accident investigator, nurse or any person that could benefit financially as a result of such inducement. 
(Code 1986, § 11-40; Code 2002, § 15-51) 
Sec. 15-52. - Abusive language. 
    No person regulated by this article shall use abusive or obscene language or fail to conduct himself in a courteous manner. 
(Code 1986, § 11-41; Code 2002, § 15-52) 
Sec. 15-53. - Release of patient. 
    No person regulated by this article shall release his patient from his care until he is assured that some responsible person is available to receive such patient. 
(Code 1986, § 11-42; Code 2002, § 15-53) 
Sec. 15-54. - Use of siren or red light. 
    No person in control of an ambulance shall use a siren or flashing red light, unless on an emergency call, as defined in section 15-31. 
(Code 1986, § 11-43; Code 2002, § 15-54) 
Sec. 15-55. - Police orders. 
    No person operating an ambulance shall disobey the lawful orders of a police officer at the scene of an accident or other similar emergency, with exceptions concerning patient care. 
(Code 1986, § 11-44; Code 2002, § 15-55) 
Sec. 15-56. - Smoking while driving. 
    No person shall smoke while driving an ambulance occupied by a patient or when attending a patient, as defined in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 11-45; Code 2002, § 15-56) 
Sec. 15-57. - Manner of driving. 
    No person in control of an ambulance shall fail to drive at a reasonable and proper speed at any time or to stop at any traffic signal showing red and at any stop sign while on an emergency call, as defined in section 15-31. 
(Code 1986, § 11-46; Code 2002, § 15-57) 
Sec. 15-58. - Emergency calls. 
(a)  An ambulance may respond, after receiving a call from a private citizen or from the city, state or county dispatcher, to a call, using red lights and siren. The dispatcher of the police department must be notified of the call, the nature of the call and the intent to use the warning equipment on the city streets by the licensee receiving the call. 
(b)  Any person in control of an ambulance, answering an emergency call from either a police monitor or any other mechanical monitoring device, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee code, plus costs. 
(c)  Any person in control of an ambulance, making an emergency run within the city limits without first notifying the police department dispatcher, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee code, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 11-47; Code 2002, § 15-58) 
Sec. 15-59. - Procedure when patient is dead on arrival of ambulance. 
(a)  The term "dead on arrival," as used as used in this section, shall mean a determination of death by a medical examiner or medical doctor. 
(b)  The following procedure shall be followed by all approved ambulances when the subject of the emergency call is dead on the arrival of the ambulance: 
(1)  When there is not any instruction given by the next of kin or other responsible person related to the deceased as to where the body shall be delivered, the ambulance driver shall deliver it to a hospital where it shall remain until a medical examiner or licensed medical doctor formally pronounces the subject dead. 
(2)  The body shall then be taken to the funeral home or mortuary. 
(Code 1986, § 11-48; Code 2002, § 15-59) 
Secs. 15-60-15-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE AND PERMIT 

Sec. 15-86. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, drive or operate any ambulance, as defined in this article, within the territorial limits of this city without first obtaining a license of public convenience and necessity and a permit issued under and pursuant to this division. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to ambulances picking up patients on sick calls only within the city limits and delivering such patients to destinations outside the city limits, nor shall it apply to ambulances picking up patients outside the city limits and delivering such patients to destinations inside the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 11-61; Code 2002, § 15-86) 
Sec. 15-87. - Application. 
(a)  Every application for a license required under this division shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the operator, and shall be filed with the city. The application shall be on a form provided by the licensing officer and shall contain the following: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the name, age and address of the applicant and the length of time the applicant has resided in the city; if a partnership, the business name of the partnership and the name, age and address of each partner and the length of time each partner has resided in the city; if a corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers and the names and addresses of all directors thereof. 
(2)  The class of transportation service which the applicant desires to furnish; the number of vehicles; a brief description of the kind and type of vehicles; the passenger capacity of the vehicles; and the model, motor number and state license number of each vehicle. 
(b)  The applicant shall file, if the application should be granted and prior to the issuance of any permit, copies of a general and automobile liability insurance and property damage insurance policies, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 11-62; Code 2002, § 15-87) 
Sec. 15-88. - Investigation; hearing; findings. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for any license required under this division by a person or operator, as defined in this article, the city commission shall cause an investigation to be made of the character and reputation of the applicant as a law-abiding citizen; the financial ability of the applicant to render safe and comfortable transportation service and to maintain or replace the equipment for such service; the financial responsibility of the applicant to maintain insurance for the payment of personal injury, death and property damage claims; and such investigation of other pertinent facts the city commission may deem relevant in determining the fitness of the applicant to assume the occupation of an operator. 
(b)  Upon completion of its investigation, the city commission shall schedule a public hearing on the application. The city commission shall give to a license applicant and to all license holders notice of any public hearing by the city commission affecting licenses at least ten days prior to the date of such public hearing, and such notice shall be furnished by mail. At the time and place specified in such notice, the city commission shall accord all persons attending an opportunity to be heard. Following the public hearing, the city commission shall make its determination, taking into consideration all matters brought to its attention regarding the qualifications of the applicant, the number of ambulances in operation, the possible effect upon traffic of additional permits and other factors affecting the public convenience and necessity. If such findings show that the applicant meets the required qualifications, the city commission shall cause a license to be issued in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 11-63; Code 2002, § 15-88) 
Sec. 15-89. - Issuance; payment of tax. 
    The license required under this division, when approved by the city commission, shall be forwarded to the city clerk, who shall issue the license to the applicant upon payment by the applicant of the annual license tax prescribed in section 15-90. 
(Code 1986, § 11-64; Code 2002, § 15-89) 
Sec. 15-90. - Annual fee. 
    No license required under this division shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual license fee in an amount as described in the city fee code for the right to engage in the ambulance business. All such licenses shall be issued for the calendar years commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31. The amount of the license fees prescribed in this section shall not be prorated for fractional parts of a calendar year. 
(Code 1986, § 11-66; Code 2002, § 15-90) 
State Law reference- Duration of municipal licenses, 11 O.S. § 22-107. 
Sec. 15-91. - Transferability. 
    No license or permit issued under this division shall be assignable or transferable by the person to whom issued. Any transfer or assignment of an existing license and permit shall be accomplished only upon assent and approval of the city commission in the same manner and subject to the same application, investigation and fees as the original application for a license. Any transfer of shares of stock or interest of any person or operator so as to cause a change in the directors, officers, shareholders or managers of such person or operator shall be deemed a transfer or assignment as contemplated in this section and subject to the same rules and regulations as any other transfer or assignment. 
(Code 1986, § 11-67; Code 2002, § 15-91) 
Sec. 15-92. - Revocation, alteration or suspension. 
    In addition to other conditions and requirements in this article, every license issued under this division shall be subject to revocation, alteration or suspension by the city commission when it shall appear that: 
(1)  The operator has failed or neglected to render the full service authorized by his license; 
(2)  The license was obtained by an application in which a material fact was omitted or stated falsely; 
(3)  The operator has persisted in permitting his motor vehicles to be operated in violation of any law; 
(4)  The operator has failed to comply with any of the sections of this article or has willfully or knowingly violated any of the sections of this article; 
(5)  The operator or his agent has induced or sought to induce a change of destination to or from a hospital or other place specified by the person hiring the ambulance; 
(6)  The operator or his agent has been guilty of negligence in the operation of ambulance service; 
(7)  The operator allows his insurance, as provided in this article, to be cancelled, withdrawn or terminated; 
(8)  The operator has allowed his vehicle or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated or unclean to the extent that it is, in the judgment of the city commission, unfit for public use; or 
(9)  The operator has been convicted of a felony or any criminal offense involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1986, § 11-68; Code 2002, § 15-92) 
Secs. 15-93-15-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPRAYERS AND EXTERMINATORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Pesticide applicators, 2 O.S. § 3-81 et seq.; damages for application of pesticides, 2 O.S. § 3-89 et seq. 

Sec. 15-121. - State permit and city license required; identification of vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of spraying trees, plants, lands or buildings with poison chemicals, such as insecticides, herbicides or fungicides, within the city unless such person applies for and obtains from the state board of agriculture a permit to engage in such business and obtains from the city clerk a city license to conduct such business in the city. 
(b)  Except for passenger automobiles, all motor vehicles used in any manner by a licensee under this article, while such vehicles are used in the scope of such business, shall be identified by having conspicuously placed on both sides of each such vehicle an identification number issued by the city to the licensee. Such number shall be issued by the licensing clerk in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  All such numbers shall be printed at least two inches in height. They shall be preceded by the capital letters "S" and "T" identifying the type of trade. Identifying letters shall be followed by the identification number given to the licensee by the office of the city clerk, upon application for a license or renewal of such license. 
(Code 1986, § 11-101; Code 2002, § 15-121) 
Sec. 15-122. - License fee and term. 
(a)  No license required under this article shall be issued by the city clerk until the applicant pays to the city clerk a license fee in an amount as described in the city fee code per annum. Such license fee shall be for a period of one year, expiring on December 31 of each year following the date of issuance. 
(b)  Such license fee shall be paid in advance, and no license shall be issued for less than the full annual fee. 
(Code 1986, § 11-102; Code 2002, § 15-122) 
State Law reference- Expiration of municipal licenses, 11 O.S. § 22-107. 
Sec. 15-123. - Spray work. 
    Under this article, all spray operators shall strictly comply with all rules and regulations made by the state board of agriculture regulating and governing the use and application of all insecticides, herbicides and fungicides. 
(Code 1986, § 11-105; Code 2002, § 15-123) 
State Law reference- State regulations and standards, 2 O.S. § 3-85. 
Secs. 15-124-15-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND INDOOR WORKPLACES 

Sec. 15-146. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, will have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Electronic smoking device means an electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. Electronic smoking device includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor; 
    Indoor workplace means any indoor place of employment or employment-type service for or at the request of another individual or individuals, or any public or private entity, whether part-time or full-time and whether for compensation or not. Such services will include, without limitation, any service performed by an owner, employee, independent contractor, agent, partner, proprietor, manager, officer, director, apprentice, trainee, associate, servant or volunteer. An indoor workplace includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees, and all space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like. The provisions of this section will apply to such indoor workplace at any given time, whether or not work is being performed. 
    Outdoor area means any covered area, partially covered area open to the sky that is on a property owned by the city. 
    Public place means any enclosed indoor area where individuals other than employees are invited or permitted; the term is synonymous with the phrase any indoor place used by or open to the public. 
    Recreational area means any area that is owned, controlled or used by the city and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes but is not limited to parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, beaches surrounding lakes and skateboard parks. 
    Restaurant means any eating establishment regardless of seating capacity. 
    Smoking means the carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device. 
    Stand-alone bar, stand-alone tavern, and cigar bar mean an establishment that derives more than 60 percent of its gross receipts, subject to verification by competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and low-point beer and no person under 21 years of age is admitted, except for members of a musical band employed or hired as provided in paragraph 2 of subsection B of Section 537 of Title 37 of the Oklahoma Statutes and that is not located within, and does not share any common entryway or common indoor area with, any other enclosed indoor workplace, including a restaurant. 
    Tobacco product means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body. "Tobacco product" does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. 
(Code 2002, § 15-146; Ord. No. 2519NS, § 2, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 2644NS, § 2, 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 15-147. - Prohibition of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices in certain places prohibited. 
(a)  The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession is in any indoor place used by or open to the public, public transportation, or any indoor workplace, except where specifically allowed by law. 
(b)  The use of lighted tobacco products and electronic smoking devices is prohibited on, and within, all municipal property, including, but not limited to, any public place, indoor workplace, outdoor area, and recreational area; and including, but not limited to, all vehicles and equipment owned or leased by the city. This article applies at all times, and to all persons on, and within, municipal property. 
(Code 2002, § 15-147; Ord. No. 2519NS, § 3, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 2644NS, § 2, 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 15-148. - Exemptions. 
    The restrictions provided in section 15-147 will not apply to the following: 
(a)  Stand-alone bars, stand-alone taverns and cigar bars; 
(b)  The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are being operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games; 
(c)  Up to 25 percent of the guest rooms at a hotel or other lodging establishment; 
(d)  Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption on the premises; 
(e)  Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or the immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the workplace, and the workplace has only incidental public access. "Incidental public access" means that a place of business has only an occasional person, who is not an employee, present at the business to transact business or make a delivery. It does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for any part of their business; 
(f)  Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the workplace has only incidental public access; 
(g)  Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers; 
(h)  Private residences and workplaces within private residences, except that smoking will not be allowed inside any private residence that is used as a licensed child care facility during hours of operation; 
(i)  Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the research or treatment; 
(j)  A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present members of the armed forces of the United States which is exempt from taxation pursuant to Sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(l9) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C., Sections 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19), when such facility is utilized exclusively by its members and their families and for the conduct of post or organization nonprofit operations except during an event or activity which is open to the public; and 
(k)  Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided, smoking will not be allowed within 15 feet of any exterior public doorway or any air intake of a restaurant. 
(Code 2002, § 15-148; Ord. No. 2519NS, § 4, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 2644NS, § 4, 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 15-149. - Designated smoking rooms and areas. 
(a)  An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so under this article may elect to provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except for cleaning and maintenance during the time the room is not in use for smoking, provided each smoking room is fully enclosed and exhausted directly to the outside in such a manner that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area. No exhaust from a smoking room will be located within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. 
(b)  If smoking is to be permitted in any space exempted in section 15-148 or in a smoking room pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, such smoking space must either occupy the entire enclosed indoor space or, if it shares the enclosed space with any nonsmoking areas, the smoking space will be fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside with no air from the smoking space circulated to any nonsmoking area, and under negative air pressure so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area when a door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened. Air from a smoking room will not be exhausted within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. Any employer may choose a more restrictive smoking policy, including being totally smoke free. 
(c)  A nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act may designate smoking rooms for residents and their guests. Such rooms will be fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, and will be under negative air pressure so that no smoke can escape when a door is opened and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building. 
(d)  Restaurants will be totally nonsmoking or may provide nonsmoking areas and designated smoking rooms. Food and beverage may be served in such designated smoking rooms which will be in a location which is fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot escape when a door is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building. No exhaust from such room will be located within 25 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. Such room will be subject to verification for compliance with the provisions of this subsection by the state department of health. 
(Code 2002, § 15-149; Ord. No. 2519NS, § 5, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 2644NS, § 5, 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 15-150. - Posting. 
(a)  The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by this article shall post a clear, conspicuous, and unambiguous sign at each point of entry to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area. 
(b)  For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or vapor products in indoor areas, the sign or decal shall be at least four inches by two inches in size and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided. For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or vapor products in outdoor areas, signs shall be weather-resistant, at least 15 inches by 15 inches in size, with lettering of at least one inch, and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use is prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided. 
(c)  Responsibility for posting signs or decals will be as follows: 
(1)  In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee is in possession of the facilities, will be responsible; 
(2)  In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the facility involved will be responsible; and 
(3)  In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the facility will be responsible. 
(Code 2002, § 15-150; Ord. No. 2519NS, § 6, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 2644NS, § 6, 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 15-151. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, will be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(b)  Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the city. In addition, any peace officer or code enforcement official may enforce this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 15-151; Ord. No. 2519NS, § 7, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 2644NS, § 7, 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 15-152. - Enforcement. 
    The state or local governmental agency of the person who owns or operates a public place will at minimum, do the following in order to prevent smoking in public places: 
(a)  Post signs at entrances to places where smoking is prohibited which state the tobacco use is prohibited or that the indoor environment is free of tobacco smoke; and 
(b)  Ask tobacco users to refrain from using any form of tobacco products, including electronic smoking devices upon observation of anyone violating the provisions of this act. 
(Code 2002, § 15-152; Ord. No. 2519NS, § 8, 10-21-2013; Ord. No. 2644NS, § 8, 11-5-2018) 
Chapter 16 - LAKES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fishing and recreation on municipal lakes, 11 O.S. § 33-201 et seq.; municipal reservoirs, 11 O.S. § 37-102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TWIN LAKES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-26. - Designation of city-owned lakes and reservoirs. 
    The reservoirs and lakes constructed by the city on South Deer Creek are designated and named "Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1" and "Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 2," and the city's police power is extended to cover such lakes. The lake constructed in 1935-1936 situated south of the lake dam is designated as "Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1," and the lake constructed in 1960-1961 situated northwest of such dam is designated as "Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 2." 
(Code 1986, § 13-1; Code 2002, § 16-26) 
Secs. 16-27-16-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SANITATION 

Sec. 16-56. - Depositing items in lakes. 
(a)  No person shall throw into or permit to enter Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 or place, throw or deposit upon the lands and premises surrounding such waters any unused bait, worms, flesh of animals or other matters subject to putrefaction or any human or animal excreta or other debris or any other unsanitary or unsightly thing. No glass containers shall be permitted on the swimming beaches, in the swimming areas or in park and picnic areas of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. 
(b)  The police department shall be the primary enforcing agency of all ordinances, rules and regulations relating to Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. The police department, police officers shall have full power and authority to enforce such ordinances, rules and regulations, with full power of arrest. 
(Code 1986, § 13-2; Code 2002, § 16-56; Ord. No. 2361NS, § 1, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-57. - Collection and disposal of refuse. 
(a)  No person shall throw or place garbage upon the ground or the property comprising the watershed of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, and all garbage or trash shall be placed in containers and removed from the premises when the container becomes full. 
(b)  The city or its agents and servants shall cause garbage cans to be placed in all picnic grounds used by the public, and all persons using such picnic grounds shall place all garbage and refuse in such can. The garbage and refuse shall be removed and disposed of by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 13-3; Code 2002, § 16-57) 
Sec. 16-58. - Burning of trash, brush or refuse. 
(a)  No person shall burn any trash or refuse upon the property comprising the watershed of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 and owned by the city, unless it is burned in an incinerator or container to be approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  No person shall burn grass, brush or refuse upon the Twin Lakes property belonging to the city without first obtaining permission to do so from the fire chief or his designee. No person shall burn grass or other rubbish around any cabin site or upon any property under lease by the city to such person without first notifying the fire chief or his designee of his intention to do so and obtaining permission from the fire chief or his designee. Any person desiring to burn grass or brush shall notify the fire chief or his designee. It shall be the duty of the fire chief or his designee to supervise such burning, and no fire shall be started except under the supervision of the fire chief or designee. 
(Code 1986, § 13-4; Code 2002, § 16-58; Ord. No. 2361NS, § 2, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-59. - Sewage disposal facilities. 
(a)  Individual sewage disposal systems may be constructed upon such premises, but shall be constructed to conform to and meet all requirements set forth in the most recently adopted building code and all applicable state health/environmental rules. 
(b)  Functional privies are prohibited on all leased property comprising the watersheds of Shawnee Twin Lakes. 
(c)  All approved septic tanks must be pumped or inspected by a state-licensed installer or sanitarian every five years for conventional systems and every two years for aerobic systems. A copy of the certificate or work receipt or service maintenance contract along with an accurately scaled map showing the exact location of the sewage disposal system in relation to the high water mark must be provided to the city. 
(d)  Any corrective measures identified during inspection must be completed within 60 days of written notice of the violation. 
(e)  All new or replaced septic/aeration systems shall be installed 150 feet from the high water mark, or as far as practically possible, as determined by the director of community development and acknowledged by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 13-5; Code 2002, § 16-59; Ord. No. 2302NS, § 2, 2-20-2007; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Secs. 16-60-16-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SWIMMING, WADING AND SCUBA DIVING 

Sec. 16-86. - Swimming and wading. 
    Swimming and wading will be permitted in designated areas on Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, in accordance with the following rules and requirements: 
(1)  Swimming will be permitted only in those areas of the lake designated as swimming areas. Such areas will be marked by buoy lines, and swimming will be allowed on the beach side of buoys. Swimming on the lake side of the buoys is prohibited. 
(2)  Swimming will also be permitted by a lessee and his guests immediately in front of the lot leased not more than 100 feet from the shore. 
(3)  Swimming will be permitted only during the hours from sunrise to one-half hour after sunset. 
(4)  Swimming from a boat or entering the water from a boat, except for the purpose of skiing, sailing, windsurfing or scuba diving, is prohibited. 
(5)  Public nudity is prohibited. No person shall appear nude or shall disrobe while in any area of the lake, except in authorized areas of buildings set aside for changing clothes. 
(6)  Diving or jumping from bridges, land or other structures that cross or are adjacent to Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 is prohibited. 
(7)  All swimming shall be at the swimmer's own risk. 
(8)  All children 12 years and younger must be accompanied by a parent or other responsible adult before entering the swimming area. All children eight years old and younger must wear a regulation life preserver when in the water. 
(9)  No dogs or other animals will be allowed on the swimming beaches, in the swimming areas, picnic areas, parks or in other waters of Shawnee Twin Lakes, except as permitted by section 16-152(d). 
(Code 1986, § 13-6; Code 2002, § 16-86; Ord. No. 2097NS, § 1, 7-7-2003) 
Sec. 16-87. - Scuba diving. 
    Scuba diving will be permitted in designated areas on Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, in accordance with the following rules and requirements: 
(1)  Scuba diving will be allowed only in designated areas. 
(2)  Any person diving or submerging with the aid of any mechanical diving or breathing device or suit must place a buoy with a flag in the water at or near the point of submergence or fly a flag from a boat indicating divers are present. The flag shall be red in color not less than 20 inches by 24 inches with a white stripe four inches wide running from one upper corner to a diagonal lower corner. When flown from a boat, it must be flown from the highest point and be visible from a 360-degree circle. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor-driven boat within 150 feet of a diver's buoy, except while engaged in the rescue of a person in such area. 
(4)  Scuba divers shall not be permitted to fish or use spear guns. 
(Code 1986, § 13-7; Code 2002, § 16-87) 
Secs. 16-88-16-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FISHING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for hunting, fishing privileges, 11 O.S. § 33-201 et seq. 

Sec. 16-116. - State license required. 
    Any person wishing to fish in Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 shall possess a current state fishing license unless otherwise exempt. 
(Code 1986, § 13-56; Code 2002, § 16-116) 
State Law reference- Fishing licenses, 29 O.S. § 4-110. 
Sec. 16-117. - City license. 
(a)  Annual and daily fees. No person shall fish in the water of Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 without first obtaining a license to fish in the waters of the lakes, upon application to the person as may be designated by the city manager to issue the license and upon the payment of an annual license fee. Daily fishing licenses may be obtained upon payment of a daily license fee. A portion of the license fees may be kept by retail outlets other than the city for handling and processing the sales of such licenses, as allowed by the city manager. The amounts of the fees and the portion to be retained by retail outlets shall be set from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city commissioners. No person shall go upon such lakes or upon the land owned by the city surrounding the lakes for the purpose of fishing without first having obtained a license to fish. 
(b)  Scope of license. The issuance of such fishing licenses enumerated in this section shall entitle the holders thereof to fish at such time and in such parts of the lakes as may be designated by the order of the city manager from time to time and provided that such applicants shall possess at such times valid state fishing licenses. 
(c)  Expiration of annual licenses. All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall bear the date of issuance and the date of expiration. All annual licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. 
(d)  Form; transferability. All licenses shall be issued on forms provided by the city and approved by the city manager and shall be nontransferable. 
(e)  Immediate possession. Each person holding a license for fishing upon Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, shall have his license therefor in his immediate possession when so fishing and shall produce the license for inspection upon demand of any officer, chief of police or his designee. 
(f)  Exemption. No city fishing license or fees required in this section shall be required of anyone under the age of 16, or 65 years and older. 
(g)  Handling fee. A $1.00 portion of license fees may be kept by retail outlets other than the city for handling and processing the sales of such license fees, as allowed by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 13-63; Code 2002, § 16-117; Ord. No. 2361NS, § 3, 6-16-2008; Ord. No. 2469NS, § 1, 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-118. - Kind of fish taken. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take, kill or catch from Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 any game fish smaller than legal size, which is as follows: Any smallmouth black bass or spotted black bass shall not be smaller than ten inches in total length, nor shall any species of trout or rock bass be smaller than six inches in total length. It shall be unlawful for any person to take, kill or catch from either of such lakes any largemouth black bass smaller than 14 inches in total length. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by the imposition of a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 13-57; Code 2002, § 16-118) 
State Law reference- "Game fish" defined, 29 O.S. § 2-115; bag limits generally, 29 O.S. § 6-302. 
Sec. 16-119. - Means of taking fish. 
    No person shall fish in Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 except with a hook and line with plugs, artificial bait, minnows, flies or similar devices. Trotlines and jug-lines shall be marked and maintained and have no more hooks than that provided by state law. Juglines shall be permitted in Twin Lakes No. 2, only. Trotlines are allowed in both lakes No. 1 and No. 2 in nonswimming areas and no-wake areas. Only one trotline shall be used by each person, and no net, seine, minnow seine, gun, trap or any kind of snare shall be used to take fish from such waters. No person shall take or attempt to take fish from such waters by means of a net, seine, trap, gun or any explosive, poison, chemical or other substance placed therein, Juglines shall be prohibited in Twin Lake No. 1. 
(Code 1986, § 13-58; Code 2002, § 16-119; Ord. No. 2361NS, § 4, 6-16-2008) 
State Law reference- Prohibited means of taking fish, 29 O.S. § 6-301. 
Sec. 16-120. - Use of certain bait. 
    No game fish, as defined by the laws of the state or this article, and no carp or buffalo shall be used as bait to fish in Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, and no person shall release any minnows or other bait fish in such waters. No person shall keep, place or maintain in such waters any live box or other receptacle for keeping minnows or other fish alive, except while actually fishing. 
(Code 1986, § 13-59; Code 2002, § 16-120) 
Sec. 16-121. - Fishing in connecting channel; number of fish taken. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fish in the channel which connects Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. Any person who shall violate this subsection shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or shall be imprisoned in the city jail not exceeding 60 days or shall be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Persons fishing on Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 shall not, on any day from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, take, kill or catch more than six black bass, 15 channel or blue catfish or 25 crappie. However, the state wildlife conservation commission may raise or lower the limits provided in this subsection by an amount not to exceed 50 percent, and such limits established by the state wildlife conservation commission from time to time are adopted in this subsection. Any person violating shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by the imposition of a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 13-60; Code 2002, § 16-121) 
Sec. 16-122. - Fishing from floating wharf. 
(a)  No child under the age of 14 years shall fish upon the floating fishing wharf unless such child is accompanied by his parent or other responsible adult person. 
(b)  All persons who fish from the floating fishing wharf shall abide by all rules and regulations and shall observe hours of operation as promulgated by the city commission. No more than three total fishing lines or fishing poles, or combinations thereof, will be allowed per person, for fishing from the floating wharf. 
(Code 1986, § 13-61; Code 2002, § 16-122; Ord. No. 2361NS, § 5, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-123. - Float fishing. 
    Any person who fishes upon the waters of Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 from inflated tubes and similar articles, commonly known as float fishing, shall be permitted only from 30 minutes before sunrise to 30 minutes after sunset and no farther than 50 feet from shoreline in either lake. 
(Code 1986, § 13-62; Code 2002, § 16-123; Ord. No. 2361NS, § 6, 6-16-2008) 
Secs. 16-124-16-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HUNTING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 16-151. - Game refuge established. 
(a)  A game refuge is established on and around Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, and the hunting and shooting of animals, fowl or birds or the discharge or shooting of any firearm, long bow, bow, arrow, crossbow, pistol, rifle or shotgun upon the lakes or upon such land surrounding the lakes which is owned by the city is prohibited, except as provided in this article. 
(b)  The hunting and shooting of migratory water fowl, including ducks and geese, shall be permitted upon Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 and upon the city property surrounding the lakes by those persons first obtaining a city permit. However, nothing contained in this subsection shall prohibit the city from designating areas as archery, pistol and rifle ranges and authorizing the use of firearms and archery equipment thereon. 
(c)  The use of any motor-driven vehicle in the game refuge at Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 is prohibited without receiving the permission of the lake ranger prior to the use of the vehicle. Violation of this section is punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 13-76; Code 2002, § 16-151) 
Sec. 16-152. - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
(a)  The holder of a hunting license issued under this division shall have the privilege, upon Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 and the land surrounding the lakes, of hunting for and shooting ducks, geese and other waterfowl in such places and at such times as the city commission shall from time to time direct. Such areas of such waters or the lands surrounding the lakes as may at any time be restricted against hunting or shooting shall be designated by signs thereon or adjacent thereto. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no holder of a hunting license or any other person shall at any time hunt or shoot any game of any kind upon such waters or the land surrounding the lakes except ducks, geese and other waterfowl, and no holder of a hunting license or any other person shall use, shoot or discharge upon such waters or the lands surrounding the lakes any long bow, bow, arrow, crossbow, pistol, rifle or any other firearm, other than a shotgun. Shot used with or fired from such shotgun shall not be a size larger than number 2. However, nothing contained in this subsection shall prohibit the city from designating areas as archery, pistol and rifle ranges and authorizing the use of firearms and archery equipment thereon. 
(c)  The hunting, killing, shooting or taking of Canada geese on Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 and the land surrounding the lakes is specifically prohibited. 
(d)  The use of hunting dogs to retrieve ducks, geese and other waterfowl is permitted during the hunting season for such fowl. 
(Code 1986, § 13-77; Code 2002, § 16-152) 
Sec. 16-153. - Doves, quail, squirrels and rabbits. 
(a)  The hunting of doves, quail, squirrels and rabbits with a shotgun is permitted on city-owned land surrounding Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. 
(b)  All persons who hunt doves, quail, squirrels and rabbits pursuant to this section shall abide by all state laws applicable to the hunting of doves, quail, squirrels and rabbits. 
(c)  No person shall hunt doves, quail, squirrels or rabbits upon city-owned lands surrounding such lakes without having first obtained a license from the city. 
(d)  The license fee for hunting doves, quail, squirrels and rabbits pursuant to this section shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per hunting season. Daily license fees shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 13-78; Code 2002, § 16-153) 
Sec. 16-154. - Frogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take, kill or capture more than 15 bullfrogs in any one day upon Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. It shall also be unlawful to take, kill or capture bullfrogs upon the lakes at any time which is not during open season for bullfrogs as declared by the state wildlife conservation commission. Notwithstanding any other section of this Code to the contrary, bullfrogs may be taken, killed or captured by bows and arrows, gigs or spears. Such gigs or spears shall not have more than three points with not more than two barbs on each point. No person shall hunt bullfrogs upon Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 without having first complied with the sections of this article relating to fishing permits. 
(Code 1986, § 13-79; Code 2002, § 16-154) 
Sec. 16-155. - Use of blinds. 
    Each person obtaining a license to hunt under this division shall be entitled to a site near the Twin Lakes for the purpose of constructing a blind, and all such blind sites shall be issued and designated by the lake ranger. Such blinds shall not be closer together than approximately 400 feet. Each blind so designated and set apart shall be used only by the person in whose name the blind is issued or his invited guests. All hunting and shooting shall be from blinds. However, if any person has a license to hunt upon such lakes by the day and has no blind available, he may shoot or hunt from without a blind, and he shall not hunt or shoot closer than 400 feet to a blind. Such blinds may be constructed in the water of either lake where the location of a blind on the shoreline is not feasible, as may be determined by the lake ranger. If the lake ranger approves a site for the construction of a blind within the water of either lake, such blind must be attainable by persons wearing waders. A location shall not be in any area where the depth of the water requires a boat or ramp to reach the blind. If a change in the water level necessitates removal of the blind, the blind shall be removed by the owner thereof upon notice from the lake ranger. Boats or other movable objects shall not be used as blinds. All blinds located in the water shall be of a semipermanent nature, stationary and incapable of being moved about. It shall be the responsibility of the lake ranger to approve sites for all blinds and the construction of blinds located in the water of either lake, and he shall not approve the construction of such blinds unless they are constructed in accordance with this section and in such a manner that they shall be reasonably safe for the users of the blinds. 
(Code 1986, § 13-80; Code 2002, § 16-155) 
Secs. 16-156-16-180. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 16-181. - Required. 
    No person shall hunt or shoot upon any waters of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 or in any tributary or arm thereof or on the lands owned and controlled by the city surrounding such waters without first obtaining a license from the city, and then only in conformity with this division. However, no such license shall be required of retired city employees or of persons who have served as members of the city commission and who have completed their terms of office. 
(Code 1986, § 13-91; Code 2002, § 16-181) 
State Law reference- Hunting licenses, 29 O.S. § 4-112. 
Sec. 16-182. - Residents 65 years of age. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, all bona fide residents of the state who have attained the age of 65 years shall not be required to purchase a license under this subdivision from the city to hunt in Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. 
(b)  Any such person shall make application to the city clerk for a permanent license to hunt in the lakes, and, upon furnishing to the city clerk written evidence of being over 65 years of age, shall be granted a permanent license to hunt in the lakes. 
(Code 1986, § 13-92; Code 2002, § 16-182) 
Sec. 16-183. - Fees. 
(a)  Any bona fide resident of the state may obtain a license to hunt upon the waters or the land owned and controlled by the city surrounding Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, unless such hunting is otherwise restricted, upon payment of an annual license fee. Such persons in like manner may obtain a license to hunt for one day upon payment of a fee, except migratory fowl, but not excluding doves, provided that no person shall go upon such lakes or upon the land owned by the city surrounding the lakes for the purpose of hunting without first having obtained a permit to hunt. The amount of the fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city commissioners. 
(b)  The issuance of such a license as stated in subsection (a) of this section shall entitle the holder thereof to hunt at such times and in such parts of the lakes as may be designated by the order of the city commission from time to time, provided that the applicant shall possess at that time a state hunting license. 
(Code 1986, § 13-93; Code 2002, § 16-183; Ord. No. 2470NS, § 1, 1-17-2012) 
Sec. 16-184. - Issuance; terms, conditions. 
(a)  All licenses issued pursuant to this subdivision shall bear the date of issuance and the date of expiration. All annual licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. 
(b)  All licenses shall be issued on forms provided by the city clerk and approved by the city manager and shall be nontransferable. 
(c)  Each person holding a license for hunting upon Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 shall have his license in his immediate possession when so hunting and shall produce the license for inspection upon demand of any officer, custodian, patrol officer or city representative. 
(Code 1986, § 13-94; Code 2002, § 16-184) 
Sec. 16-185. - Expiration of daily licenses. 
    A daily hunting license issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be good for a period of 24 hours from the time of issuance of the license. 
(Code 1986, § 13-95; Code 2002, § 16-185) 
Sec. 16-186. - Authority granted generally. 
    The issuance of a hunting license pursuant to this subdivision shall entitle the holder thereof to hunt at such times and in such parts of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 and the land owned or controlled by the city surrounding such lakes as may be designated from time to time by the city commission, provided that such person shall possess at such time a state hunting license. 
(Code 1986, § 13-96; Code 2002, § 16-186) 
Sec. 16-187. - Revocation. 
(a)  All licenses issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be conditioned upon the strict observance by the holders and users thereof of the terms of this article and any other ordinances, rules or regulations promulgated by the city commission for the protection of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 from pollution or contamination; all state sanitary laws; and all state and federal game and fish laws while upon such waters or the premises occupied thereby. 
(b)  A violation of any such condition shall constitute a violation of the terms of this division, and the city commission, upon conviction of any such holder or user of such license of such violation, in addition to other penalties for violation of this Code, may revoke and cancel the license of such holder. Such convicted holder or user shall not be eligible for another license until the city commission shall so order. 
(Code 1986, § 13-97; Code 2002, § 16-187) 
Secs. 16-188-16-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - WATERCRAFT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State boating safety generally, 63 O.S. § 4200 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 16-216. - Operation generally. 
(a)  No watercraft shall be operated or permitted to be used upon Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, except in accordance with the rules in this division, which are in addition to and supplement the state boat and water rules, regulations and safety laws, which are in force and which are incorporated in and made a part of this section. All watercraft used upon such lakes shall be subject to inspection by the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  No person under the age of 16 years shall row, sail or operate any watercraft upon such lakes, unless accompanied by a person of the age of 18 or over. 
(c)  No person shall at any time leave any child under the age of eight years in any watercraft on the waters of such lakes, except when such child is at all times within the custody and care of some person over the age of 16 years. 
(d)  No watercraft propelled by motor on Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 shall pass, with the motor in operation, by where any person is fishing at a speed greater than leaving a visible wake, nor shall motorboats be operated in any part of the lakes that may be set apart and reserved therefrom, from time to time, by order of the police department. Such restricted areas shall be designated by notice posted thereon or adjacent thereto. 
(e)  Watercraft or other vessels may be operated on Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, except in prohibited or restricted areas, in accordance with posted restrictions, including buoys, signs or markers, as regulated by enforcement personnel of the Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. Speed limits at night or under adverse weather conditions shall not exceed 15 miles per hour. 
(f)  Owners of private watercraft of all types shall not be permitted to rent their watercraft for use on the Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, or to collect fares or to take donations for the use of the watercraft. 
(g)  Any person taking part in the operation of a watercraft, in any manner, must waive in writing all rights of claims for damages or injuries sustained or claimed to be sustained against the city or against any city commissioner, city official or city employee, either elected or appointed. 
(Code 1986, § 13-21(a)-(c), (g), (h); Code 2002, § 16-216; Ord. No. 2362NS, § 1, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-217. - Procedure upon collision, accident or other casualty. 
(a)  In Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, the operator and/or passenger of a vessel involved in a collision, accident or other casualty shall render to other persons involved in the collision, accident or other casualty reasonable assistance as may be necessary and practicable and shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department after complying with the requirements of this section. The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident or other casualty shall give his name, address and identification of his vessel, in writing, to any person injured in the collision, accident or other casualty and to the owner of any property damaged in the collision, accident or other casualty. 
(b)  If a collision, accident or other casualty results in death or injury to a person or damage to property in excess of $500.00, the operator of the vessel involved in the collision, accident or other casualty shall file with the state department of public safety a full description of the collision, accident or other casualty and such information as the department may require. 
(c)  Whenever a person is halted by any duly authorized peace officer of this state for any violation of 63 O.S. § 4002 et seq., which shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, and is not taken before a magistrate as required or permitted, the officer shall prepare in quadruplicate, using the Oklahoma Uniform Violations Complaint, a written notice to appear in court. Such notices to appear shall be serially numbered, containing the name and address of the person, the state registration number of his vessel if any, the offense charged, the time and place when and where the person shall appear in court and such other pertinent information as may be necessary. 
(d)  The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least five calendar days after the alleged violation unless the person charged with the violation shall demand an earlier hearing. 
(e)  The person charged with the violation may give his written promise to appear in court by signing the written notice to appear prepared by the officer, in which event the officer shall deliver a copy of the notice to appear to the person, and thereupon the officer shall not take the person into physical custody for the violation. 
(f)  If the person charged with the violation is a minor, the citing officer shall ascertain from the minor the name and address of his parents or legal guardian, and the officer shall cause a copy of the violation to be mailed to the address of the parents or legal guardian within three calendar days after the date of the violation. 
(g)  Except for felony violations, any duly authorized peace officer of this state at the scene of a boating accident may issue a written notice to appear to the operator of a vessel involved in the accident when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed any offense in connection with the accident. 
(h)  Any city employee or officer shall make a written report to the department of public safety if an occurrence involving a vessel or its equipment results in one or more of the following: 
(1)  A person dies; 
(2)  A person is injured and requires medical treatment beyond first aid; 
(3)  Damage to the vessel and other property totals more than $500.00 or there is a complete loss of the vessel; 
(4)  A person disappears from the vessel under circumstances that indicate death or injury; 
(5)  A person drowns in swimming to retrieve a vessel that is adrift from its mooring or dock, having departed from a position of inherent safety such as a shore or pier; 
(6)  A person drowns while swimming from a vessel for pleasure and the vessel does not contribute to the drowning; 
(7)  A person drowns after falling from a vessel that is moored or anchored for use as a swimming platform or other purpose; 
(8)  A person dies or is injured while in the act of launching a vessel into a body of water; 
(9)  A person drowns or is injured while surfing; 
(10)  A fatality or injury occurs to an operator or a crew member while participating in an organized/sanctioned race or warm-up in a vessel uniquely designed for racing; or 
(11)  Damage, injury or death on a docked, moored or anchored vessel resulting from unusual wake or wave conditions. 
(Code 1986, § 13-21(f); Code 2002, § 16-217) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 4214. 
Sec. 16-218. - Sizes and types. 
(a)  No watercraft shall be operated or permitted to be used upon Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 in excess of eight feet wide and 30 feet in length, nor under 40 inches wide and 12 feet in length, unless such watercraft is coast guard-approved and bears a certification plate. All watercraft shall be subject to inspection by law enforcement officers or any other person designated by the chief of police. 
(b)  No houseboat shall be operated or permitted to be used upon such lakes, and no license shall be issued for a houseboat, and no boat of any kind or character shall be operated or permitted upon the lakes if the boat is equipped with bunks, beds or other living quarters. No person shall be permitted to live in any boat operated upon the waters of the lakes. 
(c)  Motorized racing boats less than 12 feet in length may be permitted to be used upon the lakes if such boats are equipped with a coast guard-approved personal flotation device for each passenger and a standby boat is used in connection with the operation of the raceboat. No raceboat shall be permitted upon the lakes except under the direct supervision and permission of the chief of police or the designee. 
(d)  Speedboats may be operated upon the lakes, and they shall operate within a general area designated by the chief of police or designee. When such speedboats are operating upon the lakes, they shall remain a distance of 300 feet from the bank and 100 feet from any other boat. 
(e)  Parasailing is prohibited on the waters of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. 
(f)  Paddle boats are prohibited from the waters of Twin Lakes No. 2. Paddle boats are permitted on Twin Lakes No. 1, in areas where waterskiing is prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 13-22; Code 2002, § 16-218; Ord. No. 2362NS, § 2, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-219. - Rules of right-of-way; speed; paddles. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no watercraft shall be propelled upon the waters of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 at a rate of speed greater than 45 miles per hour. All watercraft are subject to existing rules of the road. All power boats shall be required to carry at least one paddle or oar. The following rules of right-of-way apply to all watercraft operating on Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2: 
(1)  When two watercraft are approaching each other head on or nearly so, so as to involve risk of collision, each watercraft shall bear to the right and pass the other watercraft on its left side. 
(2)  When two watercraft approach each other obliquely or at right angles, the watercraft approaching on the right has the right-of-way. 
(3)  When a watercraft may overtake another on either side, the passing watercraft shall grant right-of-way to the overtaken watercraft. The watercraft being overtaken shall hold its course and speed. 
(4)  When a motorboat and a sailing vessel are proceeding in such direction as to involve risk of collision, the motorized watercraft shall keep out of the way of the sailing vessel. 
(5)  When a watercraft which is underway passes a watercraft which is at anchor, the watercraft moving shall maintain a minimum distance of 100 feet and exercise due care with regard to the wake being created. 
(Code 1986, § 13-23; Code 2002, § 16-219) 
Sec. 16-220. - Safety equipment. 
(a)  Compliance with state law. All watercraft shall comply with the Oklahoma Boat and Water Safety Act, 63 O.S. § 4200 et seq., and any revisions thereto. 
(b)  Fire extinguishers. Every motorboat or motor vessel must carry at least the minimum number of hand portable fire extinguishers for its class in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Class A and Class I motorboats without a fixed fire extinguisher system are not required to have a fire extinguisher if the construction of such motorboat will not permit the entrapment of explosive vapors or flammable gases or vapors. 
(2)  Fire extinguishers must be carried in all motorboats that have one or more of the following: 
a.  Closed compartments under thwarts and seats wherein portable tanks may be stored. 
b.  A double bottom not sealed to the hull or which is not completely filled with flotation material. 
c.  Closed living spaces. 
d.  Closed stowage compartments in which combustible or flammable material is stored. 
e.  Permanently installed fuel tanks. 
(c)  Whistle and horn. Each motorboat 16 feet in length or over shall have one hand-, mouth- or power-operated whistle or horn capable of producing several blasts of two or more seconds in duration and audible for at least one-half mile. No watercraft shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a watercraft any siren, except authorized emergency vessels. 
(d)  Lighting. Every watercraft in all weather, from sunset to sunrise, shall carry and exhibit the following lights when underway and during the prescribed times the lights shall be exhibited as provided: 
(1)  From sunset to sunrise, all watercraft of classes A and I, as described by the Oklahoma Boat and Water Safety Act, shall carry the following lights: 
a.  A bright white light aft to show all around the horizon; and 
b.  A combined lantern in the fore part of the watercraft and lower than the white light aft, showing green to the starboard and red to port, so fixed as to throw the light, from right ahead of two points of the compass aft, the beam on their respective sides. 
(2)  From sunset to sunrise, all watercraft manually propelled or propelled by the water current shall have at hand a lantern capable of showing a white light, which shall be capable of being displayed in sufficient time to prevent collision with other watercraft. 
(e)  Life-saving devices. The following requirements for personal flotation devices (PFDs) shall apply to all motorboats, watercraft and vessels that are propelled or controlled by machinery, sails, oars, paddles or poles or any other vessel: 
(1)  No person shall use a watercraft less than 16 feet in length or a canoe or kayak unless at least one coast-guard approved personal flotation device (PFD) of the following types is on board for each person: type I, II, III or IV. 
(2)  No person shall use a watercraft 16 feet or more in length unless at least one coast-guard approved personal flotation device (PFD) of the following types is on board for each person: type I, II, III and at least one type IV PFD in addition to the PFDs required. 
(3)  No person may operate or give permission to operate any personal watercraft without a coast-guard approved personal flotation device of proper size and type, either a type I, II, III or IV, preferably a type III with an impact rating of at least 35 miles per hour, which shall be worn while such craft is in operation. 
(4)  No person shall be engaged in skiing, surfboarding or similar activity unless wearing a coast-guard approved personal flotation device (PFD) of type I, II, III or IV. Ski belts are not coast-guard approved. 
(5)  A personal flotation device (PFD) type V or type V hybrid may be used in lieu of any PFD required if that type V PFD is approved by the coast guard for the activity in which the recreation watercraft is being used or is used within the limitation of its approval. 
(6)  Children who have not attained the age of 12 years shall wear a U.S. Coast Guard approved personal flotation device of proper size at all times when they are in or on any watercraft which is upon the waters of the Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2. 
(7)  All coast guard approved personal flotation devices (PFDs) must be serviceable, readily accessible and of the appropriate size for the intended user. A serviceable PFD is free of rot, tears, punctures and waterlogging, and all straps and buckles must be attached and functional. The term "readily accessible" means that the PFD can be immediately reached in an emergency situation. 
(Code 1986, § 13-24; Code 2002, § 16-220) 
Sec. 16-221. - Reckless or negligent operation. 
(a)  Reckless operation of a watercraft includes operating the watercraft in a manner which unnecessarily interferes with the free and proper use of the navigable waters or unnecessarily endangers other watercraft therein or the life and limb of any person. Reckless and negligent operation of a watercraft on Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  Every operator of a watercraft shall at all times operate the watercraft in a careful and prudent manner and at such rate of speed as not to endanger the life, limb or property of any other person and shall obey all posted speed limits. 
(c)  No person shall operate any watercraft at a rate of speed greater than will permit him in the exercise of proper care to bring the watercraft to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(d)  The operator shall keep a proper lookout at all times while underway. 
(e)  A person shall not operate a watercraft or ski within a lawfully authorized restricted area clearly marked by buoys, beacons or distinguishing devices as being prohibited to watercraft or skiing. 
(Code 1986, § 13-26; Code 2002, § 16-221) 
Sec. 16-222. - Operation or control of vessel under influence of alcohol or other intoxicating substance. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "other intoxicating substance" shall mean any controlled dangerous substance as defined in the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act or any other substance, other than alcohol, which is capable of being ingested, inhaled, injected or absorbed into the human body and is capable of adversely affecting the central nervous system, vision, hearing or other sensory or motor functions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in actual physical control of a vessel upon the waters of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 and of the city, except privately owned waters, who: 
(1)  Has a blood or breath alcohol concentration of 0.10 or more at the time of a test of the person's blood or breath; 
(2)  Is under the influence of any other intoxicating substance to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely operating a vessel upon the waters of the lakes and of the city; or 
(3)  Is under the influence of alcohol and any other intoxicating substance to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely operating a vessel upon the waters of the lakes and of the city. 
(c)  Any person operating a vessel upon the waters of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 and of the city, except privately owned waters, shall be deemed to have given consent to a test of such person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the purpose of determining the presence and concentration of alcohol or any other intoxicating substance. Such test shall be performed within two hours of an arrest and in the same manner as provided for in 47 O.S. § 752. 
(d)  Evidence that the person has refused to submit to a test as required by this section shall be admissible upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed in violation of this section. 
(e)  Any person refusing to submit to such test shall be in violation of this section and subject to a fine. 
(Code 1986, § 13-27; Code 2002, § 16-222) 
Sec. 16-223. - Manner of riding in or on. 
(a)  In Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, no person shall sit or ride on the sides of a watercraft or stand in a covered bow or on the back of any seat of a watercraft or stand in a watercraft while underway, at any speed greater than idle or trolling speed; provided, however, the operator of such watercraft may stand if such watercraft is specifically designed to be operated from a standing position. 
(b)  No operator shall allow any person to occupy the front or back deck of any watercraft, while underway at any speed greater than idle or trolling speed, or any structure above the main deck without adequate safety rails or lines so constructed as to prevent such person from slipping or falling overboard. 
(Code 1986, § 13-28; Code 2002, § 16-223) 
Sec. 16-224. - Water skiing. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "water skiing" shall mean the activity of being propelled along the water upon devices known as skis and being, at the same time, towed by some type of watercraft and shall include the use of surfboards, ski bikes or any other device which may be used to sustain any person upon the water while being towed by a watercraft. 
(b)  Water skiing and similar activities will be permitted in designated areas on Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, in accordance with the following rules and requirements: 
(1)  Water skiing shall be prohibited between November 15 and February 1. 
(2)  Any person taking part in water skiing, in any manner, must waive in writing all rights or claims for damages or injuries sustained or claimed to be sustained, against the city or against any city commissioner, city official or city employee, either elected or appointed. 
(3)  A person inexperienced in watercraft operations or a person under the age of 18 years shall not operate a watercraft which is engaged in skiing activity upon the Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, unless accompanied by an adult experienced in watercraft operations. 
(4)  No person shall operate a watercraft on any waters of the Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1 for towing a person on water skis or a surfboard or similar device, unless there is in such watercraft a person, in addition to the operator, in a position to observe the progress of the person being towed or unless a rearview mirror has been installed on the watercraft in such manner as to permit the person operating the watercraft to face the direction of travel and be in a position to observe the progress of the person being towed. The person observing must be at least eight years of age. 
(5)  No person shall operate a watercraft on the waters of the Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, towing a person on water skis, a surfboard or similar device, nor shall any person engage in water skiing, surfboarding or similar activities at any time between the hours from one-half hour after sunset to sunrise. 
(6)  No person shall operate or manipulate any watercraft, tow rope or other device by which the direction or location of water skis, a surfboard or similar device may be affected or controlled in such a way as to cause the water skis, surfboard or similar device or any person thereon to collide with or strike against any object or person. 
(7)  No person shall operate a watercraft on the waters of Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1 while towing a person on water skis, a surfboard or similar device and leave the skier unattended in the waters in such a manner as to endanger the skier or unnecessarily interfere with the free and proper use of the navigable waters of other watercraft therein. 
(8)  While being towed by a watercraft or motor vehicle, no person shall have any airfoil or balloon device in hand or affixed to a person for the purpose of becoming airborne over the lands or waters of the lake unless written permission has first been obtained from the chief of police or his designee 30 days in advance. 
(Code 1986, § 13-29; Code 2002, § 16-224; Ord. No. 2362NS, § 3, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-225. - Personal watercraft, jet skis, ski bikes and similar devices. 
    In addition to those rules and regulations established by this division and state law concerning the operation of watercraft on the waters of the Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, operators of personal watercraft shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  All personal watercraft, jet skis, ski bikes or similar devices must be registered with the state and licensed by the city. All operators of such devices must wear United States Coast Guard approved life preservers at all times, and operators of such equipment must conform to the water rules, regulations and safety laws as apply to the operation of watercraft in the Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1. 
(2)  A person may not operate a personal watercraft, jet ski or similar device on the waters of the Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, except in those areas specifically restricted for such use. Personal watercraft are not permitted on Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 2. 
(3)  A person may not operate or give permission to operate any personal watercraft in a reckless, negligent or careless manner so as to endanger life, limb or property of any person, including the operator of such watercraft. 
(4)  A person may not operate or give permission to operate any personal watercraft without a U.S. Coast Guard approved lifesaving device (PFD) of the proper size and type, either a type I, II, III or V, preferably a type III with an impact rating of at least 35 miles per hour, which shall be worn while such craft is in operation. 
(5)  A person may not operate or give permission to operate a personal watercraft within 150 feet of any person, other watercraft, dock, buoy, bridge or any other prohibitive structure at a speed greater than idle or slow steerageway speed. 
(6)  A person may not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of the Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, unless it is equipped with a self-deactivating device or a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch. 
(7)  A person may not operate a personal watercraft equipped by the manufacturer with a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch, unless the lanyard is operational and attached to the operator, operator's clothing or a personal flotation device worn by the operator. 
(8)  A person may not operate or give permission to operate a personal watercraft equipped by the manufacturer with a self-deactivating device if the self-activating device or engine throttle has been altered in any way that would prohibit the self-deactivating device from operating in its intended manner. 
(9)  A person may not operate or give permission to operate a personal watercraft between one-half hour after sunset and sunrise. For the purpose of this subsection, times of sunrise and sunset for a given day shall be the same as those officially designated by the national weather service. 
(10)  Personal watercraft, jet skis, ski bikes or similar devices operated in areas designated "no wake" shall not exceed ten miles per hour. 
(11)  No personal watercraft will exceed 20 miles per hour in areas outside the designated ski area. 
(Code 1986, § 13-30; Code 2002, § 16-225; Ord. No. 2013NS, § 1, 7-16-2001) 
Secs. 16-226-16-250. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. License to Operate 

Sec. 16-251. - Required. 
    No person shall operate any watercraft in or upon any of the waters of Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 or any tributary or arm thereof without first obtaining required licensing from the state and city and then only in conformity with this division. 
(Code 1986, § 13-36; Code 2002, § 16-251) 
Sec. 16-252. - Issuance by agents. 
    Licenses issued by the city for boating on Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 may be issued by agents of the city duly appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 13-37; Code 2002, § 16-252) 
Sec. 16-253. - Fees; special licenses. 
(a)  Any person may obtain a license for the use of a watercraft on Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, upon application to any person as may be designated by the city manager to issue the license and upon the payment in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for an annual license. Persons may also obtain daily licenses upon the payment of a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per day. 
(b)  Persons who are watercraft dealers duly licensed by the state may obtain a special license to permit the operation of watercraft on Shawnee Twin Lake No. 1 for the purpose of testing watercraft and motors and not for pleasure or any other purpose. The annual fee for such license shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, which shall be paid upon issuance of the license. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other section of this Code to the contrary, the holder of a special license shall not operate watercraft during testing operations at a speed greater than 45 miles per hour, provided that no such testing shall be commenced until the chief of police or his designee has approved such testing. 
(d)  No fee required by this subdivision shall be prorated. 
(Code 1986, § 13-38; Code 2002, § 16-253; Ord. No. 2362NS, § 4, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-254. - Issuance; terms, conditions. 
(a)  All licenses issued pursuant to this subdivision shall bear the date of issuance and the date of expiration. All annual licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. 
(b)  All licenses shall be issued on city forms and approved by the city manager and shall be nontransferable. 
(c)  Each person holding a license for boating upon Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 shall have his license therefor in his immediate possession, when so boating and shall produce the license for inspection upon demand by the chief of police or designee. 
(Code 1986, § 13-39; Code 2002, § 16-254; Ord. No. 2362NS, § 5, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-255. - Numbering of watercraft; renewal. 
(a)  All watercraft for which a license has been issued to operate on Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, shall be numbered in the order in which the license is granted, with numbers beginning at 1 and running numerically for the full number of watercraft for which licenses have been issued, and all watercraft shall be subject to inspection by the chief of police or designee. 
(b)  Any person owning an annual watercraft license for any calendar year who obtains a new annual license for the ensuing year on or before January 10 of any calendar year, may retain the same number on his watercraft as of the previous year. However, unless such new annual license is obtained on or before January 10, such number shall be forfeited and a new number obtained. 
(c)  The annual watercraft license shall be designated by the proper tag on the port side near the bow and of the watercraft, which must be plainly visible for a distance of at least 100 feet from the watercraft. Such tag shall be furnished with the license by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 13-40; Code 2002, § 16-255; Ord. No. 2362NS, § 6, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-256. - Revocation. 
(a)  All licenses issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be conditioned upon the strict observance by the holders and users thereof of the terms of this article and any other ordinances, rules or regulations promulgated by the city commission for the protection of Shawnee Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 from pollution or contamination, all state sanitary laws and all state and federal game and fish laws while upon such waters or the premises occupied thereby. 
(b)  A violation of such condition shall constitute a violation of this article, and the city manager, upon conviction of any such holder or user of the license of such violation, in addition to other penalties for violation of this Code, may revoke and cancel the license of such holder, and such convicted holder or user shall not be eligible for another license until the city manager shall so order. 
(Code 1986, § 13-41; Code 2002, § 16-256) 
Secs. 16-257-16-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CAMPING 

Sec. 16-286. - Campsites designated. 
    At Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, camping is allowed at 15 designated campsites at Isaac Walton Park, only. Primitive camping by scout groups may be permitted at designated sites by special permit. 
(Code 1986, § 13-130; Code 2002, § 16-286) 
Sec. 16-287. - Permit required. 
    At Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, no person shall occupy a site for camping unless such person shall possess a current and valid camping permit issued by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 13-131; Code 2002, § 16-287) 
Sec. 16-288. - Fees. 
(a)  Daily fees. Daily fees for camping at Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per campsite. The daily fee covers use of the facilities from 5:00 p.m. on the day of payment until 5:00 p.m. the following day. 
(b)  Receipts nontransferable. Camping fee permit receipts are nontransferable. 
(c)  Maintenance of receipts. Camping fee receipts shall be maintained at the campsite and available for review upon request by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Code 1986, § 13-132; Code 2002, § 16-288; Ord. No. 2362NS, § 7, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-289. - Prohibitions. 
    The following are prohibited in the designated camping area at Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2: 
(1)  Digging or leveling the ground at a campsite. 
(2)  Hanging a propane or gas-operated lantern on any tree or plant. 
(3)  Leaving refuse or human waste after departing a campsite. 
(4)  Parking a vehicle in, occupying or otherwise blocking in any manner, any campsite. 
(5)  The installation of permanent camping facilities. This does not prohibit the erection of a tent in designated areas. 
(6)  Firearms or hunting. 
(7)  Alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  Climbing, cutting or damaging trees, shrubs or greenery. 
(9)  Leaving a camping area without cleanup. Dumpsters in the area may be used for disposal. 
(10)  Subleasing a campsite. 
(11)  Parking in other than designated areas. 
(12)  Dumping sewage or effluent from sinks upon or into the surfaces of the ground or water in the campsite or park. 
(Code 1986, §§ 13-135(b), 13-137; Code 2002, § 16-289) 
Sec. 16-290. - Length of stay. 
    Camping at one or more campsites at Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 is limited to a period no longer than seven consecutive days. The chief of police or his designee may grant extensions to the seven-day limit based upon the degree of park use, anticipated weekend or holiday occupancy and recreation season. 
(Code 1986, § 13-133; Code 2002, § 16-290; Ord. No. 2362NS, § 8, 6-16-2008) 
Sec. 16-291. - Reservations. 
    Camping facilities at Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 are available on a first-come basis. Reservations are not accepted except for special events, festivals, etc., by special permit. 
(Code 1986, § 13-134; Code 2002, § 16-291) 
Sec. 16-292. - Campsite use. 
(a)  Limits. At Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, camping is limited to no more than ten persons per campsite. Only one pop-up trailer, travel trailer or motorhome is permitted per campsite. Two tents are permitted per campsite. 
(b)  Dogs. It is unlawful for any person to allow or permit a dog to be within any camping area unless such dog is on a leash at all times. 
(Code 1986, § 13-135(a), (c); Code 2002, § 16-292) 
Sec. 16-293. - Juvenile campers. 
    At Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, no person who is under the age of 18 years shall camp, except when accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1986, § 13-136; Code 2002, § 16-293) 
Sec. 16-294. - Quiet hours. 
    In designated campsites at Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2, quiet hours will be enforced from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. Loud noises that may disturb the peace are prohibited during these hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle, television, boom box, radio or phonographic equipment after 10:00 p.m. within the camping area. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb other persons in the camping areas by any loud or unusual noise, loud language or by any other improper behavior. 
(Code 1986, § 13-138; Code 2002, § 16-294) 
Secs. 16-295-16-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - LOT RENTALS 

Sec. 16-321. - Rental fee; renewal of lease. 
    There is established an initial annual lease fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for the year 2010, for each lot at Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1 leased by the city. All persons entering into or renewing leases after the effective date of this section shall comply with all applicable city rules and regulations and all terms of the lease and shall pay the applicable rate at time of lease renewal or lease transfer. Lease fees shall increase annually on the anniversary of each lease at a rate of two percent per year, rounded up to the nearest whole dollar, in accordance with the published lease schedule. Such leases shall be for a term of 30 years. The lessee shall have the right and option to renew such lease for an additional 30-year period, under the terms and conditions set forth in this Code and said lease, provided that the city retains the right to adjust the lease rate schedule at the termination of the original 30-year lease or at such time that a transfer is approved. There is no limit to the number of times a lease can be renewed. 
(Code 2002, § 16-321; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 2, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 16-322. - Assignment of lease; sale of improvements. 
(a)  No lease entered into under this division shall be assigned or sublet, but the lessee may at any time during the term of his lease sell and transfer to other persons the improvements on the lot leased by him. 
(b)  If improvements are sold by the lessee, the transfer shall not become effective until approved by the city commission at a regular or adjourned meeting held for that purpose. The city as lessor reserves the right to reject and disapprove any transfer when, in its opinion, it would be to the best interests of the city and its inhabitants to do so. If the transfer is approved, a new full-term lease shall be entered into between the purchaser and the city, and a transfer charge in an amount as described in the city fee schedule shall be paid to the city prior to such transfer. No transfer fee shall be charged in cases where the transfer is made as a result of a trust or will or in cases where a lease has joint owners and one owner obtains full ownership rights. 
(Code 2002, § 16-322; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 3, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 16-323. - Removal of improvements; reversion to city of unremoved improvements. 
    Any individual leasing from the city shall be the owner of all improvements which are purchased or placed by him. Such improvements, including cabins, other buildings and boathouses, shall constitute personal property, and the lessee shall have the right to remove the property from the lot at the termination of the lease. However, whenever a lease has been canceled by the city, as provided by this division or such lease, the lessee or owner of such improvements shall remove the improvements within 60 days of the date of such cancellation of the lease. Upon failure to do so, the improvements shall revert to and become the property of the city. The city shall have the right, without further notice or demand, to take immediate possession of all such improvements and may enter upon the premises of the lessee with or without process of law, and such improvements shall belong to the first party or its assigns as liquidated damages for the nonfulfillment of the lease by the lessee and the use and rental thereof. 
(Code 2002, § 16-323; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 4, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 16-324. - Use of property. 
    All lots leased by the city pursuant to this division and the cabins or buildings constructed thereon, may be used for recreational or residential purposes when in total compliance with all city codes and ordinances. Premises shall at all times be kept clean and maintained in a sanitary condition by the lessee. 
(Code 2002, § 16-324; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 5, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 16-325. - Boathouse, dock facilities; liability of city. 
(a)  In addition to the possession of the property leased, every lessee under this division or under a lease from the State of Oklahoma, shall have the right and privilege of a site for a boathouse and boat dock on the land owned by the city adjoining and immediately in front of the lot leased. The boathouse shall be erected and maintained by and at the cost of the lessee and shall not exceed 30 feet by 30 feet. The boathouse shall never be used as a place of human habitation and shall be the private property of the lessee, who shall have the right of ingress and egress to and from the boathouse, subject to the rights of the public as set forth in this division. Boathouses and docks shall be maintained in good working order and shall not present a hazard to the general public or create a nuisance. 
(b)  All docks and boathouses located on arms or coves of Twin Lakes No. 1, shall not extend from the high water line (elevation 1073.5) into the lake more than 100 feet. Docks and boathouses on Lake No. 1 lease lots, which are adjacent to skiing and watercraft areas, shall not extend from the high water line (1073.5) into the lake more than 75 feet. 
(c)  Flotation devices for docks and/or boathouses shall be constructed of materials that are not corrosive and are environmentally safe for Lake No. 1. 
(d)  Docks and/or boathouses shall not be anchored to or cross over side lot lines of abutting lots. The connections of the dock or boathouse to the shore shall be constructed in such a way as to allow the dock and/or boathouse to float level on the lake during the lake's fluctuating water elevations. 
(e)  Any person wishing to construct and/or alter a dock and/or boathouse on Lake No. 1, exclusive of routine maintenance, must obtain a building permit from the city. Failure to obtain a building permit will be considered grounds for the city to terminate the lease. 
(f)  The lessee shall agree to keep such lot and boathouse and dock in a clean and sanitary condition and to maintain the lot and boathouse in a safe condition. The city as lessor shall in no manner be liable to the lessee for any damages suffered by the lessee to such lot or boathouse or dock or the improvements thereon on account of the rise and fall of the water line of the lake or for the enlargement or decrease by the city of the size of the lake or on account of any rule or regulation that may be adopted by the lessor governing the regulations of the lake. 
(g)  The lessee shall agree to hold the lessor free and harmless from all damages suffered by him or by any other person on account of personal injuries or loss of property that may incur upon such lot, boathouse or boat dock. 
(Code 2002, § 16-325; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 6, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 16-326. - Cancellation of lease. 
    The city commission may upon a showing of intentional disregard for the terms of the lease and this division or other city ordinance pertaining to the lake, cancel the city lease upon 30 days notice to the lessee by mailing a copy of such notice to the lessee at his last known address. If a lease is cancelled either by the city or the lessee of a city-owned lot prior to the expiration of the lease term, the lessee shall pay the city an early termination fee of in an amount as described in the city fee schedule in exchange for a release of liability from the remaining term. 
(Code 2002, § 16-326; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 7, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 16-327. - Renewal of lease after cancellation. 
    No lease for a cabin site at Twin Lakes No. 1, shall be renewed in the name of the original owner after such lease has been canceled for nonpayment of rentals or for any other cause, without the original lessee paying to the city a renewal fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule in addition to the standard yearly lease fee. Such sum shall be paid to the city clerk, and no renewal of the lease shall be made to the original lessee without the payment of the renewal fee. 
(Code 2002, § 16-327; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 8, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 16-328. - Inspection of lake lot septic/waste disposal systems. 
    Each septic system or waste disposal system on all leased lake lots at Twin Lakes No. 1, shall be inspected by city staff once every five years. city staff will determine whether such system is safe and in good working order in accordance with section 16-59. The inspection fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. If the city staff determines that such system is defective, the city will notify the leaseholder that the system requires an inspection by representatives of the state department of environmental quality and/or a certified sanitarian or septic installer, to be paid for by the leaseholder. The leaseholder shall have 60 days to have the department of environmental quality inspect and correct any defects found in the system. The leaseholder must then supply the city with a certificate of compliance from the department of environmental quality. Failure to correct the defects in the system within the allotted time shall be grounds for the city to cancel the lease of the leaseholder. 
(Code 2002, § 16-328; Ord. No. 2441NS, § 9, 9-7-2010) 
Chapter 17 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Police departments generally, 11 O.S. § 34-101 et seq.; police pensions, 11 O.S. § 50-101 et seq.; arrest, style of process, 12 O.S. § 51 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Police departments, 11 O.S. § 34-101 et seq. 

Sec. 17-31. - Composition; powers and duties. 
(a)  The police department shall consist of a chief of police and such other personnel as may be designated by the city manager. The number of personnel of the police department may be enlarged or diminished by order of the city manager. 
(b)  The police department shall have such powers and shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed by the city manager. All police officers shall have powers of arrest as provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 21-21; Code 2002, § 17-31) 
State Law reference- Arrest, 22 O.S. § 171 et seq. 
Sec. 17-32. - Pension and retirement system. 
    The city adopts the state statutes with regard to the police pension and retirement system, except tit. 11, art. XLIX(L) (11 O.S. § 50-101 et seq.). 
(Code 1986, § 21-26; Code 2002, § 17-32) 
Sec. 17-33. - Disposal of unclaimed personal property. 
    The chief of police is authorized to dispose of personal property, money or legal tender that has come into the possession of the chief of police in any manner, if the owner of the personal property or money or legal tender is unknown or has not claimed the property, the property, money or legal tender has been in the custody of the chief of police for at least 90 days, and the property, money or legal tender or any part thereof is no longer needed to be held as evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any litigation. Disposal of property, money or legal tender under this section must be in accordance with the provisions of 11 O.S. § 34-104. 
(Code 1986, § 21-22; Code 2002, § 17-33; Ord. No. 2375NS, § 1, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 2535NS, § 2, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- Police disposal generally, 11 O.S. § 34-104; uniform unclaimed property generally, 60 O.S. § 651 et seq. 
Sec. 17-34. - Unclaimed personal property found by person other than public official. 
    Any personal property found by a person other than a public official which is delivered to any police officer for identification and which is not claimed or identified within 60 days shall, within ten additional days thereafter, if requested by the finder, be returned to the finder, and a record of such disposal shall be made. If any such property shall be sold as provided and the owner thereof shall take and recover possession of the property from the purchaser, the amount paid therefor shall be returned to the purchaser upon verified claim being submitted, approved and allowed by the proper officers. 
(Code 1986, § 21-23; Code 2002, § 17-34) 
Sec. 17-35. - Personal property of deceased person. 
    The personal property of a deceased person shall be delivered only to the next of kin of such person or to the legally appointed representative of his estate. If the personal property is claimed by the legally appointed representative of the estate of the deceased, a certified copy of the order of the court appointing such person shall be deemed sufficient authority to support the claim. If the personal property is claimed by the next of kin, the claimant shall furnish an affidavit to the effect that he is the person entitled to possession of such property; the affidavit shall be deemed sufficient authority to support the claim. If personal property of a deceased person remains unclaimed for a period of 90 days, it shall be disposed of in the appropriate manner provided in sections 17-33 and 17-34. 
(Code 1986, § 21-24; Code 2002, § 17-35) 
Sec. 17-36. - Disposition of exhibits. 
(a)  All exhibits which have been introduced, filed or held in custody in any criminal action or proceeding may be disposed of as provided for in this section. 
(b)  The court may, on application of the party entitled thereto or an agent designated in writing by the owner, order all such exhibits, other than documentary exhibits, as may be released from the custody of the court or the city, without prejudice to the city, delivered to such party at any time after the final determination of the action or proceedings; provided, however, where the action or proceeding has resulted in an order granting probation, such delivery may be made any time after the final determination of an appeal of such order or after the time for such appeal has elapsed. If the owner of such exhibit is the victim of the offense for which such exhibit is held, such owner may make application to the court at any time prior to the final disposition of the action or proceeding for the return of the exhibit. The applicant shall notify the last person in possession of such exhibit prior to such exhibit being seized by the city of the hearing by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last known address of such person, unless such person has signed a nonownership affidavit pursuant to 22 O.S. § 1321 disclaiming any ownership rights to such exhibit. If the last person in possession of the property is unable to be served notice by such certified mail, notice shall be provided by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the property is held in custody. The applicant shall notify the city attorney and the court when notice has been served to the last person in possession of such property or published pursuant to this section. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days or more than 20 days after the court has been notified that the notice has been served or published. If the court orders the release of the exhibit to the owner, the city attorney shall photograph or mark the exhibit with an identification number and return the exhibit to the owner within ten days of the court order. The court may authorize ten days' additional time for the return of such exhibit if the city attorney shows cause that additional time is needed to photograph or mark such exhibit. Such photograph or marked exhibit may be presented as the exhibit in any further action or proceeding. If the party entitled to such exhibits is unknown or fails to apply for the return of such exhibits, the procedure for their disposition shall be as follows: 
(1)  After the expiration of six months from the time the conviction becomes final, or if the action or proceeding has not resulted in a conviction, at any time after the judgment has become final, the court in which the case was tried shall make an order specifying what exhibits may be released from the custody of the court without prejudice to the city. Upon receipt of such an order, the property shall be transferred to the chief of police or other proper governmental agency for sale to the public. At least ten days prior to such sale, notice of the sale shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last person in possession of such exhibit prior to such exhibit being seized by the city at the last known address of such person. Upon satisfactory proof being provided to the chief of police or other proper governmental agency holding the transferred exhibit that the last person in possession of such exhibit was a lawful possessor, the exhibit shall be released to the last person in possession of such exhibit; 
(2)  At any time prior to the time fixed for the transfer, the owner or any person entitled to the possession of any of such exhibits may obtain from the court an order returning them to him; 
(3)  Articles not returned to their owners or to persons entitled to their possession at or prior to the time set for the transfer shall be sold by the proper receiving agency for cash. The articles shall be sold singly or in combinations. The money received from such sales shall be placed in the appropriate fund of the governmental agency responsible for the sale; 
(4)  Where the exhibit consists of money or currency and is unclaimed at the time of the transfer, it shall not be transferred but shall be immediately deposited in the appropriate fund of the governmental agency in possession of such property; and 
(5)  If any property is transferred to the chief of police or other governmental agency pursuant to this section, it may be sold in the manner provided by law for the sale of surplus personal property. If the chief of police or other proper governmental agency determines that any such property transferred to it for sale is needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the agency and need not be sold. 
(c)  The court may, on application of the party entitled thereto or an agent designated in writing by the owner, order such documentary exhibits as may be released from the custody of the court without prejudice to the city delivered to such party any time after the final determination of the action or proceeding; provided, however, where the action or proceeding has resulted in an order granting probation, such delivery may be made any time after the final determination of an appeal of such order or after the time for such appeal has elapsed. If the owner of such exhibit is the victim of the offense for which such exhibit is held, the owner may make application to the court at any time prior to the final disposition of the action or proceeding for the return of the exhibit. The applicant shall notify the last person in possession of such exhibit prior to such exhibit being seized by the city of the hearing by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last known address of such person, unless such person has signed a nonownership affidavit pursuant to 22 O.S. § 1321 disclaiming any ownership rights to such exhibit. If the last person in possession of the property is unable to be served notice by certified mail, notice shall be provided by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the property is held in custody. The applicant shall notify the city attorney and the court when notice has been served to the last person in possession of such property or published pursuant to this section. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days or more than 20 days after the court has been notified that the notice has been served or published. If the court orders the release of the exhibit to the owner, the city attorney shall photograph or mark the exhibit with an identification number and return the exhibit to the owner within ten days of the court order. The court may authorize ten days' additional time for the return of such exhibit if the city attorney shows cause that additional time is needed to photograph or mark such exhibit. Such photograph or marked exhibit may be presented as the exhibit in any further action or proceeding. If the person entitled to such documentary exhibits is unknown or fails to apply for the return of such exhibits, the procedure for their disposition shall be as follows: 
(1)  After the expiration of six months from the time the conviction becomes final or, if the action or proceeding has not resulted in a conviction, at any time after the judgment has become final, the court in which the case was tried shall make an order requiring such exhibits to be destroyed, provided that no such order shall be made authorizing the destruction of any documentary exhibit if the destruction of such exhibit would prejudice the city. 
(2)  No exhibit shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of until 60 days after the clerk of the court has posted a notice conspicuously in three public places in the city, referring to the order for the disposition, describing briefly the exhibit and indicating the date after which the exhibit will be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(d)  Subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to any dangerous or deadly weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives or any property of any kind or character whatsoever the possession of which is prohibited by law. Any such property filed as an exhibit or held by the city shall be, by order of the trial court, destroyed or sold or otherwise disposed of under the conditions prescribed in such order. This section shall not be interpreted to authorize the return of any property, the possession of which is prohibited by law. 
(Code 1986, § 21-25; Code 2002, § 17-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 22 O.S. § 1327. 
Chapter 18 - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dependent mobile/manufactured home means a mobile/manufactured home which does not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower. For the purposes of regulation under this chapter, a dependent mobile/manufactured home shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer/recreational vehicle, unless otherwise specified. 
    Freestanding mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle means any mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle not located in a mobile/manufactured home park or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park, respectively, licensed by the city or in an approved mobile/manufactured home subdivision. 
    Independent mobile/manufactured home means a mobile/manufactured home which meets the minimum gross floor area or habitable space requirement as provided in section 18-553 and which has a flush toilet and a bath or shower. 
    Inspection officer means the city inspector or authorized agent. 
    Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile/manufactured home park under this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, covers 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained thereon. The term "manufactured home" does not include any structure or vehicle which is owned by a religious corporation or society and is used exclusively for religious purposes. The term "mobile home" means a manufactured home transportable in one section. The term "sectional home" means a manufactured home transportable in two or more sections. These terms shall not include any travel trailer/recreational vehicle or any self-propelled vehicle used as living quarters, whether referred to as a "motor home" or by any other name. Trailers or semitrailers used for the transportation of goods or property other than the personal belongings of the owner of the vehicle shall not be included in this definition. 
    Mobile home means a single-family dwelling designed for transportation on streets and highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, both highway and rail, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or permanent foundation, connection to utilities and similar operations. The term "mobile home" shall not include modular homes or prefabricated homes that meet all city codes. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this chapter, the term "mobile home" refers to an independent mobile/manufactured home as defined in this section. See also the definition of Manufactured home. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile/manufactured homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Mobile/manufactured home space means a plot of ground within a mobile/manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile/manufactured home, and not located on a mobile/manufactured home sales lot. 
    Mobile/manufactured home subdivision means a subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is in mobile/manufactured homes, exclusively, and mobile/manufactured home lots are sold for occupancy. 
    Nonresidential mobile trailer means any vehicle having the basic characteristics of either a mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle, but which is used for purposes other than residential and is not being offered for sale, as indicated by a clearly displayed sign on or near the trailer. 
    Park means a mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park. 
    Public water system or public sewer system means any such system built and owned by or dedicated to and accepted by the city; all other such systems are private. 
    Recreational vehicle means a class D motor vehicle, provided such vehicle is a self-propelled or towed vehicle that is equipped to serve as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel purposes and is used solely as a family or personal conveyance. 
    Rural means any area that is zoned agriculturally. 
    Service building means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men or women, and may also include buildings containing laundry facilities and other facilities as required by this chapter or desired by the park operator. 
    Subdivision means a mobile/manufactured home subdivision, unless otherwise indicated. 
    Travel trailer/recreational vehicle means a vehicle or portable structure built on a chassis, designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use not included in the definition of an independent mobile/manufactured home. 
    Travel trailer/recreational vehicle park means any plot of ground upon which two or more travel trailers/recreational vehicles, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Travel trailer/recreational vehicle space means a plot of ground within a travel trailer/recreational vehicle park designed for accommodation of one travel trailer/recreational vehicle. 
    Urban means any area not zoned agriculturally. 
(Code 1986, § 15-1; Code 2002, § 18-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this chapter shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, for each offense. Each day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1986, § 15-2; Code 2002, § 18-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Freestanding mobile/manufactured home. 
(a)  Location in urban area. No freestanding mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle shall be permitted in the urban area unless it is being offered for sale or parked for storage. Except for mobile/manufactured homes or travel trailers/recreational vehicles within regular commercial mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle sales lots, each such freestanding mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle offered for sale must be clearly marked as such, shall not be occupied for either living or sleeping purposes and must be removed from the premises if not sold within 120 days. Freestanding mobile/manufactured homes or travel trailers/recreational vehicles located within regular commercial mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle sales lots need be neither individually marked for sale nor removed within 120 days if not sold. A property owner shall not store or permit to be stored more than one mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle on a residential lot. Such mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle may be stored on a hard surface but shall not be stored in any required front yard, in an unscreened side yard, or public utility easement, nor shall such mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle project beyond the front of any building. 
(b)  Location in rural area. Freestanding mobile/manufactured homes shall be permitted in the rural area (only in agricultural zoning districts). Permits for such freestanding mobile/manufactured homes shall be issued by the inspection officer, but only when the applicant agrees in writing to remove such mobile/manufactured home within 120 days after either the mobile/manufactured home site is rezoned to a district other than agricultural or is abutted within 660 feet by a district other than agricultural. Such freestanding mobile/manufactured homes must comply with all normal city regulations, except the specific qualifications to the housing code outlined for mobile/manufactured homes in article VI of this chapter. No mobile/manufactured home parks shall be permitted in the areas within the city limits lying west of State Highway No. 102, notwithstanding the fact that such areas may be in agricultural zoning districts. 
(c)  Location on lake lots. The following shall apply to mobile/manufactured homes located on lake lots: 
(1)  All mobile/manufactured homes placed on lake lease lots must be skirted and tied down or anchored. 
(2)  The lessee must submit an approved septic system certificate of approval before a permit will be issued to place the mobile/manufactured home on a lake lease lot. 
(3)  The mobile/manufactured home lake lease lot owner will be required to submit to the city code enforcement department a certified inspection of its septic system not less than every five years and upon all lake lease lot transfers. 
(4)  Any mobile/manufactured home placed on a lake lease lot must have all required permits and have all inspections with a certificate of occupancy prior to occupying the mobile/manufactured home. 
(5)  All septic systems must be installed and maintained in accordance with the state department of environmental quality bulletin no. 600 and the city codes. 
(Code 1986, §§ 15-3-15-5; Code 2002, § 18-3; Ord. No. 2111NS, § 1, 11-3-2003) 
Secs. 18-4-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS 

Sec. 18-31. - Notice of violations. 
    Whenever the inspection officer determines that a violation of pertinent sections under this chapter exists, he shall notify the licensee or permittee of such alleged violation. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with this chapter and other pertinent regulations; 
(4)  Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, for the performance of any act it requires; and 
(5)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may require. However, such notice or order shall be deemed as properly served upon the owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last known address. 
(Code 1986, § 15-21; Code 2002, § 18-31) 
Sec. 18-32. - Hearing before board of housing appeals. 
    Any person affected by any notice issued under this chapter or other regulation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of housing appeals, provided that such person shall file with the inspection officer a written request for such hearing setting forth briefly the grounds for such request within ten days after the day the notice was served. The filing of such request shall stay notice of suspension of permits and licenses, except for orders issued under section 18-35. The hearing shall be held at the next board of housing appeals meeting for which the agenda has not been completed or at a later meeting if so requested by the petitioner, if the inspection officer determines sufficient cause for such delay exists. 
(Code 1986, § 15-22; Code 2002, § 18-32) 
Sec. 18-33. - Findings of board of housing appeals; issuance of order. 
    After hearing held pursuant to section 18-32, the inspection officer shall compile the findings of the board of housing appeals as to compliance with this chapter and regulations and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the prior notice, which shall be served as provided in section 18-31. Upon failure to comply with such order, the permit of the mobile/manufactured home park or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be revoked. 
(Code 1986, § 15-23; Code 2002, § 18-33) 
Sec. 18-34. - Appeals to city commission. 
    Appeals from decisions of the board of housing appeals made pursuant to this chapter shall be to the city commission. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city commission may seek relief in the district court. 
(Code 1986, § 15-24; Code 2002, § 18-34) 
Sec. 18-35. - Emergency procedure. 
    Whenever the inspection officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the permit. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon petition to the city commission, shall be afforded a hearing at the next regular meeting as an item of new business, even if the agenda has been completed. Sections 18-33 and 18-34 shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Code 1986, § 15-25; Code 2002, § 18-35) 
Secs. 18-36-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL PERMITS 

Sec. 18-61. - Application; hearing; action by commission. 
(a)  Any person who has a special or hardship case and who desires to park a mobile/manufactured home upon property located within the corporate limits of the city may make written application to the planning commission for a hearing to determine the facts relating to his case. Upon filing such application, the applicant shall pay a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule to cover the cost of processing the application. The planning commission is authorized to hear such application after public notice has been given by publishing notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation which is printed within the city, not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. The planning commission shall consider such application and review such matters as the nature of the applicant's special or hardship case and shall consider the proposed location of such mobile/manufactured home with regard to the type of buildings or dwellings within the general area of such proposed location and the relationship of such mobile/manufactured homes to the neighborhood. The planning commission may require written consent of adjacent property owners when, in its judgment, it is deemed necessary or advisable. 
(b)  Upon hearing the planning commission shall make its recommendation to approve or disapprove such application, which recommendation shall be forwarded to the city commission for its consideration. The city commission shall review the application, the recommendations of the planning commission and any other evidence it deems necessary or advisable. The city commission may accept or reject the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Code 1986, § 15-346; Code 2002, § 18-61) 
Sec. 18-62. - Issuance. 
    If the application made under this article is approved by the city commission, the city commission shall authorize the issuance of a special permit by the city clerk for a mobile/manufactured home to be parked upon the property, subject to such application. 
(Code 1986, § 15-347; Code 2002, § 18-62) 
Sec. 18-63. - Transfer; expiration; use of home. 
    A special permit issued under this article shall be personal and shall not be transferable. The special permit shall expire upon the termination of the special or hardship situation set forth in the application. The mobile/manufactured home under such special permit shall be used and occupied by the persons so authorized and shall not be transferred, rented or leased for use by any other person at such approved location. However, any mobile/manufactured home which has been located within the corporate limits under a special or hardship permit for a period of seven years or longer may remain at such location as a nonconforming use, which use shall be controlled by the provisions of the city zoning code relating to nonconformities, as amended from time to time, and after the period of seven years it will no longer be necessary to make annual reports to the city as provided in section 18-64. 
(Code 1986, § 15-348; Code 2002, § 18-63) 
Sec. 18-64. - Annual report. 
    A person issued a permit under this article shall make an annual report to the city clerk showing that the hardship or special situation still exists. However, if such mobile/manufactured home is allowed by the city to remain at such location for a period of seven years or longer, no annual report is necessary after the seventh year. 
(Code 1986, § 15-349; Code 2002, § 18-64) 
Sec. 18-65. - Inspection fee. 
    The holder of the special permit issued under this article shall pay a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule annually to cover the costs of inspection of the mobile/manufactured home. 
(Code 1986, § 15-350; Code 2002, § 18-65) 
Secs. 18-66-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONRESIDENTIAL MOBILE TRAILERS 

Sec. 18-91. - License required. 
    No nonresidential mobile trailer shall be permitted in the city unless a license for its operation is issued by the city clerk after inspection by the inspection officer. Such license shall specify the permitted use of the nonresidential mobile trailer, the location of such operation and the termination date of the permit. No license shall be issued for a use which would violate any city, state or federal ordinance, law or regulation. 
(Code 1986, § 15-41; Code 2002, § 18-91) 
Sec. 18-92. - License fee. 
    An annual fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule shall be charged for each nonresidential mobile trailer license. However, no governmental or nonprofit agency shall be charged such a fee. 
(Code 1986, § 15-42; Code 2002, § 18-92) 
Sec. 18-93. - Use on construction projects. 
    Operation of a nonresidential mobile trailer by a contractor on a construction project for which building permits have been issued or which is otherwise approved by governmental units is permitted during the term of such construction project without issuance of a license. 
(Code 1986, § 15-43; Code 2002, § 18-93) 
Sec. 18-94. - Permanent location. 
    This article is not to be construed as permitting or authorizing the permanent location of any nonresidential mobile trailer in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 15-44; Code 2002, § 18-94) 
Secs. 18-95-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND TRAVEL TRAILER/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-121. - Supervision. 
    Under this article, the licensee or permittee or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be in charge at all times to keep a mobile/manufactured home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee or permittee, for the violation of any section of this chapter to which the licensee or permittee is subject. 
(Code 1986, § 15-61; Code 2002, § 18-121) 
Sec. 18-122. - Existing parks; expansions. 
    Mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks in existence upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which have concrete pads indicating the location of mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces need not comply with those sections of this chapter which would require the moving of concrete pads. Any park expansion shall be in full compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 15-76; Code 2002, § 18-122) 
Sec. 18-123. - Fuel piping and storage. 
    All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile/manufactured homes shall be of acceptable material as determined by the inspection officer and shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the mobile/manufactured home or less than five feet from any mobile/manufactured home exit. 
(Code 1986, § 15-62; Code 2002, § 18-123) 
Secs. 18-124-18-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-151. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate any mobile/manufactured home park or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park within the city limits unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the city clerk in the name of such person for the specific mobile/manufactured home park. 
(b)  An application shall be made to the city clerk who, acting jointly with the inspection officer, shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with all pertinent sections of this chapter and other city ordinances and regulations. Every person holding such a license shall notify the city clerk in writing within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile/manufactured home park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile/manufactured home park or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park. 
(Code 1986, § 15-77; Code 2002, § 18-151) 
Sec. 18-152. - Application for original and renewal licenses. 
(a)  An application for an original license required under this division shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The interest of the applicant in and the location and legal description of the park; 
(3)  A complete plan of the park showing compliance with all applicable sections of this chapter and regulations promulgated under this chapter; and 
(4)  Such further information as may be requested by the inspection officer. 
(b)  Application for a renewal of the license shall be made in writing by the holder of the license and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Any change in the information submitted since the time the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted; and 
(2)  Other information requested by the inspection officer. 
(Code 1986, § 15-78; Code 2002, § 18-152) 
Sec. 18-153. - Plan of park. 
    A complete plan, for the purpose of obtaining a license to be issued under this division, shall show the following: 
(1)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land; 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces; 
(3)  The location and width of roadways, walkways, buffer strips and recreational areas; 
(4)  The location of service buildings and other proposed structures; 
(5)  The location and size of utility lines and treatment facilities; and 
(6)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the park. 
(Code 1986, § 15-79; Code 2002, § 18-153) 
Sec. 18-154. - Fees. 
    The city clerk shall charge and collect for each mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park an initial license fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for up to 30 spaces and a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per space for all over 30 spaces. The initial license shall expire one year from the date of issue, unless renewed upon such conditions as the city commission may by ordinance direct. The annual renewal fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per space. 
(Code 1986, § 15-82; Code 2002, § 18-154) 
Sec. 18-155. - Posting. 
    The license certificate issued under this division shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile/manufactured home park or the travel trailer/recreational vehicle park at all times. 
(Code 1986, § 15-83; Code 2002, § 18-155) 
Sec. 18-156. - Notice of violation; compliance. 
    Whenever the inspection officer finds conditions existing in violation of this chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, he shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the license was issued that, unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice, the license will be suspended. At the end of such period, not to exceed 90 days, the inspection officer shall reinspect the park and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license was issued. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease operation of such park except as provided in section 18-32. 
(Code 1986, § 15-80; Code 2002, § 18-156) 
Sec. 18-157. - Hearing following denial or suspension or receipt of notice to correct violation. 
    Any person whose license issued under this division has been denied or suspended or who has received notice from the inspection officer that his license will be suspended unless certain conditions or practices at the park are corrected may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city commission. However, when no petition for such hearing shall have been filed within ten days following the day on which notice of suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked at the expiration of the ten-day period. 
(Code 1986, § 15-81; Code 2002, § 18-157) 
Secs. 18-158-18-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-186. - Purpose. 
    The inspection officer is authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks located within the city, in order to perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of occupants of mobile/manufactured home parks and of the general public. 
(Code 1986, § 15-96; Code 2002, § 18-186) 
Sec. 18-187. - Outside premises of private or public property. 
    The inspection officer shall have the power to inspect the outside premises of private or public property for the purposes of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter or of regulations promulgated under this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 15-97; Code 2002, § 18-187) 
Sec. 18-188. - Register of mobile/manufactured homes and occupants. 
    The inspection officer shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all mobile/manufactured homes and occupants using the park. 
(Code 1986, § 15-98; Code 2002, § 18-188) 
Sec. 18-189. - Access of owner for repairs. 
    It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this chapter or with any lawful order issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 15-99; Code 2002, § 18-189) 
Secs. 18-190-18-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGISTRATION OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS OF MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS/RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 

Sec. 18-216. - Information in register. 
    Each licensee under this article shall keep a register containing a record of all mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or occupant of each mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle and motor vehicle by which it is towed; 
(2)  The make, model, year and license of each mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle and motor vehicle; 
(3)  The state, territory or country issuing such license; 
(4)  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle; and 
(5)  Whether or not each mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle is a dependent or independent mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 15-111; Code 2002, § 18-216) 
Sec. 18-217. - Inspection of register. 
    The mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, inspection officers and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record of each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of one year following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(Code 1986, § 15-112; Code 2002, § 18-217) 
Secs. 18-218-18-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LOCATION, SPACE AND GENERAL LAYOUT 

Sec. 18-246. - Types of parks. 
(a)  Under this article, parks shall be of three types as follows: 
(1)  Mobile/manufactured home parks; 
(2)  Travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks; and 
(3)  Mixed mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks. 
(b)  No travel trailer/recreational vehicle shall be located in a mobile/manufactured home park. No mobile/manufactured home shall be located in a travel trailer/recreational vehicle park. In a mixed park, separate areas shall be reserved for mobile/manufactured homes and for travel trailers/recreational vehicles; no mobile/manufactured home shall be permitted in the travel sector; no travel trailer/recreational vehicle shall be permitted in the mobile/manufactured home sector. 
(Code 1986, § 15-126; Code 2002, § 18-246) 
Sec. 18-247. - Drainage of site. 
    Every mobile/manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and free from stagnant pools of water. Drainage shall not endanger any water supply. 
(Code 1986, § 15-127; Code 2002, § 18-247) 
Sec. 18-248. - Minimum area. 
    The minimum area of any mobile/manufactured home park shall be five acres. However, parks in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may continue to operate with less than five acres. However, if the park is to be expanded, it must at that time have a minimum of five acres. 
(Code 1986, § 15-128; Code 2002, § 18-248) 
Sec. 18-249. - Intensity of development. 
    Intensity of development for a mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be limited to no more than ten mobile/manufactured homes per gross acre for a mobile/manufactured home park and no more than 15 travel trailers/recreational vehicles per gross acre for a travel trailer/recreational vehicle park. The area used for sewage treatment facilities shall not be included in density computations. Mobile/manufactured home spaces shall be at least 30 feet wide where pads are closest to driveways. Travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces shall be at least 25 feet wide where travel trailers/recreational vehicles are located closest to the driveway. 
(Code 1986, § 15-129; Code 2002, § 18-249) 
Sec. 18-250. - Spaces generally. 
    Every mobile/manufactured home space and travel trailer/recreational vehicle space shall be clearly defined. Mobile/manufactured homes and travel trailers/recreational vehicles shall be parked in such spaces that, at the nearest point, they shall be ten feet from the service road, five feet from the rear lot line and at least ten feet from any other mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 15-130; Code 2002, § 18-250) 
Sec. 18-251. - Distance of mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle from street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle less than 25 feet from any public street or highway right-of-way or so that any part of such mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle will obstruct any roadway or walkway of such park. 
(Code 1986, § 15-131; Code 2002, § 18-251) 
Sec. 18-252. - Occupancy of designated spaces. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a mobile/manufactured home to occupy a travel trailer/recreational vehicle space, a travel trailer/recreational vehicle to occupy a mobile/manufactured home space and for any mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle to be located in a park unless in a designated mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle space. 
(Code 1986, § 15-132; Code 2002, § 18-252) 
Sec. 18-253. - Abutting driveway to mobile/manufactured home space. 
    All mobile/manufactured home spaces shall abut upon a sealed-surface driveway of not less than 20 feet in width if on-street parking is prohibited and 26 feet in width if on-street parking is permitted on one side of the street only. Driveways must have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(Code 1986, § 15-133; Code 2002, § 18-253) 
Sec. 18-254. - Parking. 
(a)  In a mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, parking on or adjacent to the street within the park is permissible as long as it does not obstruct free movement of traffic. Whether or not a safety hazard exists is a question to be determined by the inspection officer with final appeal to the city commission. If, upon final appeal before the city commission, it is determined by the commission that a safety hazard does in fact exist, the mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park concerned will be required to comply with subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  In new mobile/manufactured home parks, at least two clearly defined parking spaces will be provided for each space either on or adjacent to the space. In new travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks, at least one parking space shall be provided for each space either on or adjacent to the space. 
(Code 1986, § 15-134; Code 2002, § 18-254) 
Sec. 18-255. - Clothes drying facilities. 
    Outside drying spaces or other clothes drying facilities shall be provided in every mobile/manufactured home park or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park. Mobile/manufactured home parks shall have at least 100 linear feet of clothes drying line or one mechanical clothes drying unit in good condition; mechanical units shall be located in a service building. Travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks and mixed parks shall have at least 25 linear feet of outdoor clothes drying line for each travel trailer/recreational vehicle space or one mechanical clothes drying unit for the first ten travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces or any fraction thereof and an additional unit for each ten additional travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces or any fraction thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 15-135; Code 2002, § 18-255) 
Sec. 18-256. - Composition of driveways, walkways. 
    All driveways and walkways within a mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be at least asphalt-oil-rock sealed surface. 
(Code 1986, § 15-136; Code 2002, § 18-256) 
Sec. 18-257. - Ingress and egress. 
    In the urban area, new mobile/manufactured home parks should abut and have their major means of ingress and egress on at least a minor arterial street. Travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks and mixed parks in the urban area shall abut and have their major means of ingress and egress on at least a principal arterial street. 
(Code 1986, § 15-137; Code 2002, § 18-257) 
Sec. 18-258. - Buffer planting strip along certain boundaries. 
    All mobile/manufactured home parks shall have and maintain a buffer planting strip, not less than three feet in width, along all park boundaries not bordering a street. Such strip shall consist of not less than one row of shrubs, spaced not more than eight feet apart, which grow to a height of five feet or more in one full growing season and which will eventually grow to a height of not less than 12 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 15-138; Code 2002, § 18-258) 
Secs. 18-259-18-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SERVICE BUILDINGS FOR TRAVEL TRAILER/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 

Sec. 18-286. - Required. 
(a)  Each travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be provided with at least one service building adequately equipped with flush-type toilet fixtures and other sanitary facilities as required in this chapter. No service building shall contain less than one toilet for females, one toilet for males, one lavatory and shower or bathtub for each sex and one laundry tray. 
(b)  All sanitary facilities required by section 18-288 shall be located in service buildings. 
(Code 1986, § 15-151; Code 2002, § 18-286) 
Sec. 18-287. - Requirements. 
    Service buildings in a travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall: 
(1)  Be located 25 feet or more from any travel trailer/recreational vehicle space; 
(2)  Be of permanent construction and adequately lighted; 
(3)  Be of moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent washing and cleansing; 
(4)  Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit during cold weather and to supply adequate hot water during times of peak demands; and 
(5)  Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively screened. 
(Code 1986, § 15-154; Code 2002, § 18-287) 
Sec. 18-288. - Sanitary facilities. 
    Each park accommodating travel trailers/recreational vehicles shall provide the following: 
(1)  Toilet facilities for males shall consist of not less than two flush toilets and one urinal for the first ten travel trailers/recreational vehicles or fraction thereof and, for travel trailers/recreational vehicles in excess of ten, not less than one additional flush toilet and one additional urinal for every ten additional travel trailers/recreational vehicles or fractional number thereof. 
(2)  Toilet facilities for females shall consist of not less than two flush toilets for the first six travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces or any less number thereof and, for travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces in excess of six, not less than one additional flush toilet for every ten additional travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces in excess of six or fractional number thereof. 
(3)  Each sex shall be provided with not less than two lavatories and two showers or bathtubs with individual dressing accommodations for the first ten travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces or any less number thereof and, for travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces in excess of ten, not less than one additional lavatory and one additional shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for every ten additional travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces or fractional number thereof. 
(4)  Each toilet for females and each shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for females shall be in a private compartment or stall. 
(5)  The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be either separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. 
(6)  There shall be provided in a separate compartment or stall not less than one flush toilet bowl receptacle for emptying bedpans and other containers of human excreta or a slop sink with at least a three-inch trap and an adequate supply of hot running water for cleaning such bedpans or containers. 
(Code 1986, § 15-152; Code 2002, § 18-288) 
Sec. 18-289. - Maximum distance from trailer spaces. 
    Travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces in a travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall not be more than 200 feet from a service building. 
(Code 1986, § 15-153; Code 2002, § 18-289) 
Sec. 18-290. - Laundry facilities. 
    Laundry facilities in a travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be provided in the ratio of one laundry unit to every 30 travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces and shall be in a separate soundproof room of a service building or in a separate building. A laundry shall consist of not less than one laundry tub and one clothes washing machine. 
(Code 1986, § 15-155; Code 2002, § 18-290) 
Sec. 18-291. - Maintenance of service buildings and grounds. 
    All service buildings and the grounds of the travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public. 
(Code 1986, § 15-156; Code 2002, § 18-291) 
Secs. 18-292-18-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 18-321. - Discharge of waste from service and other buildings. 
    Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service and other buildings within the mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be discharged into a public sewer and disposal plant, septic tank system or private sewer and lagoon system of such construction and in such manner as approved by the state health department and in accordance with all applicable sections of this Code and other city ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 15-171; Code 2002, § 18-321) 
Sec. 18-322. - Sewer connection at each space. 
    Each mobile/manufactured home space shall be provided with at least a three-inch sewer connection at least four inches above the surface of the ground. The sewer connection should be protected by a concrete collar at least four inches thick and with a minimum outside diameter of 24 inches. The sewer connection shall be fitted with a standard ferrule and close nipple and provided with a screw cap. The connection between the mobile/manufactured home drain and the sewer must be watertight and self-draining. Mobile/manufactured homes with fixtures from which backsiphonage may occur shall not be connected to the park's water system until the defect has been corrected. 
(Code 1986, § 15-172; Code 2002, § 18-322) 
Sec. 18-323. - Connection to public sewer system. 
    If a public sewer system is or becomes available within 300 feet of a mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park, a connection must be made to the public system within 180 days. 
(Code 1986, § 15-173; Code 2002, § 18-323) 
Sec. 18-324. - Sewage treatment facilities. 
    The design of private sewage treatment facilities shall be based on the maximum capacity of the mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be discharged into the watershed of the Shawnee Twin Lakes or into any other waters of the state. The disposal facilities shall be located where they will not create a nuisance or health hazard to the mobile/manufactured home park or to the owner or occupant or any adjacent property. The state health department must approve the type of treatment proposed and the design of any disposal facilities and sewer systems prior to construction. 
(Code 1986, § 15-174; Code 2002, § 18-324) 
Sec. 18-325. - Dumping of accumulated waste. 
    Every mobile/manufactured home occupying a mobile/manufactured home park space shall tie into the park sewer system and shall dump any accumulated waste into the system. Every travel trailer/recreational vehicle shall dump any accumulated waste into a receptacle provided in the travel trailer/recreational vehicle park upon entering and upon leaving the park. Such receptacles must be approved by the state health department. Any other dumping of accumulated waste within the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 15-175; Code 2002, § 18-325) 
Sec. 18-326. - Monthly sewerage charge. 
    The monthly sewerage charge shall be based on the maximum mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle capacity of the park. The park operator shall, by the tenth of each month, notify the city clerk of the maximum number of mobile/manufactured home spaces in use at any time during the previous month. The city clerk shall then adjust the sewerage fee to the actual use of the park. If the park operator fails to notify the city clerk of the prior month's actual usage of trailer or mobile/manufactured home spaces, the sewerage fee shall be levied on the maximum capacity of the park. 
(Code 1986, § 15-176; Code 2002, § 18-326) 
Sec. 18-327. - Condition of sewer connections. 
    Sewer connections in a mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park shall be watertight. The park licensee shall maintain trailer and mobile/manufactured home connections to sewer and water systems in good condition and shall be responsible that there is no sewage or water leakage on park premises. 
(Code 1986, § 15-177; Code 2002, § 18-327) 
Sec. 18-328. - Sewer connections to travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces. 
    No sewer connections shall be made to travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces. 
(Code 1986, § 15-178; Code 2002, § 18-328) 
Secs. 18-329-18-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - WATER SUPPLY FOR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 18-356. - Use of public or private source of water. 
    An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each mobile/manufactured home park, capable of furnishing a maximum of 250 gallons per day per mobile/manufactured home space. Where a public supply of water of such quality is available within 300 feet or becomes available within 300 feet, a connection shall be made thereto, and its supply shall be used exclusively. Where private water supplies must be developed, the inspection officer must approve the location, construction and development of both the water well and pipe system and connections. No private source other than a water well shall be used. 
(Code 1986, § 15-191; Code 2002, § 18-356) 
Sec. 18-357. - Connections to buildings and spaces. 
    The water system of the mobile/manufactured home park shall be connected by pipes to all buildings and all mobile/manufactured home spaces, storage buildings excepted. Each mobile/manufactured home shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four inches above the ground. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities. 
(Code 1986, § 15-192; Code 2002, § 18-357) 
Sec. 18-358. - Construction and maintenance of water piping. 
    All water piping in a mobile/manufactured home park shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local law. The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies, and the system shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or backsiphonage. All water connections shall be weathertight. 
(Code 1986, § 15-193; Code 2002, § 18-358) 
Sec. 18-359. - Drinking fountains. 
    Where drinking fountains are provided for public use in a mobile/manufactured home park, they shall be of a type and in locations approved by the inspection officer. 
(Code 1986, § 15-194; Code 2002, § 18-359) 
Sec. 18-360. - Individual water service connections. 
    Individual water service connections which are provided for direct use by mobile/manufactured homes or travel trailers/recreational vehicles shall be of such construction that they will not be damaged by the parking of such mobile/manufactured homes or travel trailers/recreational vehicles. The park system shall be adequate to provide 20 pounds per square inch of pressure at all mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle connections. 
(Code 1986, § 15-195; Code 2002, § 18-360) 
Sec. 18-361. - Water supply to travel trailer/recreational vehicle space. 
    Provision shall be made within 150 feet of each travel trailer/recreational vehicle space to supply water for travel trailer/recreational vehicle reservoirs. 
(Code 1986, § 15-196; Code 2002, § 18-361) 
Sec. 18-362. - Location of pumping machinery and pipes. 
    In a mobile/manufactured home park, no well casing, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level or in any room or space above ground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such room, whether above or below ground, has free drainage by gravity to the surface. All floors shall be watertight and sloped from the pump pedestal to the drain, and floors shall extend at least two feet from the well in all directions. The pedestal shall not be less than 12 inches above the floor. This shall not be construed as prohibiting submersible pumps. 
(Code 1986, § 15-197; Code 2002, § 18-362) 
Sec. 18-363. - Requirements for water storage reservoirs. 
    All water storage reservoirs in a mobile/manufactured home park shall be watertight and constructed of impervious material. All overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated material. Overflow pipes from a reservoir shall not connect to any pipe in which sewage or polluted water may back up. 
(Code 1986, § 15-198; Code 2002, § 18-363) 
Sec. 18-364. - Installation of stopcocks and wastecocks. 
    Underground stopcocks and wastecocks shall not be installed on any connection in a mobile/manufactured home park. 
(Code 1986, § 15-199; Code 2002, § 18-364) 
Sec. 18-365. - Water wells drawing water from sands reserved to city. 
    Under this article, no water well shall draw water from any sands reserved to the city for its use, except as may be otherwise permitted by this Code or city ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 15-200; Code 2002, § 18-365) 
Sec. 18-366. - Water connection to travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces. 
    No water connections shall be made to travel trailer/recreational vehicle spaces. 
(Code 1986, § 15-201; Code 2002, § 18-366) 
Secs. 18-367-18-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - REFUSE DISPOSAL FOR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS 

Sec. 18-396. - Sanitary and safety conditions. 
    The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile/manufactured home park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident, fire hazards or air pollution. 
(Code 1986, § 15-226; Code 2002, § 18-396) 
Sec. 18-397. - Storage of refuse in proper containers. 
    All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers, which shall be located within 150 feet of any mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient numbers and capacity to properly store all refuse. 
(Code 1986, § 15-227; Code 2002, § 18-397) 
Sec. 18-398. - Racks or holders for refuse containers. 
    In a mobile/manufactured home park, racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. Lids for containers shall be permanently connected to racks or holders with chains or other flexible materials. 
(Code 1986, § 15-228; Code 2002, § 18-398) 
Sec. 18-399. - Municipal or private collection. 
    Under this article, all refuse shall be collected at least once weekly or as otherwise required by the inspection officer. Where municipal garbage collection is not available, the mobile/manufactured home park operator shall either employ a private agency or provide this service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers. 
(Code 1986, § 15-229; Code 2002, § 18-399) 
Sec. 18-400. - Burial or transporting of refuse. 
    Where a municipal or private disposal service is not available, the mobile/manufactured home park operator shall dispose of refuse by burial or by transporting to a site approved by the state health department. Refuse shall be buried only at locations and by methods approved by the state health department and in accordance with this code and city ordinances and state health department regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 15-230; Code 2002, § 18-400) 
Sec. 18-401. - Use of city disposal service. 
    When a municipal refuse disposal service is available for a mobile/manufactured home park, it must be used. 
(Code 1986, § 15-231; Code 2002, § 18-401) 
Secs. 18-402-18-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL 

Sec. 18-431. - Measures for control generally. 
(a)  Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health, as required by the inspection officer, shall be applied in the mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle park. 
(b)  The inspection officer may require the park operator to take suitable measures to control other insects and obnoxious weeds. 
(Code 1986, § 15-246(a), (c); Code 2002, § 18-431) 
Sec. 18-432. - Larvicidal solutions. 
    Effective larvicidal solutions may be required by the inspection officer for fly or mosquito breeding areas in the mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park which cannot be controlled by other, more permanent measures. 
(Code 1986, § 15-246(b); Code 2002, § 18-432) 
Sec. 18-433. - Accumulations of debris. 
    Accumulations of debris which may provide harborage for rodents shall not be permitted in the mobile/manufactured home park. 
(Code 1986, § 15-247; Code 2002, § 18-433) 
Sec. 18-434. - Extermination of rodents. 
    When rats or other objectionable rodents are known to be in the mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/recreational vehicle park, the park operator shall take definite action, as directed by the inspection officer, to exterminate them. 
(Code 1986, § 15-248; Code 2002, § 18-434) 
Secs. 18-435-18-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - ELECTRICITY AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING 

Sec. 18-461. - Electrical outlets and equipment. 
    An electrical outlet supplying at least 60 amperes shall be provided for each mobile/manufactured home space. The installation shall comply with all applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such electrical outlets and extension lines shall be grounded and weatherproofed. Plug receptacles shall also be grounded and weatherproofed. No power supply line shall be permitted to lie on the ground, and no main power line shall be suspended less than 18 feet above the ground, unless otherwise approved by the inspection officer. 
(Code 1986, § 15-261; Code 2002, § 18-461) 
Sec. 18-462. - Streetlights. 
    Streets and driveways within mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks shall be lighted with streetlights meeting the current standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society or one-half candlepower, whichever is higher. 
(Code 1986, § 15-262; Code 2002, § 18-462) 
Secs. 18-463-18-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - FIRE PROTECTION 

Sec. 18-491. - Flammable materials. 
    Mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(Code 1986, § 15-276; Code 2002, § 18-491) 
Sec. 18-492. - Water risers. 
    Where the water supply system does not provide at least six-inch water mains, there shall be provided a two-inch, frost-protected water riser within 300 feet of each mobile/manufactured home or building. 
(Code 1986, § 15-277; Code 2002, § 18-492) 
Sec. 18-493. - Fires generally. 
    Fires shall be made only in stoves and other cooking or heating equipment intended for such purposes in mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks. 
(Code 1986, § 15-278; Code 2002, § 18-493) 
Secs. 18-494-18-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS 

Sec. 18-521. - Plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs. 
    All plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs in mobile/manufactured home and travel trailer/recreational vehicle parks shall be made in accordance with applicable local regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 15-291; Code 2002, § 18-521) 
Sec. 18-522. - Skirting of mobile/manufactured homes. 
    Skirting of mobile/manufactured homes is permissible, but areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a harborage for rodents or create a fire hazard. 
(Code 1986, § 15-292; Code 2002, § 18-522) 
Sec. 18-523. - Permit for exterior construction. 
    A permit issued by the inspection officer shall be required before any construction on a mobile/manufactured home space or any structural addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile/manufactured home takes place. No construction or addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile/manufactured home located in a mobile/manufactured home park shall be permitted unless of the same type of construction or materials as the mobile/manufactured home affected. All such construction, additions or alterations shall be in compliance with applicable local and state laws. No permit shall be required for the addition of steps, canopies, awnings or antennas. 
(Code 1986, § 15-293; Code 2002, § 18-523) 
Sec. 18-524. - Additional structures on mobile/manufactured home space. 
    No structure other than a mobile/manufactured home shall be permitted on a mobile/manufactured home space, except that one structure of not to exceed 175 cubic feet may be used for storage on each such space. 
(Code 1986, § 15-294; Code 2002, § 18-524) 
Secs. 18-525-18-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MINIMUM HOUSING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-551. - Compliance with housing code generally. 
    Every mobile/manufactured home located in either a mobile/manufactured home park, a mobile/manufactured home subdivision or as a freestanding mobile/manufactured home shall meet the provisions of the city housing code, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 15-306; Code 2002, § 18-551) 
Sec. 18-552. - Applicability of housing code to travel trailers/recreational vehicles. 
    The housing code shall not apply to travel trailers/recreational vehicles insofar as floor area, flush toilet, bath or shower or ceiling height is concerned. 
(Code 1986, § 15-307; Code 2002, § 18-552) 
Sec. 18-553. - Minimum gross floor area or habitable space. 
(a)  Every mobile/manufactured home shall contain the following minimum gross floor area or habitable space: 
(1)  For one or two occupants, 150 square feet. 
(2)  For a third occupant, 100 additional square feet. 
(3)  For each additional occupant thereafter, 75 square feet additional. 
(b)  Habitable space in a mobile/manufactured home shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet over 50 percent of the floor area, and the floor area where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered in computing minimum gross floor area. 
(Code 1986, § 15-308; Code 2002, § 18-553) 
Sec. 18-554. - Primary and emergency exits. 
    A mobile/manufactured home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit and an emergency exit located remote from the primary exit. 
(Code 1986, § 15-309; Code 2002, § 18-554) 
Sec. 18-555. - Area of rooms occupied for sleeping purposes. 
    Rooms in a mobile/manufactured home occupied for sleeping purposes must contain at least 60 square feet of floor space if used by more than one person and at least 40 square feet if used by one person. 
(Code 1986, § 15-310; Code 2002, § 18-555) 
Sec. 18-556. - Sanitary facilities of dependent mobile/manufactured homes. 
    Dependent mobile/manufactured homes shall not be required to have a flush toilet or a bath or shower. 
(Code 1986, § 15-311; Code 2002, § 18-556) 
Secs. 18-557-18-585. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 18-586. - Compliance with subdivision ordinance and zoning code. 
    Mobile/manufactured home subdivisions shall comply with the city subdivision ordinance and the zoning code, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 15-326; Code 2002, § 18-586) 
Sec. 18-587. - Minimum size. 
    The minimum size of a mobile/manufactured home subdivision shall be ten acres. 
(Code 1986, § 15-327; Code 2002, § 18-587) 
Sec. 18-588. - Residences permitted. 
    No residences except mobile/manufactured homes shall be permitted in a mobile/manufactured home subdivision. 
(Code 1986, § 15-328; Code 2002, § 18-588) 
Sec. 18-589. - Minimum lot widths and areas. 
    Minimum effective lot widths in a mobile/manufactured home subdivision shall be 40 feet measured at the front building line, and minimum lot areas shall be 4,000 square feet. At least a five-foot side yard shall be provided on each lot beyond any mobile/manufactured home and additions thereto. In areas not serviced by a public sewer, the minimum additional lot area shall be determined by the inspection officer on the basis of safe and sanitary sewer service. The effective lot width of a mobile/manufactured home lot shall be determined, for interior lots, by measuring at right angles across the lot from one diagonal sideline to the other, and for corner lots the measurement shall be made at right angles from the diagonal having the greatest divergence from perpendicular to the street, through the midpoint of the rear line of the required front yard, to the opposite lot line or an extension thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 15-329; Code 2002, § 18-589) 
Sec. 18-590. - Side lot lines. 
    Sidelines of lots in mobile/manufactured home subdivisions need not be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(Code 1986, § 15-330; Code 2002, § 18-590) 
Sec. 18-591. - Lots to abut public street for certain distance. 
    Regardless of the effective lot width, mobile/manufactured home subdivision lots must abut a public street for at least 25 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 15-331; Code 2002, § 18-591) 
Sec. 18-592. - Greenbelt planting strips. 
    All mobile/manufactured home subdivisions, except those developed under residential estate standards, shall have a greenbelt planting strip, not less than ten feet in width, along all subdivision boundaries. Such greenbelt shall be composed of not less than three rows of shrubs, spaced not more than eight feet apart and which grow to a height of five feet or more after one full growing season and which will eventually grow to a height of not less than 12 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 15-332; Code 2002, § 18-592) 
Chapter 19 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal traffic regulations, 11 O.S. § 22-117; motor vehicles, 47 O.S. § 101 et seq.; alteration of speed limits, 47 O.S. § 11-803; provisions uniform throughout state, 47 O.S. § 15-101; powers of local authorities, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - State highway traffic safety code adopted. 
    The state highway traffic safety code, O.S. Title 47, as amended, is adopted and incorporated in this chapter to the extent applicable within the city as though set forth herein for the purposes of establishing locally appropriate rules and regulations for the control of traffic within the city. The adoption of the state traffic code is not intended to and does not repeal any provision of this chapter but shall be in addition thereto. 
(Code 2002, § 19-1; Ord. No. 2591NS, § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 19-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a way or part of a way through a block for public use, but established for the purpose of specially serving adjoining owners or occupants and for which public use is limited. 
    Boulevards means streets or portions thereof designated officially as through streets, or streets, the traffic on which has the right-of-way over traffic traveling on the intersecting streets. 
    Bus zone means a parking place set aside for the exclusive use of bus parking and so marked with appropriate and adequate signs. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a street when, within any 600 feet along such street, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the street. 
    Crosswalk means that portion of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs or in absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway; or any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Daytime means any time between one hour before sunrise and one hour after sunset. 
    Double parking means parking a vehicle parallel with the curb at a point where cars are lawfully parked between it and the curb and adjacent to such parking. 
    Emergency vehicle means vehicles of fire departments, ambulances and police vehicles, including vehicles owned and operated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation or by any local organization for civil defense as defined by 63 O.S. § 683.3. 
    Fire route means any street so designated by rule of the traffic and transportation commission, as normally used by the fire department or apparatus in attending fires. 
    Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets or highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two roadways 30 or more feet apart, every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting street also includes two roadways 30 or more feet apart, every crossing of two roadways of such streets is a separate intersection. 
    Legal route means any street or avenue within the city which is so posted as a truck route, either through or to an industrial access. 
    Limit lines means lines marked on pavement, curbs or sidewalks for the protection and direction of traffic. 
    Loading zone means that part of a roadway officially set apart as a zone in which the loading and unloading of goods, wares and merchandise shall be the exclusive use thereof, and so marked or indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while so set apart as a loading zone. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled, provided that such term does not include implements of husbandry as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-125. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor or a motorized bicycle. 
    Nighttime means any time between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise. 
    No parking zone means that part of a roadway officially set apart as a zone in which there shall be no parking, except as may be indicated, and so marked or indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while so set apart as a "no parking zone." 
    One-way street means a street where one-way traffic is required. 
    One-way traffic means traffic restricted to move in one direction on any given street. 
    Operator means any person, other than a commercial chauffeur or chauffeur, who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a street or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
    Parking or standing means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Parking zone means a place marked off upon any roadway with lines within which vehicles may park. 
    Passenger zone means that portion of a roadway officially set apart for the use of common carriers in taking on or discharging passengers and so marked or indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while so set apart as a passenger zone. 
    Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
    Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and inclusive of a street not comprising a business district when the property on such street for a distance of 300 feet or more is mainly improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
    Stop or stopping, when required, means complete cessation from movement; when prohibited, any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Taxi zone means that portion of a roadway officially set apart for the use of taxis and the parking and standing of the taxis and so marked or indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while so set apart as a taxi zone. 
    Through truck means any truck entering the city, proceeding through the city and leaving the city on any route; any truck entering the city and terminating therein or any truck having its point of origin within the city, proceeding through the city and leaving the city on any route. 
    Time zone means that part of a roadway officially set apart as a zone in which there shall be no parking during the hours of the day indicated thereon or where there shall be no parking for a longer time than may be indicated by proper signs so placed as to be plainly visible while such part shall be so set apart as a time zone. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for the purpose of travel. 
    Traffic control signs, devices, etc. means all authorized traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings for the control of traffic in the city. 
    Triple parking means parking a vehicle in any manner in such a way that two vehicles are parked in a line between it and the curb. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, provided that the term "vehicle" does not apply to implements of husbandry as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-125. 
(Code 1986, § 16-1; Code 2002, §§ 19-1, 19-2) 
State Law reference- Definitions relating to motor vehicles, 47 O.S. § 1-101 et seq. 
Sec. 19-3. - Chapter extended to streets forming city boundary. 
    All ordinances in effect and part of the laws of the city regulating the operation of motor vehicles and other traffic on the city streets and alleys are extended to and enforced within and upon all streets, roads and highways that form the boundary line of the city and are not within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 16-24; Code 2002, § 19-2) 
Sec. 19-4. - Obedience to chapter. 
    It is unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited or to fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 16-3; Code 2002, § 19-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-102. 
Sec. 19-5. - Valid license required. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the city streets without having first procured either a chauffeur's or operator's license from the state, except as specifically exempted in this chapter or by law. Any violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(b)  Any person who drives a motor vehicle on any public street of the city at a time when his privilege to do so is cancelled, denied, suspended or revoked shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished on first offense by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, and for a second offense or subsequent offense by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs and by imprisonment of not more than 60 days. Each act of driving on the streets of the city as prohibited shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  A record of conviction of any offense committed under this section shall be forwarded by the chief of police to the state department of public safety. 
(Code 1986, § 16-10; Code 2002, § 19-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 6-303. 
Sec. 19-6. - Compliance with driver's license restrictions. 
    No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on the public streets, highways and alleys in violation of the restrictions contained in the state driver's license of the operator thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 16-11; Code 2002, § 19-5) 
State Law reference- Restricted licenses, 47 O.S. § 6-113. 
Sec. 19-7. - Security verification form. 
(a)  The words, phrases and terms used in this section shall have the same meanings and definitions as those contained in 47 O.S. § 7-600, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall carry in such vehicle at all times a current owner's security verification form listing the vehicle or an equivalent form which has been issued by the state department of public safety and shall produce such form upon the request for inspection by any law enforcement officer or representative of the department of public safety. In case of a collision, the form shall be shown upon request to any person affected by the collision. 
(c)  An owner or operator shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's security verification form or an equivalent form from the department of public safety during operation of any of the following vehicles and shall not be required to surrender such form for vehicle registration purposes: 
(1)  Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government or any agency or political subdivision thereof; 
(2)  Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of a business, corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 7-600-7-607, according to the records of the department of public safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance or fleet policy; 
(3)  Any licensed taxicab; and 
(4)  Any vehicle owned by a licensed used motor vehicle dealer. 
(d)  Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall, while operating or using such vehicle, carry either an operator's or an owner's security verification form issued by a carrier, providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon, or an equivalent form issued by the department of public safety reflecting liability coverage. 
(Code 1986, § 16-12.1; Code 2002, § 19-7) 
Sec. 19-8. - Applicability to persons working on highways. 
    Unless specifically made applicable, the sections of this chapter, except those contained in sections 19-45 through 19-47, 19-176 through 19-178, 19-441 through 19-447, 19-449, 19-450, 19-452 through 19-454, 19-486, 19-487, 19-516, 19-546, 19-571, 19-572, 19-601 through 19-606 and 19-667 shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street or to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance or repair of public utilities, provided that all street and public utility operations shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices or flagmen. However, the sections of this chapter shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(Code 1986, § 16-7; Code 2002, § 19-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-105. 
Sec. 19-9. - Riding or driving on sidewalk. 
(a)  No person shall ride any horse or drive any vehicle upon or across any sidewalk at any place other than at a street or alley crossing or driveway intersection. 
(b)  No person shall ride or propel any bicycle, skateboard or roller skates upon or across any sidewalk or parking lot area of any commercially zoned property, public library property or church property without the authorization of the owner of the property. 
(Code 1986, § 16-15; Code 2002, § 19-9) 
State Law reference- Power of city to prohibit riding or driving on sidewalk, 11 O.S. § 22-117. 
Sec. 19-10. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic, unless it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1986, § 16-19; Code 2002, § 19-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1105. 
Sec. 19-11. - Throwing or depositing injurious substances. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or highway. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or highway from such vehicle. 
(d)  No person shall throw any substance at a vehicle or any occupant thereof, nor shall any person throw any substance at a person on or adjacent to a street or highway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-22; Code 2002, § 19-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1110. 
Secs. 19-12-19-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-41. - Enforcement of chapter; direction of traffic by police. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce this chapter. Officers of the police department are authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible and audible signals, in conformity with this chapter. However, if a fire or other emergency occurs or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire department may direct traffic as the conditions may require, notwithstanding the sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 16-43; Code 2002, § 19-41) 
State Law reference- Regulation of traffic by means of police officers, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 
Sec. 19-42. - Violations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise required by applicable law or ordinance, any person who shall violate any section of this chapter, either by doing that which is prohibited or by failing or refusing to do that which is commanded, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense when such commission or omission continues without interruption for more than one day. 
(b)  No punishment imposed under this section shall exceed the penalty under state law for the same offense. 
(Code 1986, § 16-2; Code 2002, § 19-42) 
State Law reference- Penalties for traffic violations, 47 O.S. § 17-101 et seq. 
Sec. 19-43. - Obedience to police officers generally. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Code 1986, § 16-4; Code 2002, § 19-43) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-103; regulation of traffic by means of police officers, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 
Sec. 19-44. - Eluding police officer. 
    Any operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual and audible signal, a red light and a siren, from a peace officer driving a motor vehicle showing such to be an official police, sheriff, highway patrol or state game ranger vehicle directing the operator to bring his vehicle to a stop and who willfully increases his speed or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude such peace officer or who willfully attempts in any other manner to elude the peace officer or who does elude such peace officer is guilty of a misdemeanor. The peace officer, while attempting to stop a violator of this section, may communicate a request for the assistance of other peace officers from any office, department or agency. Any peace officer having knowledge of such request is authorized to render such assistance in stopping the violator and may effect an arrest under this section upon probable cause. 
(Code 1986, § 16-5; Code 2002, § 19-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 540A. 
Sec. 19-45. - Removal of parked vehicles by police. 
(a)  Members of the police department are authorized to remove any vehicle from a street, alley or highway in the city to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by the city when the vehicle: 
(1)  Is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any place where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)  Upon a highway, is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is, because of physical injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; or 
(3)  Is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice, in writing, to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. If any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(c)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in subsection (b) of this section and if the vehicle is not returned to the owner within three days, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles and shall file a copy of the notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. The notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle; the date, time and place from which removed; the reasons for such removal; and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(Code 1986, § 16-155; Code 2002, § 19-45) 
State Law reference- Officers authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicle, 47 O.S. § 11-1002. 
Sec. 19-46. - Changing position of parked vehicles by police. 
    If any vehicle is unoccupied by any person and the removal of the vehicle is authorized under this Code or any other city ordinance or if it shall be necessary and proper in any emergency to remove the vehicle, any police officer shall have authority and is given the power to change the position of any such vehicle and to again park and place the vehicle in the nearest practicable and available place. 
(Code 1986, § 16-156; Code 2002, § 19-46) 
Sec. 19-47. - Removal of stalled vehicle. 
    Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled upon any street or alley or when, because of damage or other reason, it cannot be moved by its own power and consequently blocks the street or interferes with the use of the street or alley by other vehicles, it shall be the duty of the owner or operator thereof to remove the vehicle by towing or otherwise as expeditiously as possible. In no case shall it be permitted to remain more than two hours. 
(Code 1986, § 16-157; Code 2002, § 19-47) 
Sec. 19-48. - Maintenance and construction zones. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to close any street or highway or section thereof within the city to traffic while such street or highway is under repair, maintenance or construction and, in exercising such authority, shall erect or cause to be erected control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that such street or highway has been closed to traffic. 
(b)  When any street or highway has been closed to traffic under this section and traffic control devices or barricades have been erected, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over or around such traffic control devices or barricades or otherwise to enter such closed area. However, this subsection shall not apply to persons while engaged in the construction, maintenance and repair of such highway or to persons entering therein for the protection of lives or property. Persons having their places of residence or places of business within such closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through such area at their own risk. 
(c)  Whenever construction, repair and maintenance of any street or highway is being performed under traffic conditions, the city manager shall erect or cause to be erected traffic control devices to warn and guide the public, and every person using such street or highway shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen or other traffic control devices which are placed to regulate, control and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance area. 
(d)  No person shall remove, change, modify, deface or alter any traffic control device or barricade which has been erected on any highway under this section. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall relieve the city or any of its subdivisions or their contractors, agents, servants or employees from liability for failure to perform any of the duties imposed in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 16-23; Code 2002, § 19-48) 
Sec. 19-49. - Owner presumed operator in parking violations. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with the proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation occurred. 
(Code 1986, § 16-44; Code 2002, § 19-49) 
Sec. 19-50. - Parades. 
(a)  Permit required. Any person desiring to conduct a parade of any description upon the city streets, before conducting the parade, shall obtain permission from the city manager authorizing the holding of such parade. An application shall be made to the city manager, in writing, and shall give the name of the person desiring to hold the parade, the route of the parade and the time when the parade is to be held. The city manager, upon approval of the application, shall inform the chief of the fire department and chief of police of the time and place and route of the holding of such parade. The city manager may, at his discretion, refuse permission for any parade to be held at such time and place as in his opinion would interfere with traffic or otherwise be to the detriment of the welfare of the city. 
(b)  Driving through parade. No vehicle, except ambulances on duty, fire apparatus, physicians' cars on call and police cars, shall be driven through or interrupt any parade or procession without permission of a police officer. 
(Code 1986, § 16-16; Code 2002, § 19-50) 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate or prohibit processions, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 
Sec. 19-51. - Motor vehicle impoundment fee. 
(a)  Any vehicle impounded under the authority granted by this Code or the statutes of the State of Oklahoma shall be stored and held safely until written order for its release, signed by an authorized officer of the city, has been issued. Motor vehicles impounded for the following reasons shall require that such order of release be conditioned on the payment of an impound fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule by the person to whom the release is issued: 
(1)  Where the motor vehicle has an evidentiary value, has directly or indirectly been involved in the commission of a crime, has been used to transport any person who has committed any offense involving the use of a firearm, or is directly or indirectly associated with a drive-by shooting; 
(2)  When a police officer effects the arrest and removal of the owner or operator of a vehicle from the vehicle; 
(3)  When the vehicle bears a license plate that has expired for a period in excess of 90 days, bears a license plate that has been altered or tampered with or bears a temporary tag issued more than 30 days prior to the impoundment, or bears no license plate that would be in conformance with the Oklahoma Vehicle License Act (47 O.S. § 1101 et seq.); or 
(4)  When the person operating the vehicle on public streets or public property is driving under a suspended or revoked driver's license or is operating a vehicle with an invalid driver's license or no driver's license. 
(b)  This impound fee shall be independent of any fines, costs or fees that may be assessed from citations issued to any person for violation of traffic laws or other ordinance violations involving the impounded vehicle and in addition to any fees owed to the towing service for the impoundment and storage. The chief of police is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations consistent with this chapter to implement this section. All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited into the police vehicle equipment fund. 
(Code 2002, § 19-51; Ord. No. 2440NS, § 1, 8-16-2010) 
Secs. 19-52-19-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC COMMISSION 

Sec. 19-76. - Created; membership, appointment. 
(a)  It is hereby established the traffic commission to be composed of seven city residents. The mayor shall appoint the members with the consent and approval of the city commission. 
(b)  In addition to the seven members of the commission as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the city manager, police chief and city engineer or their designees shall be ex-officio members of the traffic commission. These members shall have no vote in matters coming before the commission. 
(Code 1986, § 16-41(a), (b); Code 2002, § 19-76; Ord. No. 2278NS, § 2, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 19-77. - Terms of office. 
    The term of each member of the traffic commission shall be three years or until the successor is duly qualified. The terms of all members shall commence and terminate on January 1 of the year of appointment or termination. 
(Code 1986, § 16-41(d); Code 2002, § 19-77; Ord. No. 2278NS, § 3, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 19-78. - Compensation. 
    All members of the traffic commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1986, § 16-41(c); Code 2002, § 19-78; Ord. No. 2278NS, § 4, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 19-79. - Meetings; officers. 
(a)  The traffic and transportation commission shall meet monthly on the fourth Tuesday of each month. The commission shall also meet upon special call by the mayor, city manager, chairman or vice-chairman of the commission or at the request of the city commission. 
(b)  The commission shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary, who shall each serve for a period of one year and until their successors shall be elected. 
(Code 1986, § 16-42(e); Code 2002, § 19-79) 
Sec. 19-80. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  General duties. The traffic and transportation commission shall coordinate traffic and transportation activities, receive complaints and conduct hearings having to do with traffic and transportation matters. 
(b)  Recommendations. The commission shall recommend to the city commission and city officials in writing, signed by the chairman, ways and means toward improving traffic, transportation and parking conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic movement and regulations. 
(c)  Other duties. The commission shall carry out any and all further duties which may be imposed upon the commission by the city's general or traffic ordinances. 
(d)  Referral for recommendations. All ordinances affecting the movement of traffic, transportation or parking and all measures for the facilitation of traffic movement should first be referred to the commission for recommendations. Recommendations should be made to the city commission in writing and should be signed by the chairman of the commission. 
(Code 1986, § 16-42(a)-(d); Code 2002, § 19-80) 
Secs. 19-81-19-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS 

Sec. 19-106. - Traffic control devices ratified. 
    All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings in place on the date of adoption of this Code are expressly ratified and confirmed by the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 19-106) 
Sec. 19-107. - Obedience; placement required for enforcement. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(b)  No section of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1986, § 16-61; Code 2002, § 19-107) 
State Law reference- Signs required, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 
Sec. 19-108. - Traffic control signal legend. 
(a)  Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights or colored lighted arrows successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal, except when prohibited under section 19-48, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in section 19-110, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter. 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 19-110, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)  Steady red indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stopline, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown except as provided in subsection (a)(3)b of this section. 
b.  Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street after stopping as required by subsection (a)(3)a of this section. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 19-110, pedestrians facing a steady circular red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(b)  If an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1986, § 16-62; Code 2002, § 19-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-202. 
Sec. 19-109. - Right turn on red light. 
    Vehicular traffic which has come to a complete stop in obedience of a steady red or stop traffic control signal as provided for in this chapter may turn right from the appropriate lane after coming to the required stop unless otherwise prohibited by the city. The prohibition of right turns on red signals shall be indicated by signs informing drivers that such turns are prohibited. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(Code 1986, § 16-63; Code 2002, § 19-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-202. 
Sec. 19-110. - Pedestrian control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or "wait" or "don't walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing a walk signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way in the direction of the signal by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Wait or don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of a wait or don't walk signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the wait or don't walk signal is showing. 
(Code 1986, § 16-64; Code 2002, § 19-110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-203. 
Sec. 19-111. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Whenever an illuminated red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked or, if none, before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth in section 19-170. 
(Code 1986, § 16-65; Code 2002, § 19-111) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-204. 
Sec. 19-112. - Pedestrian-actuated school crossing signals. 
    Whenever a pedestrian-actuated school crossing signal is provided, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Flashing yellow. 
a.  When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution. 
b.  Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may actuate the signal control switch and shall wait until steady red alone is shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal. 
(2)  Steady yellow alone. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or stop signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or pass the signal when the red or stop signal is exhibited. 
b.  No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which the signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown. 
(3)  Steady red. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, before passing the signal or entering the intersection and shall remain standing until flashing yellow is shown alone. 
b.  Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(4)  Steady red and steady yellow combined. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and that such vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow signal is shown alone. 
b.  Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is about to be shown and shall not enter the signal controlled roadway or intersection or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular traffic, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 16-66; Code 2002, § 19-112) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-205. 
Sec. 19-113. - Stop signs; yield signs. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in this chapter or by law. 
(b)  Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, as near as practicable to the nearest line of the intersecting roadway; however, such yield signs shall not be erected upon the approaches of but one of the intersecting streets. 
(c)  Every stop sign shall bear the word "stop." Every yield sign erected or replaced after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall bear the word "yield." Every stop sign and every yield sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by internal illumination or by a floodlight projected on the face of the sign or by efficient reflecting elements in or on the face of the sign. 
(d)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stopline, but, if none, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stopline, but, if none, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-67; Code 2002, § 19-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-703; state sign manual, 47 O.S. § 15-104; authority to designate through highways and "stop" and "yield" intersections, 47 O.S. § 15-108. 
Sec. 19-114. - Unauthorized display. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, which projects any flashing or revolving beams of light or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any street or highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. However, the city commission may permit, under such conditions as the city commission may deem proper, commercial or other advertising upon any traffic sign located on streets or highways within the city and not designated as either state or federal highways or extensions thereof. 
(b)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(c)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is empowered to remove the sign, signal or marking or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1986, § 16-68; Code 2002, § 19-114) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-206. 
Sec. 19-115. - Alteration, defacement, injury or removal. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device, sign, signal, parking meter or post or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 16-69; Code 2002, § 19-115) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-207A. 
Secs. 19-116-19-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 19-141. - Applicability to animals. 
    Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-driven vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those sections which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1986, § 16-6; Code 2002, § 19-141) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-104. 
Sec. 19-142. - Following fire apparatus or emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(b)  The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any emergency vehicle or shall not purposely drive to any location on a street where an emergency exists which would interfere with the free movement of authorized emergency vehicles or any other traffic using the street at that location. For the purpose of this subsection, the definition of the term "emergency" shall include traffic accidents, airplane accidents, disasters, explosions, civil disturbances and, without limitation by the foregoing, any other related circumstances which tend to cause traffic congestion. The purpose of this subsection is to eliminate sightseers and other persons who do not have official business at the scene of an emergency and whose presence would tend to cause traffic congestion. 
(Code 1986, § 16-20; Code 2002, § 19-142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1108. 
Sec. 19-143. - Crossing fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway, without the consent of the fire department official in command. No person shall walk or step on or throw any material on or across such fire hose. 
(Code 1986, § 16-21; Code 2002, § 19-143) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1109. 
Sec. 19-144. - Obstruction of driver's view or control. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons exceeding three as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 16-18; Code 2002, § 19-144) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1104(a), (b). 
Sec. 19-145. - Altering state speed limits. 
(a)  Whenever the city determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the maximum speed permitted pursuant to 47 O.S. § 11-801 et seq. is greater or less than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon a highway or part of a highway, the city may determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit thereon which: 
(1)  Decreases the limit at intersections; 
(2)  Increases the limit within an urban district, but not to more than 65 miles per hour; or 
(3)  Decreases the limit outside an urban district, but not to less than 30 miles per hour. 
(b)  The city shall determine by an engineering and traffic investigation the proper maximum speed for all arterial streets and shall declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit which may be greater or less than the maximum speed permitted under state law for an urban district. 
(c)  Any altered limit established as authorized in this section shall be effective at all times or during hours of darkness or at other times as may be determined when appropriate signs giving notice are erected upon such street or highway. 
(d)  As to streets and highways within the corporate limits which have been constructed or reconstructed with state or federal funds, the city shall have joint authority with the state transportation commission to establish or alter speed limits; provided, however, the speed limit on an interstate highway within the corporate limits shall not be decreased to less than 60 miles per hour and, provided further, the city shall not impose speed limits on any such street or highway substantially lower than those justified by the highway design, capacity and traffic volume as determined by engineering studies. 
(e)  Not more than six such alterations as authorized in this section shall be made per mile along a street or highway, except for reduced limits at intersections, and the difference between adjacent limits shall not be more than ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1986, § 16-81; Code 2002, § 19-145) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-803. 
Sec. 19-146. - Driving at slow speed. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduces speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(b)  Whenever the state transportation commission determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any part of a street consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, it may determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Code 1986, § 16-82; Code 2002, § 19-146) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-804. 
Sec. 19-147. - Driving on right side of roadway. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway, provided that any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic; or 
(5)  Upon a roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the righthand lane when available for traffic or as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(c)  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) of this section. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-84; Code 2002, § 19-147) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-301. 
Sec. 19-148. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right. Upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1986, § 16-85; Code 2002, § 19-148) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-302. 
Sec. 19-149. - Overtaking vehicle on left; signal. 
    The following shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules stated in this chapter: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(3)  Every driver who intends to pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, which requires moving his vehicle from one lane of traffic to another, shall first see that such movement can be made with safety and shall proceed to pass only after giving a proper signal by hand or mechanical device. 
(Code 1986, § 16-86; Code 2002, § 19-149) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-303. 
Sec. 19-150. - Passing on right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-87; Code 2002, § 19-150) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-304. 
Sec. 19-151. - Limitations on passing on left. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle shall return to the righthand side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1986, § 16-88; Code 2002, § 19-151) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-305. 
Sec. 19-152. - Driving to left of center of roadway. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway when: 
(1)  Approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard if another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  Approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing unless otherwise indicated by official traffic control devices. 
(3)  The view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The limitations in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway or under the conditions described in section 19-147(a)(2) or to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-89; Code 2002, § 19-152) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-306. 
Sec. 19-153. - No passing zones. 
(a)  The traffic and transportation commission is authorized to determine those portions of any street where overtaking and passing or driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(b)  Where signs or markings are in place to define a no passing zone as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, no driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within such no passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no passing zone throughout its length. 
(Code 1986, § 16-90; Code 2002, § 19-153) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-307. 
Sec. 19-154. - One-way streets and rotary traffic islands. 
(a)  The traffic and transportation commission may designate any street or any separate roadway for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. 
(c)  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1986, § 16-91; Code 2002, § 19-154) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-308; authority of city to designate one-way streets, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 
Sec. 19-155. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply. 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as near as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety and then giving a signal, not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle, of his intention to change lanes. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of allocation. 
(3)  Upon a roadway which is divided into four or more lanes, a vehicle proceeding at less than the maximum posted speed, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, shall not impede the normal flow of traffic by driving in the left lane. Such vehicle shall be driven in the right-hand lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(4)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
(Code 1986, § 16-92; Code 2002, § 19-155; Ord. No. 2026NS, § 1, 10-15-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-309. 
Sec. 19-156. - Following too closely. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
(b)  The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residential district and which is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or another vehicle. 
(c)  No vehicle which has more than six tires in contact with the road shall approach from the rear of another vehicle which has more than six tires in contact with the road closer than 300 feet, except when passing such vehicle. 
(d)  Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residential district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. The distance between such vehicles shall be a minimum of 200 feet under all conditions. This subsection shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Code 1986, § 16-93; Code 2002, § 19-156) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-310. 
Sec. 19-157. - Driving on divided highways. 
    Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the righthand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic control devices or peace officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through a permanent opening in the dividing space, barrier or section or at a permanent crossover or intersection as established unless specifically permitted by public authority. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any temporary opening in a dividing space, barrier or section or at a temporary crossover or intersection unless specifically authorized by a public authority or at the direction of a peace officer. 
(Code 1986, § 16-94; Code 2002, § 19-157) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-311. 
Sec. 19-158. - Entering or leaving controlled access roadways. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Code 1986, § 16-95; Code 2002, § 19-158) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-312. 
Sec. 19-159. - Use of controlled access roadways. 
    The traffic and transportation commission may, with respect to any controlled access roadway in the city, prohibit the use of any such roadway by pedestrians, bicycles or other nonmotorized traffic or by any person operating a motor-driven cycle. The traffic and transportation commission shall erect and maintain official signs on the controlled access roadway on which such regulations are applicable, and when so erected no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. 
(Code 1986, § 16-96; Code 2002, § 19-159) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-313. 
Sec. 19-160. - Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has entered the intersection or which is so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(b)  When two vehicles enter or approach an intersection from different streets at approximately the same time, except in subsection (a) of this section, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rules declared in this section are modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 16-97; Code 2002, § 19-160) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-401. 
Sec. 19-161. - Turning left at intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this chapter, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
(Code 1986, § 16-98; Code 2002, § 19-161) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-402. 
Sec. 19-162. - Entering stop or yield intersection. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in this chapter or by law. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by section 19-113(d) and after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another street or which is approaching so closely on such street as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver having so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions or shall stop if necessary as provided in section 19-113(e) and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another street so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver having so yielded may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding. If such driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
(d)  Where two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals on two or more intersecting cross streets and are approaching so as to enter the intersection at the same time where each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where one vehicle is required to stop and the other to slow or take caution, the one slowing or taking caution shall have the right-of-way. Where one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the right-of-way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not so entered the intersection. 
(Code 1986, § 16-99; Code 2002, § 19-162) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-403; authority to designate through highways and "stop" and "yield" intersections, 47 O.S. § 15-108. 
Sec. 19-163. - Emerging from private road, driveway or building. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a street from a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such street. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-100; Code 2002, § 19-163) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 11-404, 11-704. 
Sec. 19-164. - Operation of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privilege set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits, so long as he does not endanger life or property; provided, however, no emergency vehicle except police vehicles shall exceed posted maximum speed limits by more than ten miles per hour. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of state law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The privileges of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such privileges protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1986, § 16-101; Code 2002, § 19-164) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-106; audible and visual signals on vehicles, 47 O.S. § 12-218. 
Sec. 19-165. - Operation of vehicle on approach of emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of state law or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the righthand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the streets. 
(Code 1986, § 16-102; Code 2002, § 19-165) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-405; audible and visual signals on vehicles, 47 O.S. § 12-218. 
Sec. 19-166. - Starting parked vehicle. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1986, § 16-103; Code 2002, § 19-166) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-603. 
Sec. 19-167. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and bypassing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(b)  The traffic and transportation commission may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection. When markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Code 1986, § 16-104; Code 2002, § 19-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-601. 
Sec. 19-168. - Turning on curve or crest of grade. 
    No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within 500 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 16-105; Code 2002, § 19-168) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-602. 
Sec. 19-169. - Safe turning movements; signals required for turning, stopping or decreasing speed. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway, as required in section 19-167, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway, until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section if any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(d)  Any stop or turn signal when required in this section shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Any motor vehicle in use on a street shall be equipped with and the required signal shall be given by signal lamps when the distance from the center to the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles. 
(f)  All signals required in this section to be given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn, hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1986, § 16-106; Code 2002, § 19-169) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 11-604-11-606. 
Sec. 19-170. - Operation of vehicles at railroad crossings. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. This requirement shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train. 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance, and such railroad train, because of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard. 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(c)  The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire or of any school bus carrying any school child or of any vehicle carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, except as provided in this section, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required in this subsection and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of any such vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing such crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
(d)  No stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed. 
(Code 1986, § 16-107; Code 2002, § 19-170) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 11-701, 11-702. 
Sec. 19-171. - Meeting or overtaking stopped school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is stopped to take on or discharge school children and on which the red loading signals are in operation is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the school bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants. 
(b)  Every school bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words "school bus" in letters not less than eight inches in height and in addition shall be equipped with visual signals meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-218, which shall be actuated by the driver of the school bus whenever but only whenever such vehicle is stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(d)  When a school bus is being operated upon a street for purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from school, all markings thereon indicating "school bus" shall be covered or concealed. 
(Code 1986, § 16-108; Code 2002, § 19-171) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-705. 
Sec. 19-172. - Backing. 
    No vehicle shall be backed upon any street or highway except for such distance as may be necessary to permit the vehicle to enter the proper driving lane from a parked position. Such backing shall be done only after the driver of the vehicle has ascertained that such movement can be made without endangering other traffic. 
(Code 1986, § 16-109; Code 2002, § 19-172) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1102. 
Sec. 19-173. - Driving through safety zone. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(Code 1986, § 16-110; Code 2002, § 19-173) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1301. 
Sec. 19-174. - U-turns. 
(a)  Restricted. No U-turn shall be made by any motor vehicle at any intersection, except where designated as permissible. No U-turn shall be made by a vehicle on any street within the block between any street intersection, except where designated as permissible. 
(b)  Kickapoo Spur. No U-turn by southbound traffic shall be permitted at the Kickapoo Spur. 
(Code 1986, §§ 16-111, 16-112; Code 2002, § 19-174) 
Sec. 19-175. - Driving through property for turning around or for avoiding use of street or traffic control device. 
    No person operating a motor vehicle shall drive through a commercial driveway, commercial or municipal parking lot or any other private property for the purpose of making a turnaround or for the purpose of avoiding the use of a street or obedience to a traffic control device, except when directed to do so by police officers. 
(Code 1986, § 16-113; Code 2002, § 19-175) 
Sec. 19-176. - Reckless driving. 
    It shall be deemed reckless driving for any person to drive a motor vehicle in a careless or wanton manner without regard for the safety of persons or property or in violation of the conditions outlined in section 19-726. Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding 30 days or punishment by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1986, § 16-115; Code 2002, § 19-176) 
State Law reference- Reckless driving, 47 O.S. § 11-901; basic speed restrictions, 47 O.S. § 11-801 
Sec. 19-177. - Careless driving. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in a careless manner on the highways, streets or alleys within the city limits without regard for the safety of persons or property of others or to drive at a speed greater than or less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the highway, street or alley. 
(Code 1986, § 16-116; Code 2002, § 19-177) 
Sec. 19-178. - Driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. 
(a)  It is unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to drive, operate or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within this city who: 
(1)  Has a blood or breath alcohol concentration, as defined in section 19-179 of this chapter, of 0.08 or more at the time of a test of such person's blood or breath administered within two hours after the arrest of such person; 
(2)  Is under the influence of alcohol; 
(3)  Is under the influence of any intoxicating substance other than alcohol which may render such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor vehicle; or 
(4)  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any other intoxicating substance which may render such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor vehicle. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with a violation of this section is or has been lawfully entitled to use alcohol or a controlled dangerous substance or any other intoxicating substance shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. 
(c)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 2002, § 19-178; Ord. No. 2022NS, § 1, 9-17-2001) 
Sec. 19-178.5. - Driving while impaired by alcohol. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle while his ability to operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the consumption of alcohol. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 2002, § 19-178.5; Ord. No. 2022NS, § 2, 9-17-2001) 
State Law reference- Persons under influence of intoxicating substances, 47 O.S. § 11-902. 
Sec. 19-179. - Admission of evidence shown by tests for alcohol or drugs. 
(a)  Upon the trial of any criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or any other intoxicating substance, or the combined influence of alcohol or any other intoxicating substance, evidence of the alcohol concentration in the blood or breath of the person as shown by analysis of the blood or breath of the person performed in accordance with the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 752 and 759 or evidence of the presence and concentration of any other intoxicating substance as shown by analysis of such person's blood, breath, saliva or urine specimens in accordance with the provisions of sections 47 O.S. § 752 or 759 is admissible. Evidence that the person has refused to submit to either of said analyses is also admissible. For the purpose of this section, when the person is under the age of 21 years, evidence that there was, at the time of the tests, any measurable quantity of alcohol is prima facie evidence that the person is under the influence of alcohol in violation of section of this Code. For persons 21 years of age or older: 
(1)  Evidence that there was, at the time of the test, an alcohol concentration of 0.05 or less, is prima facie evidence that the person was not under the influence of alcohol; 
(2)  Evidence that there was, at the time of the test, an alcohol concentration in excess of 0.05, but less than 0.08, is relevant evidence that the person's ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired by alcohol. However, no person shall be convicted of the offense of operating or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while such person's ability to operate such vehicle was impaired by alcohol, solely because there was, at the time of the test, an alcohol concentration in excess of 0.05 but less than 0.08 in the blood or breath of the person in the absence of additional evidence that such person's ability to operate such vehicle was affected by alcohol to the extent that the public health and safety was threatened, or that said person had violated a state statute or local ordinance in the operation of a motor vehicle; and 
(3)  Evidence that there was, at the time of the test, an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more, shall be admitted as prima facie evidence that the person was under the influence of alcohol. 
(b)  For purposes of this section and this chapter, the term "alcohol concentration" means grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood if the blood was tested, or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath, if the breath was tested. 
(c)  To be admissible in a proceeding, the evidence must first be qualified by establishing that the test was administered to the person within two hours after the arrest of the person. 
(Code 1986, § 16-119; Code 2002, § 19-179; Ord. No. 1952NS, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 2022NS, § 3, 9-17-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 756. 
Sec. 19-180. - Transportation of alcoholic beverages in vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any alcoholic beverage, except in the original container which shall not have been opened and the seal upon which shall not have been broken and from which the original cap or cork shall not have been removed, unless the opened container is in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a vehicle commonly known as a station wagon and panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion. 
(Code 1986, § 16-25; Code 2002, § 19-180) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537. 
Sec. 19-181. - Transportation of low-point beer in vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any low-point beer, except in the original container which shall not have been opened and from which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed, unless the opened container is in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion. 
(Code 1986, § 16-26; Code 2002, § 19-181) 
Sec. 19-182. - Use of safety belts. 
(a)  Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in this state shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt system, required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "passenger car" shall mean "vehicle" as defined in 47 O.S. § 1102, except that the term "passenger car" shall not include trucks, truck tractors, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles or vehicles used primarily for farm use and licensed pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 1-125. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger vehicle in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician licensed in this state that he is unable to wear a safety belt system for medical reasons, provided the issuance of such verification by a physician, in good faith, shall not give rise to nor shall such physician thereby incur any liability whatsoever, in damages or otherwise, to any person injured because of such failure to wear a safety belt system. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a route carrier of the U.S. Postal Service. 
(d)  The department of public safety shall not record or assess points for violations of this section on any license holder's traffic record maintained by the department. 
(e)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and shall pay court costs in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 16-120; Code 2002, § 19-182) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-417. 
Sec. 19-183. - Child passenger restraint system. 
(a)  For purposes of this section the term "child passenger restraint system" means an infant or child passenger restraint system that meets the federal standards for crash-tested restraint systems as set by the United States Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Every driver, when transporting a child under four years of age in a motor vehicle operated on the city roadways, streets or highways, shall provide for the protection of the child by properly using a child passenger restraint system or a properly secured seat belt in the rear seat of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  Children four or five years of age shall be protected by use of a child passenger restraint system or a seat belt. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A driver who is not a resident of the state; 
(2)  The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle or other motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state or federal laws; 
(3)  The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle; 
(4)  A driver of a vehicle if all of the seat belts in the vehicle are in use; or 
(5)  The transportation of children who, for medical reasons, are unable to be placed in such devices. 
(e)  A law enforcement officer is authorized to stop a vehicle if it appears that the driver of the vehicle has violated this section and to give an oral warning to the driver. The warning shall advise the driver of the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to install or use a child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor vehicle. 
(f)  Any person convicted of violating subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and shall pay an amount as described in the city fee schedule for court costs. This fine shall be suspended for a first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system. 
(Code 1986, § 16-121; Code 2002, § 19-183) 
Sec. 19-184. - License plate display. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the streets, roadways or thoroughfares unless such vehicle displays a current and appropriate identification number plate as required by the State of Oklahoma. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to display upon any vehicle owned by such person within Oklahoma, any license plate issued by any state or country other than Oklahoma, unless there shall be displayed upon such vehicle at all times a current license plate and decal assigned to it by the Oklahoma Tax Commission or the vehicle shall display evidence that the vehicle is registered as a nonresident vehicle pursuant to rules promulgated by the Oklahoma Tax Commission. A violation of this section shall be presumed to have occurred if a person who is the holder of an Oklahoma Driver's License operates a vehicle owned by such person and there is not displayed on the vehicle a current Oklahoma license plate and decal, unless the vehicle is owned by a member of the armed forces of the United States assigned to duty in Oklahoma in compliance with official military or naval orders or the spouse of such member of the armed forces. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate any vehicle registered as a commercial vehicle and displaying a commercial vehicle license plate issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission, without the name of the commercial establishment or the words "Commercial Vehicle" permanently and prominently displayed upon the outside of the vehicle in letters not less two inches high and two inches wide. Such letters shall be in sharp contrast to the background and shall be of sufficient shape and color to be readily legible during daylight hours from a distance of 50 feet while the vehicle is not in motion. 
(d)  License plates shall be placed and fastened securely to the rear of the vehicle and the numbers and letters of such plate shall be upright reading from left to right and clearly visible at all times. 
(Code 2002, § 19-184; Ord. No. 2382NS, § 1, 12-1-2008) 
Sec. 19-185. - Texting while driving prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway within this city while using a hand-held electronic communication device to manually compose, send or read an electronic text message while the motor vehicle is in motion. 
(b)  Any person who violated the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply if the person is using a cellular telephone or electronic communication device for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an imminent emergency situation: 
(1)  An emergency response operator; 
(2)  A hospital, clinic; physician's office or health [care provider]; 
(3)  A provider of ambulance services; 
(4)  A provider of firefighting services; or 
(5)  A law enforcement agency. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cellular telephone means an analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth reserved for cellular telephones. 
    Compose, send or read with respect to a text message means the manual entry, sending or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any person or device. 
    Electronic communication device means an electronic device that permits the user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than through an oral transfer or wire communication. The term "electronic communication device" does not include a device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or a voice-operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a motor vehicle, or a hands-free device that allows the user to write, send or read a text message without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate or initiate a feature or function. 
    Text message includes a text-based message, instant message, electronic message, photo, video or electronic mail. 
(e)  The ordinance from which this section derives shall become effective November 1, 2015. 
(Code 2002, § 19-185; Ord. No. 2576NS, § 1, 10-19-2015) 
Secs. 19-186-19-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 19-211. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move and no owner shall cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any street or highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or which does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in this article or which is equipped in any manner in violation of this article. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent this article. 
(c)  The sections of this article with respect to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or farm tractors, except as made applicable in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 16-231; Code 2002, § 19-211) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-101. 
Sec. 19-212. - Use of lighted lamps. 
    Every vehicle upon a street or highway within the city at any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 500 feet ahead shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices as required in this article, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 16-232; Code 2002, § 19-212) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-201. 
Sec. 19-213. - Visibility distance of lamps; mounted height of lamps. 
(a)  Whenever a requirement is declared in this article as to distance from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such requirement shall apply during the times stated in section 19-212 in respect to a vehicle without a load when upon a straight, level, unlighted highway, under normal atmospheric conditions, unless a different time or condition is expressly stated. 
(b)  Whenever a requirement is declared in this article as to the mounted height of lamps or devices, it shall mean from the center of such lamp or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when the vehicle is without a load. 
(Code 1986, § 16-233; Code 2002, § 19-213) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-202. 
Sec. 19-214. - Headlights. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with at least two headlamps with at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, which headlamps shall comply with the requirements and limitations set forth in this article. 
(b)  Every headlamp upon every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle and motor-driven cycle, shall be located at a height measured from the center of the headlamp of not more than 54 inches and not less than 22 inches to be measured as set forth in section 19-213. 
(Code 1986, § 16-234(a), (c); Code 2002, § 19-214) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-203. 
Sec. 19-215. - Taillights. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer and any other vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with at least one taillamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as required in this article, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that for a train of vehicles only the taillamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified. Every such vehicle, other than a truck tractor, registered in this state and manufactured or assembled after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall be equipped with at least two taillamps mounted on the rear, on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, which, when lighted as required in this article, shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Every taillamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not more than 72 inches and not less than 20 inches. 
(c)  Either a taillamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any taillamp, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlamps, clearance lamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. 
(Code 1986, § 16-235; Code 2002, § 19-215) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-204. 
Sec. 19-216. - Lamps on parked vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following requirements: At least one lamp shall display a white or amber light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and the same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible at a distance of 500 feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location of such lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. The preceding requirements shall not apply to a motor-driven cycle. 
(b)  Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1986, § 16-236; Code 2002, § 19-216) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-214. 
Sec. 19-217. - Brakes generally. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
(b)  Every trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and shall be so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and such brakes shall be so designed and connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle the brakes shall be automatically applied. 
(c)  Every singly driven motor vehicle and every combination of motor vehicles shall be equipped with parking brakes adequate to hold a vehicle or combination on any grade on which it is operated under any condition of loading, on a surface free from snow or ice. 
(Code 1986, § 16-237(a), (c), (d); Code 2002, § 19-217) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-301(a), (c), (e). 
Sec. 19-218. - Maintenance of brakes. 
    All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 16-238; Code 2002, § 19-218) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-303. 
Sec. 19-219. - Horns and warning devices. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a street or highway, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his horn, but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a street or highway. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this section. 
(c)  It is permissible but not required that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. 
(d)  Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by the state department of public safety, but such siren shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which event the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren when reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 16-239; Code 2002, § 19-219) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-401. 
Sec. 19-220. - Mufflers; exhaust system modifications. 
    Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in any manner which will amplify or increase the noise or sound emitted louder than that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 16-240; Code 2002, § 19-220) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-402. 
Sec. 19-221. - Glass coating materials or sunscreening devices on windshields and windows. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Glass coating material or sunscreening devices means materials, films, applications or devices which are used in conjunction with approved vehicle glazing materials for the purpose of reducing the effects of sun. 
    Light transmission means the percentage of total light which is allowed to pass through a window. 
    Luminous reflectance means the ratio of the amount of total light, expressed in percentages, which is reflected outward by the glass coating material or sunscreening device to the amount of total light falling on the glass coating materials. 
    Manufacturer means a person who: 
(1)  Engages in the manufacturing or assembling of sunscreening devices; or 
(2)  Fabricates, laminates or tempers glazing materials, incorporating the capacity to reflect or reduce the transmittance of light during the manufacturing process. 
    Multipurpose vehicle means any vehicle capable of carrying goods or persons and which is manufactured on a truck frame. 
    Window means the windshield, side or rear glass of a motor vehicle, including any glazing material, glass coating or sunscreen device. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person to sell, install or to operate a motor vehicle with any object or material placed, displayed, installed, affixed or applied upon the windshield or side or rear windows or with any object or material so placed, displayed, installed, affixed or applied in or upon the motor vehicle so as to obstruct or reduce a driver's clear view through the windshield or side or rear windows, except as provided by this section. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to place, install, affix or apply any transparent material upon the windshield or side or rear windows of any motor vehicle if such material alters the color or reduces the light transmittance of such windshield or side or rear windows, except as provided in this section. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Side or back windows that have a substance or material in conjunction with glazing material that has a light transmission of at least 25 percent and a luminous reflectance of, at most, 25 percent; 
(2)  Front side wing vents and windows that have a substance or material not attached in conjunction with glazing material, which is used by a vehicle operator on a moving vehicle during daylight hours; 
(3)  Rearview mirrors; 
(4)  Adjustable nontransparent sun visors which are mounted forward of the side windows and are not attached to the glass; 
(5)  Signs, stickers or other materials which are displayed in a 49-square-inch area in the lower corner of the windshield farthest removed from the driver or signs, stickers or other materials which are displayed in a 49-square-inch area in the lower corner of the windshield nearest the driver; 
(6)  Direction, designation or termination signs on buses if the signs do not interfere with the driver's clear view of approaching traffic; 
(7)  Rear window wiper motors; 
(8)  Rear window defrosters or defoggers; 
(9)  Rear truck lid handle or hinges; 
(10)  Side windows to the rear of the driver or back windows that have a substance or material in conjunction with glazing material that has a light transmission of at least ten percent and luminous reflectance of, at most, 25 percent on all vehicles manufactured prior to 1996-year models, if the motor vehicle is equipped with outside mirrors on both lefthand and righthand sides of the vehicle that are so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway through each mirror for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the motor vehicle; 
(11)  Transparent material which is installed, affixed or applied to the topmost portion of the windshield if: 
a.  It does not extend downward beyond the AS-1 line or more than five inches from the top of the windshield, whichever is closer to the top of the windshield; and 
b.  The material is not red or amber in color; 
(12)  All windows to the rear of the driver's seat in a vehicle licensed as a bus, as defined by 47 O.S. § 1-105, or a taxicab, as defined by 47 O.S. § 1-174; and 
(13)  Vehicles not subject to registration in the state. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit the use and placement of federal, state or political subdivision certificates on any windows as are required by applicable laws. 
(f)  Louvered materials, when installed as designed, shall not reduce the area of the driver's visibility below 50 percent, as measured on a horizontal plane. When such materials are used in conjunction with the rear window, the measurement shall be made based upon the driver's view from inside the rearview mirror. 
(g)  The commissioner of public safety, upon application from a person required for medical reasons to be shielded from the direct rays of the sun, supported by written attestation of such fact from a physician licensed pursuant to 59 O.S. § 495, may issue an exemption from this section for a motor vehicle belonging to such person or in which such person is a habitual passenger. Any person may operate a vehicle or alter the color or reduce the light transmitted through the side or rear windows of a vehicle in accordance with an exemption issued by the commissioner. 
(h)  This section shall not apply to implements of husbandry, as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-125. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to automobile manufacturers that comply with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 205 or to multipurpose vehicles with windows that are in compliance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 205, regardless of whether the glass coating or sunscreening device is added by the automobile manufacturer or a manufacturer as defined by this section. 
(j)  This section shall not apply to law enforcement vehicles which are owned by the state or a political subdivision thereof. 
(k)  Any person who violates this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 16-241; Code 2002, § 19-221) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-422. 
Secs. 19-222-19-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ACCIDENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Accidents and accident reports, 47 O.S. § 10-101 et seq. 

Sec. 19-251. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or imprisoned in the city jail not exceeding 30 days or punished by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1986, § 16-256; Code 2002, § 19-251) 
Sec. 19-252. - Police authority to investigate. 
    The police department is authorized to investigate accidents involving motor vehicles on private property where the public is invited or on public property. 
(Code 1986, § 16-257; Code 2002, § 19-252) 
Sec. 19-253. - Damage to vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section 19-254. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 16-258; Code 2002, § 19-253) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-103. 
Sec. 19-254. - Duty to give information and render aid. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his correct name, address and registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and security verification form to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. 
(Code 1986, § 16-259; Code 2002, § 19-254) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-104A; accidents involving death, 47 O.S. § 10-102.1; nonfatal injury, 47 O.S. § 10-102. 
Sec. 19-255. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle that is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the correct name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle and provide the operator or owner with information from his security verification form, as defined in 47 O.S. § 7-600, or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and providing information from his security verification form and a statement of the circumstances. 
(Code 1986, § 16-260; Code 2002, § 19-255) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-105. 
Sec. 19-256. - Duty upon striking fixtures upon highway. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and security verification form and shall make report of such accident when and as required in section 19-258. 
(Code 1986, § 16-261; Code 2002, § 19-256) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-106. 
Sec. 19-257. - Immediate notice of accident. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department after complying with the requirements of 47 O.S. § 10-104. 
(Code 1986, § 16-262(a); Code 2002, § 19-257) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-107. 
Sec. 19-258. - Written report of accident; notice to other parties; ancillary proceedings. 
(a)  The operator of a motor vehicle which is in any manner involved in a collision upon any road, street, highway or elsewhere within this city resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or in which it is apparent that damage to one vehicle or other property is in excess of $300.00 shall forward a written report of such collision to the department of public safety if settlement of the collision has not been made within six months after the date of the accident and provided that if a settlement has been made a report of such settlement must be made by the parties. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-202, if any party involved in a collision files a report under this section, the department shall notify all other parties involved in the collision, as specified in the report, that a report has been filed, and all other parties shall then furnish the department, within ten days, such information as the department may request to determine whether the parties were in compliance with the requirements of 47 O.S. § 7-601 et seq. at the time of the collision. Upon a finding that an owner or driver was not in compliance with 47 O.S. § 7-601 et seq., the department shall then commence proceedings under the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 7-201 and 7-301 et seq. 
(Code 1986, § 16-262(b); Code 2002, § 19-258) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-108; authority of city to require accident reports, 47 O.S. § 10-117. 
Secs. 19-259-19-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEDESTRIANS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrians' rights and duties, 47 O.S. § 11-501 et seq. 

Sec. 19-286. - Obedience to traffic devices and signals; privileges and restrictions. 
(a)  A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian control signals as provided in sections 19-108 and 19-110. 
(c)  At all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 16-211; Code 2002, § 19-286) 
State Law reference- Pedestrians subject to traffic regulations, 47 O.S. § 11-501. 
Sec. 19-287. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated in section 19-288(b). 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 16-212; Code 2002, § 19-287) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-502. 
Sec. 19-288. - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Code 1986, § 16-213; Code 2002, § 19-288) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-503. 
Sec. 19-289. - Due care of drivers. 
    Notwithstanding the sections of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-214; Code 2002, § 19-289) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-504. 
Sec. 19-290. - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of a crosswalk. 
(Code 1986, § 16-215; Code 2002, § 19-290) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-505. 
Sec. 19-291. - Walking on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction and shall yield to approaching vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 16-216; Code 2002, § 19-291) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-506(a), (b). 
Sec. 19-292. - Soliciting rides, donations, employment or business. 
    No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, donation, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 16-217; Code 2002, § 19-292) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-507. 
Secs. 19-293-19-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Bicycles and play vehicles generally, 47 O.S. § 11-1201 et seq. 

Sec. 19-321. - Responsibility of parent or guardian; applicability of article to bicycles. 
(a)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the sections of this article. 
(b)  The sections of this article applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 16-191; Code 2002, § 19-321) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1201(b), (c). 
Sec. 19-322. - Rights and duties of persons riding bicycles generally. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this article and except to those sections of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1986, § 16-192; Code 2002, § 19-322) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1202. 
Sec. 19-323. - Manner of riding bicycle. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1986, § 16-193; Code 2002, § 19-323) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1203. 
Sec. 19-324. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-194; Code 2002, § 19-324) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1204. 
Sec. 19-325. - Use of bicycles upon roadways and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 1986, § 16-195; Code 2002, § 19-325) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1205. 
Sec. 19-326. - Carrying articles while riding bicycle. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1986, § 16-196; Code 2002, § 19-326) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1206. 
Sec. 19-327. - Lamp, rear reflector and brake on bicycle. 
(a)  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the state department of public safety which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1986, § 16-197; Code 2002, § 19-327) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1207. 
Sec. 19-328. - Operation of minibikes, trail bikes, golf carts, go-carts and similar off the road vehicles. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the definitions of the terms "motor vehicle" and "motorcycle" contained in this chapter, self-propelled, motor-driven cycles, known and commonly referred to as "minibikes," "trail bikes" and other similar trade names, shall not be permitted to be operated upon the city streets, highways, alleys or any other city property. 
(b)  Minibikes used by regularly organized units of any Shrine temple shall be exempt from this section while being used in any parade or other function of such body. 
(c)  This section shall also apply to those motor-driven or operated vehicles known as golf carts, go-carts and power lawn mowers and other motor vehicles that are manufactured principally for use off the streets and highways. However, this shall not prohibit occasional necessary movement of such golf carts, go-carts, power lawn mowers and other such vehicles on streets. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting farm vehicles from using the public highways. 
(Code 1986, § 16-17; Code 2002, § 19-328) 
Sec. 19-329. - Operation of motorcycles, motorscooters and motorbicycles. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motorcycle, a motorscooter or a motorbicycle while transporting more than one passenger, except a motorcycle, motorscooter or motorbicycle factory-designed for the purpose of carrying additional passengers. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motorcycle, motorscooter or motorbicycle at a speed greater than the speed limit legally posted; provided, however, in no event nor at any time may an operator under the age of 16 years operate a motorcycle, motorscooter or motorbicycle at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon the streets, roads, highways or other public places within the city any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless the headlamps of such motorcycle or motor-driven cycle are fully lighted. 
(Code 1986, § 16-13; Code 2002, § 19-329) 
Sec. 19-330. - Safety equipment on motorcycles and motorscooters. 
(a)  Generally. The equipment in this section shall be required on all motorcycles and motorscooters, except when on actual trail rides conducted on other than public roads and highways. 
(b)  Rearview mirrors. Every motorcycle, motorscooter and similar motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with two mirrors, each containing a reflection surface of not less than three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a distance of 200 feet to the rear of his vehicle. 
(c)  Windshield. Every motorcycle, motorscooter and similar motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with a windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects. However, in lieu of such windshield the operator shall wear goggles or a face shield of such material and design as to protect him from foreign objects. 
(d)  Brakes. Every motorcycle, motorscooter and similar motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of such vehicle and to stop and hold such vehicle. Further, the required equipment for such vehicle shall include two separate means of applying the brakes: one means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheel. Every such vehicle shall be equipped with a stoplamp, on the rear of the vehicle, which shall display a red or amber light or a light of any color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than 100 feet to the rear in normal sunlight, and actuated upon application of the service brake. 
(e)  Speedometer. Every motorcycle, motorscooter and similar motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with a properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for such vehicle. 
(f)  Fenders. Every motorcycle, motorscooter and similar motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with a fender over each wheel. Such fenders shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer of such vehicle. 
(g)  Lights. Every motorcycle, motorscooter and similar motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two headlamps capable of showing a white light visible at least 300 feet in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding. Every headlamp shall be located at a height measured from the center of the headlamp of not more than 54 inches and not less than 22 inches to be measured as set forth in section 19-213. The motorcycle, motorscooter and similar motor-driven cycle shall have one taillamp mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from at least 300 feet to the rear. 
(h)  Headgear. No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any motorcycle, motorscooter or similar motor-driven cycle unless such person is equipped with and wearing on his head a crash helmet of a type which complies with the standards established by the state department of public safety. Every crash helmet shall consist of lining, padding and a chin strap and shall be so designed as not to distort the view of the driver. 
(Code 1986, §§ 16-14, 16-234(b), (c), 16-237(d); Code 2002, § 19-330) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-608, 12-609. 
Secs. 19-331-19-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Abandonment of vehicles, 47 O.S. § 901 et seq.; removal of abandoned vehicle, 47 O.S. § 11-1002. 

Sec. 19-356. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    Vehicle means a machine propelled by power, other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and includes, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors and wagons. 
(Code 1986, § 16-276; Code 2002, § 19-356) 
Sec. 19-357. - Prohibited; declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. The circumstances mentioned in this subsection may consist of but shall not be limited to any one or more of the following conditions:. 
(1)  Weed and grass undergrowth indicating to a reasonable person that the vehicle has not been moved, thereby permitting such growth to occur. 
(2)  Tires flat or wheels or tires missing. 
(3)  Portions of the vehicle, needed for its legal operation and control on the street and highways, that are missing, including a current automobile license tag. 
(4)  Evidence offered by neighbors or other persons of the length of time the vehicle has been standing in one place without removal and evidence that parts are taken from or added to such vehicle which would indicate a salvage or garage operation. 
(5)  Evidence of violation of any of the sections of this Code or city ordinances pertaining to junk and salvage yards, including violations of the city zoning code. 
(b)  The abandonment of vehicles, as contemplated or defined in this section, on any street or private property within the city limits is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and, in addition to the penalties for violations of this chapter, the counsel to the city may, upon proper evidence submitted by city enforcement agents, institute any necessary action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the terms of this article and to abate such nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 16-277; Code 2002, § 19-357; Ord. No. 1989NS, § 1, 11-20-2000; Ord. No. 2058NS, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
Sec. 19-358. - Wrecked, dismantled or junked vehicles. 
(a)  Leaving on street. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. 
(b)  Allowing to remain on property. No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 48 hours. However, this article shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Code 1986, §§ 16-278, 16-279; Code 2002, § 19-358) 
Sec. 19-359. - Impoundment. 
    The chief of police or other appropriate official or any member of his department designated by him is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left on any public way within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article or is lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 47 O.S. § 901 et seq. 
(Code 1986, § 16-280; Code 2002, § 19-359) 
Sec. 19-360. - Notice to owner. 
    An officer designated to enforce this article shall, when it appears to him that a vehicle is in violation of this article, give notice to the owner or possessor thereof as follows: 
(1)  He shall first securely attach to the vehicle, whether located on a public way or on private property, a written notice stating that: 
a.  The vehicle is in violation of this article which prohibits the abandonment of inoperable vehicles within the city; 
b.  The owner or possessor thereof has 48 hours within which to remove the vehicle to an authorized place of storage or salvage; and 
c.  Should the notice not be complied with, both criminal and civil actions will immediately be instituted to enforce this article. 
(2)  Notice shall also be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or possessor if his whereabouts can be determined by due diligence informing him of those conditions contained in the notice attached to the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 16-281; Code 2002, § 19-360) 
Secs. 19-361-19-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RAILROADS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Constitution reference- City consent for street railroad required, OK Const. Art. 9, § 10. 
State Law reference- Annexation of territory separated by railway, 11 O.S. § 21-102; authority of city to regulate railways, 11 O.S. § 22-119; relocation, etc., of railroad property, 11 O.S. § 32-104; street and sidewalk improvements, 11 O.S. § 36-116 et seq.; use of streets by railroads, 66 O.S. § 63; street railroads in cities, 66 O.S. § 201 et seq. 

Sec. 19-386. - Boarding or alighting from train in motion. 
    No person, not an employee of a railway company, shall get upon, hold onto or board or alight from any railway car, tender or engine while the car, tender or engine is in motion within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 16-296; Code 2002, § 19-386) 
Sec. 19-387. - Trespass on railroad property. 
    No person, without lawful right, shall stand, walk, sit or recline upon any railroad track, depot, yard or right-of-way within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 16-297; Code 2002, § 19-387) 
Sec. 19-388. - Blocking streets. 
    No railroad company or its agent or employee shall obstruct any street, avenue or alley crossing within the city with any railway cars, engine or other equipment for a longer period of time than five minutes pursuant to 45 USC 421 et seq. 
(Code 1986, § 16-298); Code 2002, § 19-388 
Sec. 19-389. - Speed limit. 
    No engineer, fireman or other railroad employee shall run or operate any railway locomotive or car at any greater speed than 35 miles per hour within that portion of the city lying between Leo Street on the west, Harrison Street on the east, Independence on the north and Bluff Street on the south pursuant to 45 USC 421. 
(Code 1986, § 16-299; Code 2002, § 19-389) 
Sec. 19-390. - Obedience to warning or danger signals. 
    No person shall refuse to heed any danger signal established or posted by any railroad company within the city for the purpose of giving a warning of approaching trains or cars. Every watchman stationed by any railway company for the purpose of giving signals of danger to the public or of warning the public of approaching cars or trains shall be vested with police power insofar as necessary to prevent any person from not heeding and obeying the signals or warning, and he shall have power to arrest any person so violating such signal. 
(Code 1986, § 16-300; Code 2002, § 19-390) 
State Law reference- Arrest by private person, 22 O.S. § 202. 
Secs. 19-391-19-415. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 19-416-19-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, 47 O.S. § 11-1001 et seq.; authority of city to regulate the standing or parking of vehicles, 47 O.S. § 15-102. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 19-441. - Emergency and construction vehicles excepted. 
    This division shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or to vehicles or machinery used in the construction or maintenance of streets, and such vehicles or machinery may be operated on any part of the road, whether the road is open to traffic or closed, when such operation is necessary in the maintenance or construction of the street, provided that all such operations shall be protected with adequate warnings, signs, signals, lights, devices or flagmen. 
(Code 1986, § 16-131; Code 2002, § 19-441) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1005. 
Sec. 19-442. - Manner of parking vehicles. 
    Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, no operator of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within one foot of the edge of the roadway, except as follows: Upon those streets which have been marked or designated for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs and wholly between the zone lines. 
(Code 1986, § 16-151; Code 2002, § 19-442) 
State Law reference- Parking near curb, 47 O.S. § 11-1004. 
Sec. 19-443. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
    The person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street. 
(Code 1986, § 16-152; Code 2002, § 19-443) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1101. 
Sec. 19-444. - Restrictions on parking generally. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall park such vehicle for a longer period of time than is designated for the area by official signs, nor shall he park such vehicle at any place at any time in which parking is prohibited and for which official signs are placed. 
(Code 1986, § 16-133; Code 2002, § 19-444) 
Sec. 19-445. - Loading and unloading. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, nothing contained in this chapter or in any traffic rule or regulation of the city shall be deemed to prohibit a vehicle from parking at the curb of any street while taking on or discharging passengers, but a vehicle shall not stop on any crosswalk or between any safety zone and the curb nearest thereto in such manner as to obstruct free passage upon all parts of such crosswalk or between such safety zone and the nearest curb. 
(b)  So far as practicable, all persons shall alight from vehicles and board the vehicles upon the right side. 
(c)  When taking up or discharging freight or passengers, a vehicle shall, so far as practicable, be headed in the direction of the traffic, on the right side of the roadway. So far as practicable, all vehicles shall be loaded from the righthand side and shall be drawn in close to the curb when loading or unloading. 
(d)  When such handling is impracticable, the vehicle being loaded or unloaded or seeking a position for loading or unloading may back to the curb, but shall not stand at an angle which will interfere with the traffic on the street. No vehicle shall remain backed up to the curb, except when actually loading or unloading such vehicle and in such case for no longer time than the actual loading or unloading requires. 
(e)  Upon the request to the driver, a vehicle parking or waiting at the curb shall promptly give place to a vehicle about to take on or let off passengers or freight. 
(Code 1986, § 16-153; Code 2002, § 19-445) 
Sec. 19-446. - Blocking roadway. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. However, this section shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle stopped momentarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers, if such stopping does not actually impede traffic, nor shall it apply to a necessary stop in obedience to traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals of a police officer. 
(Code 1986, § 16-136; Code 2002, § 19-446) 
Sec. 19-447. - Standing in front of theater or entrance to building. 
    No vehicle shall be left standing in front of the entrance to any theater or within 15 feet of either side of the entrance to any building, except when taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 16-150; Code 2002, § 19-447) 
Sec. 19-448. - Use of alley for loading or unloading. 
    No person shall load or unload any goods, wares or merchandise from any vehicle on the street or sidewalk in front of any place of business where such place of business has an alley entrance from which such merchandise may be loaded or unloaded. 
(Code 1986, § 16-175; Code 2002, § 19-448) 
Sec. 19-449. - Parking in alleys. 
    Vehicles shall not be parked in alleys except for loading and unloading purposes and then not longer than is necessary for such purpose. When so parked, the vehicle shall stand as close as possible to one side of the alley and in any case shall so stand as to permit other vehicles to pass. Vehicles in alleys shall comply with the directions and orders of police officers. 
(Code 1986, § 16-147; Code 2002, § 19-449) 
Sec. 19-450. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public is invited or on public property that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such person is eligible for a detachable insignia or reflective insignia or special license plate under 47 O.S. § 1136 as a physically disabled person under the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112 and such insignia or plate is displayed as provided in 47 O.S. § 1101 et seq. or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be an offense, and, upon conviction, such person shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and, in addition, such person shall pay any and all reasonable and necessary charges incurred by the landowner or other person in having any motor vehicle removed from the property and stored. 
(Code 1986, § 16-135; Code 2002, § 19-450; Ord. No. 2106NS, § 1, 10-6-2003) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1007. 
Sec. 19-451. - Parking on posted private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or park a motor vehicle or trailer upon the posted private property of another without first obtaining permission from the landowner or the person in charge of such property, except where such placing or parking is casual or involuntary. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be considered to be an offense, and, upon conviction, violators shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and, in addition, shall pay any and all reasonable and necessary charges incurred by the landowner or other person in having any vehicle or trailer removed from his property and stored. 
(Code 1986, § 16-158; Code 2002, § 19-451) 
Sec. 19-452. - Use of street for storage of vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall use any street or alley for the parking and placing of any vehicles in the street or alley under such circumstances as to constitute an improper use thereof for purely storage purposes and in lieu of the use of private property. No proprietor or person in charge of any livery stable, blacksmith shop, garage, vehicle repair shop or any business establishment which performs any service for hire in reference to any vehicle shall use the streets, parkings, traverse driveways or other public places in the city for the storing of vehicles thereon. 
(b)  No work of any kind shall be done on any vehicle while it is parked upon the street, nor shall any vehicle on which work has been done be parked in front of such place after the work has been completed. 
(c)  Every such vehicle shall be parked inside the building or on private property from the time of delivery for such services until the vehicle is redelivered to the owner thereof or some person authorized by him to receive the vehicle. The streets and alleys around such places shall be open to public use on the same terms and conditions as all other streets. 
(Code 1986, § 16-154; Code 2002, § 19-452) 
Sec. 19-453. - Central business district. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the central business district of the city is defined as follows: all of that area between 11th Street on the north and Seventh Street on the south; Pennsylvania Street on the east and Market Street on the west. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or allow a vehicle to remain parked in any parking space designated by signs as two-hour parking contrary to the provisions of this section. The parking of motor vehicles shall be allowed in two-hour parking places within the central business district of the city, but it shall be a violation to permit any vehicle to remain in such two-hour parking spaces for more than two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays. The only exception to the two-hour parking rule in the central business district shall be the 15-minute parking on both sides of Ninth Street from Union Street to Bell Street. 
(c)  The city manager is authorized to designate two-hour parking spaces in the central business district and place lines or marks on the curb or on the street designating two-hour parking spaces within the central business district. No person shall park any vehicle across any such line or mark or park such vehicle in such a way that the vehicle shall not be within the area so designated by such lines or markings, whether the area is designated as parallel parking or diagonal parking. Any person who violates this subsection shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, and such violation shall be considered illegal parking. If any vehicle remains parked in any such parking space beyond a two-hour period, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime. Any person causing a vehicle to be parked overtime as provided for in this subsection shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each parking ticket placed on the vehicle as provided in this section. 
(d)  The city manager is authorized to designate police officers or other persons to patrol the central business district and use appropriate means of marking parked vehicles in order to identify vehicles that are parked overtime. Such persons shall patrol such areas in accordance with the schedules prepared by the city manager. Such vehicles and parking spaces shall be checked on the basis of not less than every two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all days except Sunday and legal holidays. Whenever the person patrolling such spaces and vehicles determines that a vehicle has been parked overtime, he shall place on the vehicle a ticket indicating a violation. If the vehicle remains parked in such place, the person patrolling the spaces and vehicles is authorized to place additional tickets on the vehicle, and each such ticket shall represent a separate violation. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each such violation. If any such vehicle parked overtime bears a license tag issued by some state or sovereign other than this state, such person may cause to be placed thereon a courtesy or warning ticket, and no complaint for violation shall be issued pursuant to such courtesy or warning ticket. 
(Code 1986, § 16-148; Code 2002, § 19-453; Ord. No. 2029NS, § 1, 11-19-2001) 
Sec. 19-454. - Moving vehicle to avoid two-hour limit in central business district. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, a block is defined as that part of a street between two intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to move a motor vehicle to any location within the same block with the intent to avoid receiving a parking ticket in violation of the two-hour parking limit on any street within the central business district. However, it shall not be unlawful for a person to move a vehicle to the opposite side of the street within the same block. 
(c)  Any vehicle remaining in the same block as defined in subsection (a) of this section beyond the two-hour limit shall be regarded as parked overtime, and the person causing the vehicle to remain in the block beyond a two-hour period shall be subject to a fine for each such two-hour period. 
(Code 1986, § 16-149; Code 2002, § 19-454) 
Secs. 19-455-19-480. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Passenger, Bus and Loading Zones 

Sec. 19-481. - Designation of loading and unloading zones. 
(a)  That part of the north side of Ninth Street, described as beginning 20 feet west of the west curbline of Bell Street at the intersection of Ninth and Bell Streets, extending west to the alley between Bell and Broadway Streets is designated as a loading zone. No person shall permit a motor vehicle to remain parked in the designated area for more than 15 minutes. 
(b)  A portion of the east side of Eden Street beginning 150 feet south of the south curbline of Main Street and extending south a distance of 20 feet is designated as a loading and unloading zone. No person shall permit a motor vehicle to remain parked in such designated area for more than 15 minutes. 
(Code 1986, § 16-176(b), (c); Code 2002, § 19-481) 
Sec. 19-482. - Use of passenger zones. 
    No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the actual loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone. 
(Code 1986, § 16-171; Code 2002, § 19-482) 
Sec. 19-483. - Use of loading zones. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the actual loading or unloading of passengers or for the unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone. 
(Code 1986, § 16-172; Code 2002, § 19-483) 
Sec. 19-484. - Use of bus zones and taxi zones. 
    No operator of any vehicle other than a bus shall stand or park in an officially designated bus zone, and no operator of any vehicle other than an intracity vehicle for hire shall park in any taxi zone. 
(Code 1986, § 16-173; Code 2002, § 19-484) 
Sec. 19-485. - Parking or standing of buses and vehicles for hire. 
    No operator of any bus or vehicle for hire shall stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a zone which is specially established or set aside for the particular vehicle. However, this section shall not prevent the operator of an intracity vehicle for hire from temporarily stopping in accordance with other parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1986, § 16-174; Code 2002, § 19-485) 
Sec. 19-486. - Shipping entrances to buildings. 
(a)  Special no parking spaces in front of shipping entrances may be provided and established by compliance with the conditions of this section. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant of a building adjacent to a street or alley desiring a certain no parking space immediately in front of a shipping entrance to such building shall make application to the traffic and transportation commission, setting forth all relevant information and stating the number of feet desired for such purpose. The traffic and transportation commission may grant or refuse such application, in its discretion, or grant the application with restrictions or limitations as it may fix which are reasonable under the circumstances. 
(c)  If the application is granted, the chief of police shall issue to the applicant a permit or certificate setting forth the location of such no parking space, the number of feet frontage fixed and such other limitations as may be pertinent. The permit may at any time be withdrawn or further limited by the traffic and transportation commission. 
(d)  The holder of the permit shall have the right to place no parking signs on the sidewalk marking the limits of such no parking space. Such signs shall be of the exact size, character and description required by the traffic and transportation commission, but shall be provided at the expense of the holder of the permit and shall bear the number of the permit issued. 
(e)  No vehicle shall be allowed to stop or remain standing in any special no parking space, except for the purpose of taking on or discharging merchandise, freight or passengers. Except as provided in this section, no person shall place or exhibit a sign or standard similar to those used by the police department upon any street or in any public place or attempt by signs or written or printed instructions to regulate traffic or the parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 16-137; Code 2002, § 19-486) 
Sec. 19-487. - Parking and loading or unloading trucks and commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Parking and storage in residential areas. Commercial vehicles and trucks shall not be parked or stored within any residential area except in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Not more than one commercial vehicle or truck of a maximum of 11/2 tons rated capacity and two axles, per family living on the premises, shall be permitted. Off-street parking shall be provided for this commercial vehicle. 
(2)  In no case shall a commercial vehicle or truck used for hauling explosives, gasoline, hazardous materials or liquefied petroleum products be permitted within any residential area. 
(3)  No tractor trailer rigs (semitrailers) or tractors for semitrailers shall be parked or stored on the street, street right-of-way, yard or driveway within any residential area. 
(4)  No trailer used for hauling or boat shall be stored or parked in any residential front yard or unscreened side yard or public-utility easement; nor shall such trailer or boat project beyond the front of any building in a residential district. However, any boat that is tagged for the current year and is in working condition may be parked on a trailer in a residential, hard-surfaced (asphalt/concrete) driveway providing the boat is covered with a tarpaulin. 
(b)  Loading; unloading. All commercial trucks which exceed a gross vehicular weight of five tons (10,000 pounds GVW) are prohibited to load or unload between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. within the city limits, except as follows: 
(1)  Designated truck routes. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial zones. 
(c)  Parking of vehicles carrying explosives, hazardous or flammable materials. Vehicles carrying explosives, hazardous materials or flammable materials are prohibited from parking within the city limits, except as follows: 
(1)  For the explicit purpose of loading or unloading. 
(2)  In those zoning districts where such activities are permitted. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate this section or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-10. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 16-134(a), (c)-(e); Code 2002, § 19-487; Ord. No. 1943NS, § 1, 8-16-1999; Ord. No. 2099NS, § 1, 8-4-2003; Ord. No. 2102NS, § 1, 9-2-2003) 
Secs. 19-488-19-515. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Municipal Parking Lots 

Sec. 19-516. - Designated and restrictions. 
    Municipal parking lots of the city are designated and the restrictions of the parking lots shall be as follows: 
(1)  Parking Lot A. Municipal Parking Lot A, located in the southwest corner of the intersection of North Street and Union Avenue, is all-day, free parking. 
(2)  Parking Lot B. Municipal Parking Lot B, located in the southeast corner of Ninth Street and Broadway Avenue, is designated as the west half being two-hour parking and the east half being all-day, free parking. 
(3)  Parking Lot C. Municipal Parking Lot C, located in the northwest corner of Philadelphia Avenue and Seventh Street, is all-day, free parking. 
(4)  Parking Lot D. Municipal Parking Lot D, located in the northwest corner of Broadway Avenue and Seventh Street, is all-day, free parking. 
(5)  Parking Lot E. Municipal Parking Lot E, located in the northwest corner of Bell and Tenth Streets, is all-day, free parking. 
(6)  Parking Lot F. Municipal Parking Lot F, located in the northwest corner of Bell and Seventh Streets, is all-day, free parking. 
(7)  Parking Lot G. Municipal Parking Lot G, located in the southeast corner of Philadelphia Avenue and Ninth Street, has the north half of the parking lot designated as all-day, free parking, and the west half (50 parking spaces) of the south half as library parking only, and the east half of the south half as two-hour parking. 
(8)  Parking Lot H. Municipal Parking Lot H, the public parking area north of and adjacent to the city hall lying east of the north door of the city hall, is two-hour parking. 
(Code 1986, § 16-142; Code 2002, § 19-516) 
Secs. 19-517-19-545. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Prohibited 

Sec. 19-546. - Certain places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(4)  Within an intersection. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(7)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings. 
(8)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(9)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance, when properly signposted. 
(10)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(11)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway underpass. 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1986, § 16-132; Code 2002, § 19-546; Ord. No. 2091NS, § 1, 4-7-2003) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1003. 
Secs. 19-547-19-570. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - No Parking Zones 

Sec. 19-571. - Designated. 
    The following no parking zones are hereby established in the city; and the parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited at all times within any of the following zones: 
Street Extent Side N. Aydelotte Ave. Midland to Franklin Ave. Both N. Aydelotte Ave. 2100 Block East S. Beard St. From 7 th St. south 250 feet East S. Beard St. 7 th St. to Main St. East N. Beard St. 1800 Block - 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. School Days West S. Bell St. From southeast corner of Bell St. and 7 th St. south 46 feet East N. Bell St. 10 th St. north around cul-de-sac North N. Bell St. Highland Ave. to Ridgewood Ave. West E. Bentley St. 900 Block North S. Broadway Ave. 7 th St. to Forrest Ave. West S. Broadway Ave. 600 Block Both N. Broadway Ave. From 124 N. Broadway Ave. North to 9 th St. East N. Broadway Ave. From southeast corner of Broadway Ave. and Highland Ave. south 128 feet East N. Broadway Ave. 700 Block N. Broadway between Dewey and Wallace East N. Broadway Ave. Highland Ave. to Ridgewood Ave. Both N. Broadway Ave. From Ridgewood Ave. north 391 feet West N. Broadway Ave. 150 feet north and south of Wallace Both Bryan Street From Highland south to the city limits line Both E. Cammack Oklahoma Ave. to the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way North N. Center St. Independence Ave. to Bradley St. East N. Chapman Ave. Benedict St. to Dewey St. East N. Chapman Ave. From the southwest corner of Wallace St. and Chapman Ave. south 66 feet West N. Chapman Ave. 2200 Block from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Both W. Chicago Ave. Kickapoo St. to Park St. South W. Chicago Ave. Kickapoo St. east to alley at mid-block North E. Dewey St. 100 Block E. Dewey between Hobson St. and Bell St. South W. Dewey St. From Kickapoo St. east to Louisa St. Both W. Dewey St. 300 Block North W. Dewey St. From Park St. East to Broadway Ave. South S. Dixon St. From Main St. south to Walnut St. Both N. Dorothy Ave. W. Highland Ave. to W. Ridgewood Ave. Both N. Dorothy Ave. Franklin Ave. to Rosa Ave. Both N. Dorothy Ave. Federal Ave. to Midland Ave. West N. Douglas St. From Highland Ave. north 35 feet West N. Douglas St. Highland Ave. to Ridgewood Ave. East S. Draper St. Main St. to Walnut St. West N. Draper St. 9 th St. to Whittaker St. West N. Draper St. From Highland to Whittaker Both N. Draper St. 100 feet south of Highland West Dunbar St. Between Bell St. and Philadelphia St. South S. Eden St. 258 feet south of Main St. West S. Eden St. Main St. to Walnut St. East Ellis Drive From West Rosa south to dead end (except from 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) Both N. Elm 500 Block Both Emmett St. From Beard St. west 125 feet South Federal Ave. From Harrison St. west to Airport Dr. Both W. Ford St. Pottenger St. west to Kennedy St. Both W. Franklin Ave. From the northwest corner of Franklin Ave. and Kickapoo St. west 144 feet North W. Franklin Ave. Kickapoo St. to the city airport South Gordon Cooper Drive From Beard Street Bridge south to the Shawnee-Tecumseh city limits Both Harrison-Farrall Loop Highway 1-40 to Highway 177 Both E. Hayes Broadway to Bell Both W. Hayes Ave. From northeast corner of Louisa and Hayes Ave. east 25 feet North W. Hayes Ave. Beginning at a point 98 ft. east of the east edge of the pavement of Kickapoo St. at the intersection with Hayes, thence east along the south side of Hayes 80 feet South Highland Ave. From Kickapoo to Bryan Both Independence Ave. Highway 177 to Bryan Both N. Ione St. 500 Block Both N. Kennedy St. Benedict St. to Kickapoo Spur Both N. Kennedy St. 300 Block and 400 Block Both N. Kickapoo St. Main St. to 45 th St. Both S. Kickapoo St. From Farrall to Main St. Both N. Leo St. From the point of the intersection of Leo and the entrance to the Heart of Oklahoma Exposition Center, north to Rosa St. Both S. Lindale St. From 7 th St. to Walnut Street Both S. Louisa From the northeast corner of Louisa St. and Hayes Ave. north 25 feet East N. Louisa From the southwest corner of Louisa St. and Dill St. south 113 feet West N. Louisa 700 block-300 ft. south from intersection of Wallace & Louisa (7:00 a.m.- 4:00 p.m. Mon.- Fri.) East MacArthur Blvd. West city Limits to Bryan except for north side of MacArthur between University Parkway Entrance and exit onto MacArthur at OBU Both W. Main St. Park St. to Kickapoo St. Both E. Main St. From the northeast corner of Main St. and Philadelphia Ave. east 100 feet North E. Main St. From Eden St. east 115 feet South E. Main St. Fire Station No. 2 Drive South E. Main St. 105 feet west of Harrison South E. Main St. 1100 Block North N. Market St. Main St. to Highland Ave. East N. Market St. From the northeast corner of Market St. and Highland Ave. north 82 feet East N. Market St. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Loading and Unloading Only from Emmett to the end of Wilson School property East N. McKinley 500 block Both S. McKinley Main St. to Oakland Ave. West W. Midland Between Kickapoo St. and Pottenger St. Both N. Oklahoma From 9 th St. south 220 feet West S. Osage From the southeast corner of Osage St. and Walnut St. south 84 feet East S. Park St. Dunbar Ave. to Hayes Ave. West S. Pennsylvania Ave. 7 th St. to Oakland Ave. West S. Pennsylvania Ave. From the northeast corner of Oakland Ave. and Pennsylvania Ave. North 36 feet East N. Pesotum St. Highland Ave. to Seneca Dr. East S. Philadelphia Ave. 7 th St. to Oakland Ave. West N. Philadelphia Ave. Main St. to 9 th St. East N. Philadelphia Ave. 10 th to Highland Ave. East N. Philadelphia Ave. From the northwest corner of Highland Ave. and Philadelphia Ave., north to Ridgewood Ave. West N. Philadelphia Ave. From the northeast corner of Highland Ave. and Philadelphia Ave., north 315 [feet] East N. Philadelphia Ave. From the northwest corner of Philadelphia Ave. and Ridgewood Ave., north 45 feet West Plaza Dr. From Kickapoo St. East Both W. Poplar From Kickapoo St. to Pottenger St. North N. Pottenger From Burns to Dewey Both W. Pulaski Ave. Kickapoo St. to Park St. West E. Remington Pesotum St. to Bryan St. Both E. Ridgewood Ave. Union Ave. to Philadelphia Ave. Both E. Ridgewood Ave. Douglas St. to Bell St. North Saratoga Airport Drive to Kickapoo St. North Seneca Dr. Pesotum St. to Sequoyah Dr. West Sequoyah Dr. From Cherokee Dr. to Independence Ave. (Except for loading/unloading 7:30-8:30 a.m. and 2:30-3:30 p.m. Monday-Friday - west side only) Both N. Shawnee Ave. Main St. to 9 th St. East N. Shawnee Ave. 10 th St. to Highland Ave. East W. Slover St. From Leo St. West to Canadian River Both N. Tennessee St. From Main St. 150 feet north East N. Tucker Ave. Main St., north 89 feet West N. Tucker Ave. From 60 feet south of 10 th St. to a point 60 feet north of 10 th St. Both N. Tucker Ave. From Darrow to Wallace West N. Tucker Ave. Between Highland and Wallace Both N. Tucker Ave. From Wallace to Grant West S. Union Ave. From the southwest corner of Union Ave. and 7 th St., south 32 feet West S. Union Ave. From the southeast corner of Union Ave. and 7 th St., south 32 feet East N. Union Ave. Entrance to Municipal Parking Lot "A" at 9 th St. and Union Ave. north to 9 th St. West N. Union Ave. From 9 th St., north 127 feet West N. Union Ave. From 9 th St., north 160 feet East N. Union Ave. From 10 th St., south 125 feet East N. Union Ave. From Highland Ave. south 130 feet East N. Union Ave. Highland Ave. to Ridgewood Ave. (No Parking, Loading or Unloading) West N. Union Ave. Ridgewood Ave. to Independence Ave. Both N. Union Ave. Chicago Ave. to MacArthur Blvd. Both W. University Airport Dr. to Kickapoo St. Both W. Wallace St. Kickapoo St. west 141 feet South W. Wallace St. Kickapoo St. east to Broadway Ave. North W. Wallace St. From alley between Kickapoo St and Louisa St. east to Broadway Ave. (Except of Sundays) South E. Wallace St. Broadway Ave. to Harrison Ave. Both E. Walnut St. 900 Block North E. Walnut St. 1400 and 1500 Block North E. Walnut St. 1400 - 1600 Block South E. Walnut St. From Center St. east to Oak St. Both E. Whittaker St. From Draper St., west 235 feet South E. Whittaker St. From Draper St., west 235 feet (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.) North E. Whittaker St. From Draper St., east 90 feet South W. Wood St. 500 Block North 7 th St. Beard to Broadway Ave. Both E. 7 th St. Bell St. to Broadway Ave. South E. 7 th St. From the northwest corner of 7 th St. and Union Ave., west 50 feet North E. 7 th St. 1500 Block Both E. 7 th St. No parking trucks or trailers over 2 tons between Union Ave. and Philadelphia Ave. South E. 9 th St. Broadway Ave. to Bell St. (except the north side of 9 th St. from a point 20 ft. west of the west curbline of Bell St. at the intersection of 9 th and Bell, west to the alley) Both W. 9 th St. Kickapoo St. to Market St. South E. 10 th St. Elm St. westerly to a point 119 feet west of Harrison Ave. North E. 10 th St. From 81 feet east of Harrison Ave. to a point 119 feet west of Harrison Ave. North E. 10 th St. From 60 feet east of Tucker Ave. to a point 60 feet west of Tucker Ave. Both E. 10 th St. Philadelphia Ave. to Union Ave. North W. 10 th St. From Beard St., westerly 250 feet South W. 10 th St. Beard St. to Louisa St. North W. 11 th St. Beard St. to Broadway Ave. North W. 11 th St. From alley between Market St. and Beard St. east to Beard St. South E. 35 th St. 900 Block (Except north side from a point 20 feet east of Harrison to a point 300 feet east of Harrison that will be loading and unloading only) Both  
  
(Code 1986, § 16-138; Code 2002, § 19-571; Ord. No. 1946NS, § 1, 10-18-1999; Ord. No. 1975NS, § 1, 7-17-2000; Ord. No. 2000NS, § 1, 3-19-2001; Ord. No. 2006NS, § 1, 6-4-2001; Ord. No. 2018NS, § 1, 8-6-2001; Ord. No. 2030NS, § 1, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 2074NS, § 1, 11-4-2002; Ord. No. 2093NS, § 1, 5-19-2003; Ord. No. 2109NS, § 1, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 2115NS, § 1, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 2214NS, § 1, 8-1-2005; Ord. No. 2523NS, § 1, 11-18-2013; Ord. No. 2575NS, § 1, 9-21-2015) 
Sec. 19-572. - Certain location except police cars. 
    No person shall park any vehicle on Ninth Street from its intersection with Bell Street to the intersection of Ninth Street and an alley running north and south between Broadway Street and Beard Street, except that police cars may park parallel on the north side of Ninth Street between such alley and Broadway Street. 
(Code 1986, § 16-139; Code 2002, § 19-572) 
Secs. 19-573-19-600. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Time Limited Parking Zones 

Sec. 19-601. - Established. 
    The limited parking zones in this subdivision are established in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 16-141; Code 2002, § 19-601) 
Sec. 19-602. - Hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
    No person shall park or stand any vehicle in any of the following areas during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Sundays and holidays excepted: 
Street Extent Side N. Broadway Street Highland Street to Ridgewood Street West W. Ridgewood Street Broadway to Beard Street North  
  
(Code 1986, § 16-141(1); Code 2002, § 19-602) 
Sec. 19-603. - Hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
    No person shall park or stand any vehicle in any of the following areas during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.: 
Street Extent Side Tenth Street Alley between Beard and Broadway Street to Beard Street North  
  
(Code 1986, § 16-141(2); Code 2002, § 19-603) 
Sec. 19-604. - Two-hour parking. 
    Parking a motor vehicle or allowing a motor vehicle to remain parked on North Louisa Street between Wallace Street and Dill Street on the east side thereof between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, is restricted to two-hour parking, and any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 16-141(3); Code 2002, § 19-604) 
Sec. 19-605. - Fifteen-minute parking. 
(a)  There is established a 15-minute parking limit for motor vehicles in all designated parking spaces at the following locations: 
(1)  In the block on all of the south side and all of the north side of Ninth Street between Bell Street and Union Avenue; 
(2)  On both the north side and south side of Ninth Street between Broadway Avenue and the alley between Broadway Avenue and Bell Street; 
(3)  At 116 North Beard in the north half of the block on the west side from the alley to Ninth Street; 
(4)  At 114 North Beard on the west side from Main Street north to the alley; and 
(5)  At 4 East Main on the north side of Main Street in front of the minimall. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a motor vehicle to remain parked in any such space for more than 15 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except for Sundays and legal holidays. 
(Code 1986, § 16-141(4); Code 2002, § 19-605) 
Sec. 19-606. - Thirty-minute parking. 
(a)  There is established a 30-minute parking limit for motor vehicles in all designated parking spaces at the following locations: 
(1)  In the block on the north side of Ninth Street between Union and Philadelphia Avenues; and 
(2)  On both the north side and south side of Ninth Street from the alley east to Broadway Avenue. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a motor vehicle to remain parked in any such space for more than 30 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except for Sundays and legal holidays. 
(Code 1986, § 16-141(5); Code 2002, § 19-606) 
Secs. 19-607-19-635. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Additional Parking Zones 

Sec. 19-636. - Established. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit a motor vehicle to stand on the east side of Union Street between Highland and Ridgewood Streets except in a specific area described as beginning at a point 58 feet north of the north curbline of Highland Street and extending north 144 feet. No person shall permit a motor vehicle to remain parked in the designated area for more than ten minutes. 
(Code 1986, § 16-176(a); Code 2002, § 19-636) 
Secs. 19-637-19-665. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 19-666. - Through truck routes established. 
(a)  There are established in the city through truck routes. 
(b)  All through trucks designed for or used in commercial usage and/or heavy hauling shall remain on state and federal route highways, unless an alternate route has been provided and signs installed to so indicate. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to cause to be placed and maintained conspicuous signs bearing appropriate words and markings designating such routes to conform with this section. The signs so placed shall be of a sufficient size to be easily readable at a distance of 100 feet by any person using, approaching or entering such truck routes. 
(d)  The following streets, avenues, public ways or portions thereof are designated and established as truck routes within the city: 
Street or Avenue From To Beard Farrall Gordon Cooper Drive Farrall Highway 177/270 Harrison 45th Kickapoo Harrison Gordon Cooper Drive Beard South city limits Harrison Farrall North city limits Kickapoo I-40 Farrall Kickapoo Spur Highway 177/170 Kickapoo MacArthur Harrison West city limits Highland Harrison East city limits Highway 177/270 North city limits South city limits  
(e)  Vehicles required by statute to be licensed for three-ton carrying capacity or over shall be prohibited from using any of the city's public streets and places for travel, except for the purpose of access to and exit from a location within the city which has not been legally designated as a truck route. Whenever it is necessary for vehicles of the class described in this subsection to travel to and from a location on any of the city's public streets and places for purposes of loading and/or unloading merchandise or material at such location, the route traveled shall be as short and direct as possible from and to the most available, legally designated truck routes. 
(f)  Unless otherwise legally posted by official signs in the city, any legally licensed truck shall be permitted the privilege of being parked on any of the public streets or places within the city legally designated as truck routes, if so parked in the manner prescribed by law, for a continuous period of time not to exceed two hours. 
(Code 1986, § 16-9; Code 2002, § 19-666) 
Sec. 19-667. - Use of streets by commercial trucks. 
(a)  All commercial trucks which exceed a gross vehicular weight of five tons (10,000 pounds GVW) are prohibited from using or traveling any streets and alleys within the city limits, except as follows: 
(1)  On a designated truck route. 
(2)  On section line roads, arterials. 
(3)  For the explicit purpose of loading or unloading. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate this section or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-10. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 16-134(b), (e); Code 2002, § 19-667) 
Secs. 19-668-19-695. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HEAVY VEHICLES 

Sec. 19-696. - Load limits on bridges. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "gross weight" is defined as the weight of a vehicle without load, plus the weight of any load thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a truck or other motor vehicle whose gross weight exceeds five tons on or across the following bridges located within the city: 
(1)  Six-tenths mile west of Highway 102 on Archery Range Road, also known as BPW Road. 
(2)  Three-tenths mile west of Highway 102 on Clear Pond Road. 
(3)  One-tenth mile east of Walker Road on Ingram Road, also known as By-Pass Road. 
(4)  One-fourth mile west of NS 332 on Ingram Road, also known as By-Pass Road. 
(5)  One-tenth mile west of Highway 102 on Rose Lane. 
(6)  One-half mile north of the Dam Road on Walker Road. 
(7)  Three-fourths mile south of the Dam Road on Walker Road. 
(8)  One-tenth mile west of Highway 102 on Wanda Drive. 
(c)  Any person who desires to cross one of the bridges described in subsection (b) of this section with a vehicle whose gross weight exceeds five tons may apply to the city manager for a special permit to cross a specific bridge. The city manager is authorized to investigate the circumstances relating to the application and cause appropriate studies to be made. If, after such studies are made, it appears to the city manager that the crossing of such bridge by such vehicle will not likely cause damage to it, the city manager may issue a special permit to the applicant to cross the bridge. However, no such permit shall be issued until the applicant has executed an indemnity agreement agreeing to indemnify and save harmless the city and all other persons from damages or injuries caused by such vehicle crossing or attempting to cross the bridge. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or imprisonment in the city jail not exceeding 30 days or punishment by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1986, § 16-114; Code 2002, § 19-696) 
Secs. 19-697-19-725. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPEED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Basic speed restrictions, 47 O.S. § 11-801. 

Sec. 19-726. - Limits generally. 
(a)  Any person driving a vehicle on a street, roadway, alley or highway shall drive the vehicle at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the highway and any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(b)  Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section, the limits specified in this chapter or established as authorized in this chapter shall be maximum lawful speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed in excess of such maximum limits. The following specific speed limits for the stated places shall be observed: 
(1)  Twenty miles per hour in the city's business district. 
(2)  Twenty-five miles per hour through any posted school zone during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. during school days. However, in those school zones in which the speed of motor vehicles is controlled by changeable message signs, the speed limit in such school zones is 25 miles per hour during the hours indicated on such changeable message signs. 
(3)  Twenty miles per hour when passing any sign reading "slow" or the extended property line on which such sign is located or at any point on that portion of the street which is set apart as a slow zone. 
(4)  Forty-five miles per hour on Gordon Cooper Drive from the south edge of the North Canadian River Bridge to the south boundary line of the corporate limits. 
(5)  Forty miles per hour on Independence Street, from a point 200 feet west of Kennedy Street to Highway 177. 
(6)  Fifteen miles per hour on East Whittaker Street from 150 feet east of the east line of Draper Street to 150 feet west of the west line of Pesotum Street. 
(7)  Twenty-five miles per hour in any other part of the city. 
(8)  Fifteen miles per hour in any alley. However, for alleys in the area bounded by Seventh Street on the south, Ninth Street on the north, Beard Street on the west, and Oklahoma Street on the east the speed limit shall be ten miles per hour. 
(9)  Thirty-five miles per hour on Shawnee Mall Frontage Road from Harrison Street to Shawnee Mall. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, as is consistent with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when driving upon any narrow or winding roadway and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or when, because of weather or highway conditions, such reduced speed shall be prudent. 
(Code 1986, § 16-80; Code 2002, § 19-726; Ord. No. 2524NS, § 1, 12-2-2013) 
Sec. 19-727. - Special speed limitations. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a street at a speed that is greater than the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure, when such structure is signposted as provided in this section. 
(b)  The traffic and transportation commission may conduct an investigation of any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a street. If it shall thereupon find that such structure cannot, with safety to itself, withstand vehicles driving at speeds otherwise permissible under this chapter, it shall determine and declare the maximum speed of vehicles which such structure can safely withstand and may cause and permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed to be erected and maintained at a distance of 100 feet before each end of the structure. 
(c)  The following shall apply when streets or highways are under construction or being repaired or when a detour has been established: 
(1)  Where any state or federal highway shall be under construction or repair or a detour shall have been designated because of construction or repairs in progress and the state department of highways has determined a maximum safe, careful and prudent speed on such highway or detour during the period of such construction or repairs and shall have plainly posted at each terminus thereof and not less than each half-mile along the route thereof such determined maximum speed, no person shall drive any vehicle upon such portion of such highway or upon such detour at a speed in excess of the speed so determined and posted. 
(2)  Where any city street shall be under construction or repair or a detour shall have been designated because of construction or repairs in progress and the city shall have determined a maximum safe, careful and prudent speed on such city street or detour during the period of such construction or repairs and shall have plainly posted at each terminus thereof and not less than every four blocks along the route thereof such determined maximum speed, no person shall drive any vehicle upon such portion of such city street or upon such detour at a speed in excess of the speed so determined and posted. 
(d)  Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the state department of highways or the city and the existence of such signs shall constitute conclusive evidence of the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Violation of the posted speed limit in the maintenance or construction zone shall result in the doubling of the appropriate fine. For purposes of this subsection, the term "maintenance or construction zone" means any location where maintenance or construction work is actually in progress and workers present. 
(Code 1986, § 16-83; Code 2002, § 19-727) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-806. 
Chapter 20 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of municipalities, 11 O.S. § 22-101 et seq.; crimes and punishment, 21 O.S. § 1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Aiding or abetting offenses. 
    No person shall give aid, comfort or refuge to any person in the commission of an offense, whether he directly commits the offense or not and whether present or not. The penalty shall be the same as that for the offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-1; Code 2002, § 20-1) 
State Law reference- Aiding in misdemeanor, 21 O.S. § 28. 
Sec. 20-2. - Conspiracy. 
(a)  Two or more persons are guilty of a conspiracy if such persons conspire to either: 
(1)  Commit any crime; 
(2)  Falsely and maliciously indict another for any crime or procure another to be charged or arrested for any crime; 
(3)  Falsely move or maintain any suit, action or proceeding; 
(4)  Cheat and defraud any person of any property by any means which are, in themselves, criminal or by any means which, if executed, would amount to a cheat or to obtaining money or property by false pretenses; or 
(5)  Commit any act injurious to the public health, to public morals or to trade or commerce or for the perversion or obstruction of justice of the due administration of the laws. 
(b)  No agreement to commit any offense amounts to a conspiracy, unless some act besides such agreement is done to effect the object thereof by one or more of the parties to such agreement. 
(Code 1986, § 18-2; Code 2002, § 20-2) 
State Law reference- Conspiracy, 21 O.S. § 421 et seq. 
Sec. 20-3. - Refusing to aid officer. 
    Every person who, after having been lawfully commanded to aid any officer in arresting any person or in retaking any person who has escaped from legal custody or in executing any legal process, willfully neglects or refuses to aid such officer is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1986, § 18-3; Code 2002, § 20-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 537. 
Sec. 20-4. - Suppressing evidence. 
    Every person who maliciously practices any deceit or fraud or who uses any threat, menace or violence, with intent to prevent any party to an action or proceeding from obtaining or producing therein any book, paper or other matter or thing which might be evidence or from procuring the attendance or testimony of any witness therein or with intent to prevent any person having in his possession any book, paper or other matter or thing which might be evidence in such suit or proceeding or prevent any person being cognizant of any fact material thereto from producing or disclosing such is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1986, § 18-4; Code 2002, § 20-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 546. 
Sec. 20-5. - Interference with city officer or official. 
    No person shall interfere with city officers or officials by: 
(1)  Obstructing, threatening or attempting to intimidate any such officer or official; 
(2)  Resisting an officer who is making an arrest, serving a warrant or suppressing a riot or refusing aid to an officer in making an arrest, serving a warrant or suppressing a riot when so requested by that officer in his presence; 
(3)  Impersonating an officer falsely by any kind of representation, pretense, insignia, sound, clothing or conduct; 
(4)  Delivering any article or thing to any person under arrest without the consent of the officer having charge and custody of the prisoner; 
(5)  Removing a prisoner from custody by means other than legal process; 
(6)  Escaping from custody after having been arrested (and taken into custody); 
(7)  Harassing or misleading an officer or a city official by making false 911 phone calls, by false alarms or unauthorized use of any device to summon police, fire protection or other emergency aid without reasonable cause; 
(8)  Destroying, altering, concealing, or disguising physical evidence, planting false evidence or furnishing false information to an officer, which impedes that or another officer in the performance of his duties, or which is intended to prevent the apprehension or obstruct the prosecution or defense of any person; 
(9)  Following or blocking the way of any emergency vehicle engaged in an emergency run, or knowingly interfering with officers at the location of the emergency; 
(10)  Tampering with any signal equipment or other device placed, operated and maintained by the city in connection with the administration of its Code provisions, ordinances, regulations, services, functions of performance of duties thereto; 
(11)  Removing any barricade or obstruction placed by the city to keep traffic off any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area; 
(12)  Unlawfully taking possession of or withholding possession of any real or personal property belonging to the city or the state which the city is entitled to or an official is to maintain custody of on behalf of the state; 
(13)  No person shall mislead or lie to an officer during an investigation or upon arrest about their name or date of birth; 
(14)  No person shall knowingly make or file or cause to be made or filed a false or misleading report or misrepresentation, allegation or complaint with the police department or any officer or employee of the city, or on any official application or to commit perjury before any tribunal of the city; 
(15)  No person shall willfully and without probable cause make a false report to any person of any crime, violation of ordinances, or circumstances indicating the possibility of crime or violation having been committed, including, but not limited to, the unlawful taking of personal property, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police or other official action or investigation; 
(16)  No person shall willfully, knowingly, and without probable cause communicate false information concerning a missing child to a law enforcement agency that causes or encourages the activation of an Amber alert warning system. 
(Code 1986, § 18-6; Code 2002, § 20-6; Ord. No. 2257NS, § 1, 5-15-2006; Ord. No. 2300NS, § 1, 2-5-2007) 
State Law reference- Obstructing officer, 21 O.S. § 267. 
Sec. 20-6. - Removing, destroying or defacing decorations. 
(a)  No person shall remove, destroy, molest, deface or disarrange any decoration that may be used by any other person in, upon or about any building within the city to indicate the celebration of any holiday or public event, without the consent of the owner thereof. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-7; Code 2002, § 20-7) 
State Law reference- Offenses concerning flags, 21 O.S. § 371 et seq. 
Sec. 20-7. - Assault; battery. 
(a)  No person shall commit any assault or offer or attempt with force or violence to do bodily harm or injury to another or to commit an assault or battery or both on the person of another. For the purpose of this section, assault and battery are defined as follows: 
(1)  An assault is any willful and unlawful attempt or offer with force or violence to do a corporal hurt to another person. 
(2)  A battery is any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another. 
(b)  To use or attempt to use force or violence upon or toward the person of another is not unlawful when: 
(1)  Necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has committed a felony and delivering him to a public officer competent to receive him in custody. 
(2)  Necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance of any legal duty or by another person assisting him or acting by his direction. 
(3)  Committed either by a person about to be injured or by any other person in his aid or defense in preventing or attempting to prevent an offense against his person or any trespass or other unlawful interference with real or personal property in his lawful possession, provided that force or violence used is not more than is sufficient to prevent such offense. 
(4)  Committed by a parent or the authorized agent of any parent or by the guardian, master or teacher in the exercise of lawful authority to restrain or correct his child, ward, apprentice or scholar, provided that restraint or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of such child, ward, apprentice or scholar or by his refusal to obey the lawful command of such parent or authorized agent or guardian, master or teacher and the force or violence used is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree. 
(5)  Committed by a carrier of passengers or the authorized agents or servants of such carrier or by a person assisting them at their request in expelling from any carriage, railroad car, vessel or other vehicle any passenger who refuses to obey any lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for the conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force and violence used is not more than is sufficient to expel the offending passenger, with reasonable regard for his personal safety. 
(6)  Committed by any person in preventing an idiot, a lunatic, an insane person or other person from committing an act dangerous to himself or another or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for the protection of his person or for his restoration to health, during such period only as shall be necessary to obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of his person. 
(c)  Should it be necessary for a police officer to use a taser on any person violating this Code section, then a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule shall be added to any fine and costs or other punishment given to the defendant. This fee is to be collected as any other court-ordered fine and costs. 
(Code 1986, § 18-8; Code 2002, § 20-8; Ord. No. 2432NS, § 1, 4-19-2010) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit assaults and batteries, 11 O.S. § 22-110; assault and battery generally, 21 O.S. § 641 et seq. 
Sec. 20-8. - Blasphemy. 
    No person shall commit blasphemy. For the purposes of this section, blasphemy consists of wantonly uttering or publishing words, casting contumelious reproach or profane ridicule upon God, Jesus Christ, the Holy Ghost, the Holy Scriptures or the Christian or any other religion. If it appears beyond reasonable doubt that the words complained of were used in the course of serious discussion and with intent to make known or recommend opinions entertained by the accused, such words are not blasphemy. Every person committing blasphemy, on conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, for each offense. Each day, or occurrence, as applicable, of such offense shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 1986, § 18-9; Code 2002, § 20-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 901 et seq. 
Sec. 20-9. - Fortunetelling. 
(a)  No person pretending or professing to tell fortunes by the use of any subtle craft, means or device whatsoever, either by palmistry, clairvoyance or otherwise, shall ply his trade, art or profession within the city or make any charge therefor, either directly or indirectly, or receive any gift, donation or subscription by any means whatsoever for the telling of fortunes. 
(b)  No person shall open or conduct any place of business within the city or advertise the conduct of any business within the city prohibited by this section. 
(c)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-10; Code 2002, § 20-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 931. 
Sec. 20-10. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  Every person who keeps any disorderly house or any house of public resort by which the peace, comfort or decency of the immediate neighborhood is habitually disturbed is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-11; Code 2002, § 20-11) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit disorderly houses, 11 O.S. § 22-109; keeping disorderly house, 21 O.S. § 1026. 
Sec. 20-11. - Consuming or inhaling intoxicants in public places. 
(a)  No person shall drink or consume or possess with intent to consume or possess an open container of, any intoxicating beverage, wine, low-point beer, intoxicating substance or intoxicating compound of any kind, or inhale glue, paint or other intoxicating substance upon any street, alley, roadway or sidewalk in the city, or in or upon any property owned by or under the control of the city, or in any public place within the city, except as authorized in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  No person shall be drunk or intoxicated in any vehicle or at any public place within the city as a result of the consumption of any intoxicating beverage, wine, low-point beer, intoxicating substance or intoxicating compound of any kind or as a result of inhaling glue, paint or other intoxicating substance, or as a result of any prescription or nonprescription medicine. 
(c)  No person shall be drunk or intoxicated from any cause and disturb the peace of any person. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the consumption or possession of low-point beer, beer and wine, by persons 21 years of age or older, is permitted on land owned or under the control of the city at: 
(1)  An event for which a special event permit has been issued by the city, subject to policies and conditions set by the city manager. The special event permit shall clearly delineate the areas in which such beverages can be consumed, and the permittee shall be responsible for designating that area by clearly marked barricades or similar structures. 
(2)  Sidewalk tables appurtenant to a bar, tavern or food service establishment as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city, if properly licensed, provided that such service is limited to seated patrons only. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any patron receiving such service to remove low-point beer, wine or an alcoholic beverage purchased for consumption at a sidewalk table from such area or the bar, tavern or food service establishment where such beverage was purchased. It shall be unlawful and an offense for the owner or operator of a bar, tavern or food service establishment providing such service to permit a patron to remove low-point beer or an alcoholic beverage purchased for consumption at a sidewalk table from such area or the bar, tavern or food service establishment where such beverage was purchased. 
(Code 1986, § 18-13; Code 2002, § 20-12; Ord. No. 2546NS, § 1, 6-16-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, alternative treatment, 37 O.S. § 8. 
Sec. 20-12. - Abandoned refrigerators, iceboxes or airtight containers. 
(a)  No person shall abandon or discard in any place accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of 11/2 cubic feet or more, which has an attached lid or door that may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch, nor being the owner, lessee or manager of any such place shall any person knowingly permit such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain in such condition. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-14; Code 2002, § 20-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1208. 
Sec. 20-13. - Disturbing assemblies. 
(a)  The term "disorderly conduct," for the purpose of this section, shall consist of the performance of any act which detracts from the orderly exercise of methods and standards prescribed by any religious sect or denomination as a means of public worship of the Supreme Being by its people. 
(b)  No person shall willfully disquiet, distort or interrupt any congregation or assembly of people lawfully assembled or met together at any public entertainment or for any purpose by making any unnecessary or inappropriate noise or by any disorderly conduct or other means. 
(c)  No person shall conduct himself in any disorderly manner at any public worship or so near the public worship as to interfere with the public worship therein. 
(d)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-15; Code 2002, § 20-14) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit disturbances, 11 O.S. § 22-110; disturbing religious meeting, 21 O.S. § 915 et seq.; disturbing lawful meeting, 21 O.S. § 1361. 
Sec. 20-14. - Disturbance by loud or unusual noise or abusive, violent, profane or threatening language. 
    If any person shall willfully or maliciously disturb, either by day or night, the peace and quiet of the city or any neighborhood, family or person by loud or unusual noise or by abusive, violent, obscene or profane language, whether addressed to the person so disturbed or some other person, or by threatening to kill, do bodily harm or injury, destroy property, fight or by quarreling or challenging to fight or fighting or shooting off any firearm or brandishing the firearm or by running any horse at unusual speed along any street, alley, highway or public road, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 18-16; Code 2002, § 20-15) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit disturbances, 11 O.S. § 22-110; similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1362. 
Sec. 20-15. - Insulting displays. 
(a)  No person shall display any sign, emblem, flag or device which, in its common acceptation, is insulting, profane or abusive to the citizens of the city and which is calculated or where the natural consequence is to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-18; Code 2002, § 20-16) 
Sec. 20-16. - Fraud to obtain food, lodging or services. 
(a)  Any person who shall obtain food, lodging, services or other accommodations at any hotel, inn, restaurant, boardinghouse, roominghouse, motel or auto camp, with intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof, if the value of such food, lodging, services or other accommodations is of the value of $20.00 or less, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(b)  Any person who shall obtain shelter, lodging or any other services at any apartment house, apartment, rental unit, rental house or trailer camp, with intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(c)  Prima facie proof of the intent to defraud mentioned in this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Such lodging, food, service or other accommodation was obtained by false pretense or by false or fictitious show or pretense of any baggage or other property; 
(2)  The person gave a check on which payment was refused; 
(3)  The person left the hotel, inn, restaurant, boardinghouse, roominghouse, motel, apartment house, apartment, rental unit or rental house, trailer camp or auto camp without payment or offering to pay for such food, lodging, services or other accommodation; 
(4)  The person surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove his baggage; or 
(5)  The person registered under a fictitious name. 
(d)  Any act mentioned in subsection (c) of this section shall not apply where there has been an agreement in writing for delay in payment. 
(Code 1986, § 18-19; Code 2002, § 20-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1503. 
Sec. 20-17. - Petit larceny-Generally. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section and in sections 20-19 and 20-20, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Larceny is the taking of personal property accomplished by fraud or stealth, and within intent to deprive another thereof. 
    Petit larceny is larceny committed when the property taken is not of value exceeding $1,000.00 and is not taken from the person of another. 
(b)  If the thing stolen consists of any evidence of debt or other written instrument, the amount of money due thereon or secured to be paid thereby and remaining unsatisfied or which in any contingency might be collected thereon or the value of the property, the title to which is shown thereby, or the sum which might be recovered in the absence thereof, as the case may be, shall be deemed the value of the thing stolen. 
(c)  Any fixture or part of realty, the instant it is severed from the realty, becomes personal property and is the subject of larceny as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Any person who commits or aids in the commission of petit larceny or in concealing any stolen property as defined in this section is guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, plus costs, or imprisonment for not to exceed 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1986, § 18-20; Code 2002, § 20-18; Ord. No. 2021NS, § 1, 9-17-2001; Ord. No. 2624NS, § 1, 1-16-2018) 
State Law reference- Larceny defined, 21 O.S. § 1701; grand and petit larceny, 21 O.S. § 1704; punishment for petit larceny, 21 O.S. § 1706; larceny of written instrument, 21 O.S. § 1709; larceny of severed fixture, 21 O.S. § 1712. 
Sec. 20-18. - Same-Lost property. 
    One who finds lost property of a value of $500.00 or less, under circumstances which give him knowledge or means of inquiry as to the true owner, and who appropriates such property to his own use, or to the use of another person who is not entitled thereto, without having first made such effort as the circumstances render reasonable and just, to find the owner and restore the property to him, is guilty of petit larceny. 
(Code 1986, § 18-21; Code 2002, § 20-19; Ord. No. 2021NS, § 2, 9-17-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, larceny of lost property, 21 O.S. § 1702. 
Sec. 20-19. - Larceny outside city. 
    Any person who steals the property of another outside the corporate limits of the city and brings the property within the corporate limits shall be convicted and punished in the same manner as if such larceny had been committed within the city, and such larceny may be charged to have been committed within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 18-22; Code 2002, § 20-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1715. 
Sec. 20-20. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emancipated minor means any person under 18 who is married and/or not under direct supervision and care of the parent or legal guardian of the minor. 
    Mercantile establishment means any place where merchandise is displayed, held or offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale. 
    Merchant means an owner or operator of any mercantile establishment and includes the merchant's employees, servants, security agents or other agent. 
    Unemancipated minor means any unmarried person under 18 years of age under direct supervision and care of the parent or legal guardian of the minor. 
(b)  An adult or emancipated minor who takes possession of any goods, wares or merchandise displayed or offered for sale by any wholesale or retail store or other mercantile establishment without the consent of the owner, seller or merchant and with the intention of converting such goods, wares or merchandise to his own use without having paid the purchase price thereof shall be liable in a civil action for the retail price of the merchandise if it is unsalable or the percentage of the diminished value of the merchandise due to the conversion, together with attorney fees and court costs. 
(c)  The parent or legal guardian having custody of an unemancipated minor who takes possession of any goods, wares or merchandise displayed or offered for sale by any wholesale or retail store or other mercantile establishment without the consent of the owner, seller or merchant and with the intention of converting such goods, wares or merchandise to his own use without having paid the purchase price thereof shall be liable in a civil action for the retail price of the merchandise if it is unsalable or the percentage of the diminished value of the merchandise due to the conversion, together with attorney fees and court costs. 
(d)  An adult, emancipated minor or unemancipated minor against whom judgment is rendered for taking possession of any goods, wares or merchandise displayed or offered for sale by any wholesale or retail store or other mercantile establishment without the consent of the owner, seller or merchant and with the intention of converting such goods, wares or merchandise to his own use without having paid the purchase price thereof may also be required to pay exemplary damages. 
(e)  In lieu of exemplary damages prescribed by subsection (d) of this section, any adult, emancipated minor or unemancipated minor against whom a judgment for exemplary damages has been rendered under this section may be required to perform public services designated by the court, provided that in no event shall any such person be required to perform less than the number of hours of such public service necessary to satisfy the damages assessed by the court at the federal minimum wage prevailing in the state at the time of judgment, but in no case less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(f)  This section is in addition to criminal penalties and other civil remedies and shall not limit merchants or other persons from electing to pursue criminal penalties and other civil remedies, so long as a double recovery does not result. 
(g)  For the purpose of this section, liability shall not be imposed upon any governmental entity, private agency or foster parent assigned responsibility for the minor child pursuant to court order or action of the state department of human services. 
(h)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a civil action or proceeding pursuant to this section may be commenced at any time within two years after the conduct in violation of a subsection of this section terminates or the cause of action accrues. If a criminal prosecution is brought by the state or by the United States to punish, prevent or restrain any criminal action contained or described in this section, the running of the period of limitations prescribed by this section shall be suspended during the pendency of such prosecution, action or proceeding and for one year following its termination or conclusion. 
(i)  An action for recovery of damages, pursuant to this section, may be brought in the small claims division of the district court where the damages sought are within the jurisdictional limits of the court or in any other appropriate court. 
(Code 1986, § 18-24; Code 2002, § 20-21) 
State Law reference- Larceny of merchandise from retailer or wholesaler, 21 O.S. § 1731; shoplifting, arrest procedures, 22 O.S. § 1341 et seq. 
Sec. 20-21. - Malicious mischief. 
(a)  No person shall commit any act of malicious mischief. The term "malicious mischief," as used in this section, shall include the doing of any act which shall deprive any person of the exercise of any lawful right. It shall include the failure or refusal to perform a duty which is the duty of such person to perform when such failure or refusal results in the deprivation of a person's enjoyment of a lawful right. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day and each separate act or refusal to act shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-25; Code 2002, § 20-22) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, 21 O.S. § 1751 et seq. 
Sec. 20-22. - Damage to city property. 
    It shall be an offense for any person to damage, deface, injure, destroy, besmear or bedaub any building, sidewalk, street, pavement, curbing, fire hydrant, water or sewer line, fixture or other real or personal property of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 18-26; Code 2002, § 20-23) 
State Law reference- Malicious injury or destruction of property, 21 O.S. § 1760. 
Sec. 20-23. - Taking or withholding possession of city property. 
(a)  No person shall unlawfully take possession of any property, real or personal, belonging to the city or to the possession of which the city is entitled or shall unlawfully withhold the possession thereof from the city. The unlawful withholding or possession of any such property after demand therefor has been made under the direction of the city commission or any authorized city officer shall be a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-27; Code 2002, § 20-24) 
Sec. 20-24. - Destruction of private property. 
    Any person who willfully commits any act which injures the property of another is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1986, § 18-28; Code 2002, § 20-25) 
Sec. 20-25. - Radio and television interference. 
(a)  No person shall operate within the city any electrical apparatus, device, machine or equipment which needlessly and unnecessarily causes interference with radio or television reception, when such interference can be reasonably prevented by means of repairs, adjustments, the installation of corrective appliances or other practicable alterations. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-29; Code 2002, § 20-26) 
Sec. 20-26. - Trespassing. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, no person shall enter upon or remain upon any public or private property or in any area or structure of such property when: 
(1)  Such entrance or remaining is plainly forbidden by signs, markings, or otherwise, or by verbal or written command of the owner, his agent, or employee, or by written or verbal command of city, state or federal laws, ordinances or officials; or 
(2)  The property is enclosed. 
(b)  Persons excepted from the above subsection are those entering: 
(1)  By authority of federal or state law or city ordinances; 
(2)  With the expressed or implied consent of the owner, his agent or employee in charge thereof; or 
(3)  When the property has been posted "illegal to occupy" by the city, the owner or owner's agent may enter the property during daylight hours to conduct necessary repairs in accordance with all codes, but may not use the property for human habitation until such approval is granted by the city. 
(c)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-30; Code 2002, § 20-27; Ord. No. 2457NS, § 1, 6-6-2011) 
State Law reference- Trespass on posted property, 21 O.S. § 1835. 
Sec. 20-27. - Throwing acid and injuring persons, animals or property. 
    No person shall purposely or premeditatedly put or throw upon the person or property of another or upon any animal any acid or other corroding, irritating or harmful substance, with intent to injure or harass such person, property or animal. 
(Code 1986, § 18-31; Code 2002, § 20-28) 
Sec. 20-28. - Selling or giving away carbolic acid. 
    No person shall sell or give away carbolic acid of a greater strength than ten percent, except upon the prescription of a reputable physician or licensed veterinarian. This section shall not apply to sales: 
(1)  At wholesale by jobbers, wholesalers and manufacturers to retail druggists, qualified physicians or to each other; 
(2)  At retail by retail druggists to regular practitioners of medicine, dentistry or veterinary medicine; 
(3)  Made to manufacturers of proprietary or pharmaceutical preparations for use in the manufacture of such preparations; or 
(4)  Made to hospitals, colleges or scientific or public institutions. 
(Code 1986, § 18-32; Code 2002, § 20-29) 
Sec. 20-29. - Barbed wire fence. 
(a)  No person shall place or maintain any barbed wire or any other sharp iron points on any railing, banister, poles or posts in the city or place any such barbed wire or sharp iron points on any railing or banister surrounding any window area or stairway in the city, except on the top of a fence in excess of six feet in height. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-33; Code 2002, § 20-30) 
Sec. 20-30. - Electrical fences. 
(a)  No person shall charge any fence abutting upon or constructed along any public thoroughfare with electricity or electric current or cause such to be done. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-34; Code 2002, § 20-31) 
Sec. 20-31. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin. The term does not include the mature stalks of such plant; fiber produced from such stalks; oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant; any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom; fiber, oil or cake; or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
    Person means individual, corporation or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association. 
    Practitioner means: 
(1)  A physician, dentist, podiatrist, veterinarian, scientific investigator or other person licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, use for scientific purposes or administer a controlled dangerous substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state; or 
(2)  A pharmacy, hospital, laboratory or other institution licensed, registered or otherwise permitted to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, use for scientific purposes or administer a controlled dangerous substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the city's citizens by reducing the dangers of drug abuse by making it unlawful to knowingly and intentionally possess marijuana. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess marihuana unless such substance was obtained directly or pursuant to a valid prescription or order from a practitioner, while acting in the course of his professional practice. 
(d)  Penalties for violation. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  Upon conviction of the first offense, punishment shall be a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and costs and/or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed 30 days. 
(2)  Upon conviction of a second and subsequent offense, punishment shall be by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and costs and/or by imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed 60 days. 
(Code 1986, § 18-35; Code 2002, § 20-32) 
Sec. 20-32. - Indecent exposure. 
(a)  A person shall be guilty of the offense of indecent exposure when the person willfully does either of the following: 
(1)  Lewdly exposes his or her person or genitals in any public place or in any place where there are present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby; or 
(2)  Procures, counsels or assists any person to expose such person or to make any other exhibition of such person to public view or to the view of any number of persons, for the purpose of sexual stimulation of the viewer. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 18-36; Code 2002, § 20-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1021A(1), (2). 
Sec. 20-33. - Abuse of city tennis courts. 
(a)  Unless specifically posted otherwise, city tennis courts are to be used exclusively for tennis purposes, and the use of roller skates, skateboards, roller blades, ice skates or any other device used to propel across or upon any surface through the use of wheels or blades by any person is specifically prohibited. 
(b)  Any person who violates this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 18-37; Code 2002, § 20-34) 
Sec. 20-34. - Uses of airport trail. 
(a)  The airport trail is to be exclusively for walking, jogging or bicycle riding, and the use of any motorized vehicle upon the trail is specifically prohibited. 
(b)  Any person using the airport trail in the company of a dog must keep such dog on a leash no longer than six feet in length. Allowing a dog to run free on the trail or having any other pet or animal on the trail is specifically prohibited. It is an exception to this prohibition to have a pony weighing 500 pounds or less upon the trail, provided such pony is under control and accompanied by a person familiar with the pony, and further provided that, prior to the pony being allowed on the trail, its owner obtains a special permit from the city animal control division allowing such pony on the trail. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 18-38; Code 2002, § 20-35) 
Sec. 20-35. - Possession of laser pointing devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful in the city for any person to possess laser pointing devices at any sporting event or school function. This section shall not apply to those persons authorized to use such devices by the sponsoring school or organization responsible for the event. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful in the city for any person under the age of 18 years to use or possess any laser pointing device for any purpose other than the purpose for which it was designed. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 18-39; Code 2002, § 20-36) 
Sec. 20-36. - Solicitation by coercion. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coercion means: 
(1)  To approach or speak to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to believe that the person is being threatened with: 
a.  Bodily injury; or 
b.  The commission of a criminal act upon the person or another person, or upon property in the person's immediate possession. 
(2)  To persist in the solicitation after the person solicited has given a negative response; 
(3)  To block, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a solicited person; or 
(4)  To engage in conduct that would reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a solicited person to accede to demands. 
    Solicitation means to ask, beg, solicit or plead, whether orally, or in written or printed manner, for the purpose of receiving alms, charity, or gifts of items of value for oneself or another person. 
(b)  Any person who conducts a solicitation by coercion is guilty of a criminal offense. 
(c)  A person convicted of the offense of solicitation by coercion may be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Code 2002, § 20-37; Ord. No. 1964NS, § 1, 2-22-2000) 
Sec. 20-37. - Possession or sale of drug-related paraphernalia. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or sell drug-related paraphernalia. The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of kind which are used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled dangerous substance or from which a controlled dangerous substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used or intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled dangerous substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled dangerous substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled dangerous substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used or intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled dangerous substances; 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use in cutting controlled dangerous substances; 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used or intended for use in compounding controlled dangerous substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used or intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled dangerous substances; 
(10)  Containers and other object used or intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled dangerous substances into the human body; 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled dangerous substances into the human body; and 
(12)  Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs or ice pipes or chillers. 
Provided, however, the term "drug paraphernalia" shall not include separation gins intended for use in preparing tea or spice, clamps used for constructing electrical equipment, water pipes designed for ornamentation or pipes designed for smoking tobacco. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2002, § 20-28; Ord. No. 2174NS, § 1, 8-16-2004) 
Sec. 20-38. - Resisting a police officer. 
(a)  It is unlawful to resist, oppose or assault, prevent, fail to cooperate with or in any way interfere with a police officer or any person duly authorized to act as such, while the officer or authorized person is discharging or attempting to discharge his official duties within the limits of the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to warn or signal another so as to assist such other person to flee, escape or evade an officer seeking to make an arrest or for any person to bar or lock any door or barrier in the face of or in front of an approaching officer. 
(c)  Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or instruction of an individual acting in his official capacity, and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his official capacity. 
(d)  The words "obstruction of" shall, in addition to their common meaning, include: 
(1)  Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest; 
(2)  Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is under arrest; or 
(3)  Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting officer. 
(e)  Should it be necessary for a police officer to use a taser on any person violating this Code section, then a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule shall be added to any fine and costs or other punishment given to the defendant. This fee is to be collected as any other court-ordered fine and court costs. 
(Code 2002, § 20-39; Ord. No. 2299NS, § 1, 2-5-2007; Ord. No. 2432NS, § 2, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 20-39. - Resisting public officials. 
    It is unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to: 
(1)  Resist, oppose or obstruct the chief of police, any other police officer, the municipal judge, or any other officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties; 
(2)  Threaten or otherwise intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such officer or employee from the discharge of his official duties; or 
(3)  Assault or beat, or revile, abuse, use abusive or indecent language toward or about, any such officer or employee while such officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. 
(Code 2002, § 20-40; Ord. No. 2298NS, § 1, 2-5-2007) 
Sec. 20-40. - Disorderly conduct. 
    A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance, alarm or recklessly creating the risk thereof, he: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Endangers the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats, and abusive conduct; 
(4)  Jostles or crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
(5)  Uses "fighting words" directed toward any person and thus creates a turmoil; 
(6)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; or 
(7)  By acts of violence interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(Code 2002, § 20-41; Ord. No. 2297NS, § 1, 2-5-2007) 
Sec. 20-41. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 21-1; Code 2002, § 20-42; Ord. No. 2535NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 20-42. - Impersonation of police officer. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Wrongfully exercise or assume to exercise any of the powers conferred upon any police officer, sheriff, deputy sheriff or detective; 
(2)  Wear a star such as is provided for or worn by any such officer in such manner as to represent and hold himself out as any such officer; or 
(3)  By sign or words or in any other way represent or hold himself out to be any such officer or to possess the powers and authority thereof when he is not lawfully authorized to do so. 
(Code 1986, § 21-2; Code 2002, § 20-43; Ord. No. 2535NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- Falsely assuming to be police officer, 21 O.S. § 264. 
Sec. 20-43. - Failure to assist peace officer upon request. 
    No person, being present, shall refuse or neglect to assist any peace officer in making an arrest, when so requested by such officer, to help preserve the peace or prevent the escape of a person charged with an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 21-3; Code 2002, § 20-44; Ord. No. 2535NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
State Law reference- Eluding police officer, 21 O.S. § 540A; refusal to aid in arrest during riot, 21 O.S. § 1318; assistance in preventing offenses, 22 O.S. § 35; assistance in execution of process, 22 O.S. § 91 et seq.; assistance during unlawful assembly, 22 O.S. §§ 102, 103, 105; aid in execution of warrant, 22 O.S. § 188. 
Sec. 20-44. - False alarms; unlawful use of police signals. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Turn in or send in any false call or alarm for the purpose of improperly or carelessly attracting the attention of the police or any police officer; 
(2)  Wrongfully use any police whistle or any other instrument used by the police; 
(3)  Imitate any signal used by police or other officers; 
(4)  Molest or tamper with any police officers in communicating or signaling one another; or 
(5)  Turn in any false alarm to any city official. 
(Code 1986, § 21-4; Code 2002, § 20-45; Ord. No. 2535NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
Sec. 20-45. - Injury to or interference with police dogs. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the police department or interfere with the officer in charge of such dog in the performance of the functions or duties of the police department or interfere with or meddle with any such dog or officer while being used by the police department or any officer or member thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 21-5; Code 2002, § 20-46; Ord. No. 2535NS, § 1, 3-3-2014) 
Secs. 20-46-20-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of firearms, etc., 11 O.S. § 22-110; weapons, 21 O.S. § 1272 et seq. 

Sec. 20-66. - Carrying weapons generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his person or in his portfolio or purse any dagger; bowie knife; dirk knife; switchblade knife; spring-type knife; sword cane; knife having a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife; blackjack; loaded cane; billy; hand chain; metal knuckles; or any other offensive weapon, except as provided by law or ordinance. This section shall not prohibit the proper use of guns and knives for hunting, fishing or recreational purposes, nor shall this section be construed to prohibit any use of weapons in a manner otherwise permitted by statute. 
(Code 1986, § 18-46; Code 2002, § 20-66) 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of firearms, etc., 11 O.S. § 22-110; carrying weapon generally, 21 O.S. § 1272 et seq.; firearms in vehicles, 21 O.S. § 1289.7; carrying concealed weapon, 21 O.S. § 1289.8. 
Sec. 20-67. - Sale to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to sell to any minor any of the arms or weapons enumerated in section 20-66 without a written consent of the parent or guardian of such minor. Any person so doing shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 18-48; Code 2002, § 20-67) 
Sec. 20-68. - Discharging firearms in public place. 
(a)  Every person who willfully discharges any species of firearm, airgun or other weapon or who throws any other missile in any public place or in any place where there is any person to be endangered thereby, although no injury to any person shall ensue, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-49; Code 2002, § 20-68) 
State Law reference- Power of city to prevent the discharge of firearms, 11 O.S. § 22-110; discharging firearms in public place, 21 O.S. § 1364. 
Secs. 20-69-20-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- "Minors" defined, 15 O.S. § 13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means those hours during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. all days of the week and beginning at 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
    Minor means any person under 18 years of age. Furthermore, the term "minor" is synonymous with the term "juvenile." 
    Parent means any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco parentis or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court. 
    Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. 
    Remain means to stay behind, to tarry, to stay unnecessarily and to linger, to fail to leave when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of any public place. 
    Street means a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the legal right-of-way, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. 
    Time of night means the based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, generally observed at that hour by the public. 
    Year of age continues from one birthday, such as the 17th, to but not including the day of the next, such as the 18th birthday. 
(Code 1986, § 18-66(b); Code 2002, § 20-96; Ord. No. 2324NS, § 1, 8-6-2007) 
Sec. 20-97. - Purpose of curfew. 
    The purpose of curfew is to curb the increasing problem of juvenile crime, to educate and reform juvenile offenders, to punish juvenile offenders and to create an environment whereby adults and juveniles take responsibility for the actions of juveniles. It is further intended by this section to continue to hold neglectful or careless parents to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall not be a defense to the committing of any violation of any offense contained in this section or section 20-98 that a parent, guardian or any other person whose responsibility it is to exercise control over a minor was completely unaware or indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
(Code 1986, § 18-66(a); Code 2002, § 20-97) 
Sec. 20-98. - Unlawful curfew actions; defense; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any minor to be or remain in or upon the streets or any public place within the city at night, during curfew hours; 
(2)  Any parent of a minor to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, allow a minor to remain in any public place or street within the city during curfew hours; or 
(3)  Any owner, operator or employee of a public place to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of any public place during curfew hours. 
(b)  It is a defense to subsection (a)(1) of this section if the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by a parent of such minor or accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take such parent's place in accompanying such minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area; 
(2)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; 
(3)  On an errand at the specific direction of the minor's parent, without any detour or stop; 
(4)  Involved in an emergency; 
(5)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not object to a police officer; 
(6)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(7)  Engaged in an employment activity or going home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(8)  Attending or traveling between home and an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a civil organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(9)  At a legitimate business, such as a restaurant, for a legitimate purpose, such as dining, prior to the curfew hours beginning and completes the purpose for being at the business within 30 minutes of the beginning of the curfew period. Movie ticket stubs and cash register receipts will be prima facie proof that the minor was present at a legitimate function; or 
(10)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law. 
(c)  It is a defense to subsection (a)(2) of this section for the parent of a minor if the minor would qualify for any defense listed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  It is a defense to subsection (a)(3) of this section if the owner, operator or employee of a public place promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the public place during curfew hours and remained after being asked to leave. 
(e)  Any person convicted of violating any subsection of this section shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1986, § 18-67; Code 2002, § 20-98) 
Sec. 20-99. - Leaving child in vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall at any time leave any child under the age of eight years in any motor vehicle or other vehicle parked on any avenue, street, alley or public place within the city, except when such child is at all times within the custody and care of some person over the age of 14 years. 
(b)  Any person violating this section, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-68; Code 2002, § 20-99) 
Sec. 20-100. - Allowing or encouraging minor to commit offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully aid, abet, allow, encourage or, by omission of a duty, encourage or assist a minor to commit any municipal, state or federal offense. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1986, § 18-69; Code 2002, § 20-100) 
Sec. 20-101. - Parental responsibility; failure to control. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any parent to fail to control a minor who is under the parent's supervision by, after notification of a prior offense committed by the minor, failing to prevent the minor from committing the same offense or more than one other offense within one year of the date the minor committed the first offense. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1986, § 18-70; Code 2002, § 20-101) 
Sec. 20-102. - Commission of crime in presence of minor. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any municipal, state or federal offense in the presence of any person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1986, § 18-71; Code 2002, § 20-102) 
Sec. 20-103. - Permitting crimes or disorderliness on premises. 
(a)  No owner, operator, proprietor, manager or employee in charge of any place shall knowingly permit minors who have congregated on the premises to commit any offense or to carouse, make unnecessary noises, disturb, disrupt or annoy the people residing or carrying on business in the immediate neighborhood or so as to disturb the peace. Furthermore, no owner, operator, proprietor, manager or employee of any place shall permit any minor to loiter, litter or cause any disturbance on the property of a neighboring resident or business. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1986, § 18-72; Code 2002, § 20-103) 
Sec. 20-104. - Original jurisdiction of municipal court in certain juvenile cases. 
    The municipal court may elect to have and possess original jurisdiction to hear and determine any offenses committed by persons under the age of 18 years of age and penalize juveniles found guilty as allowed by 10 O.S. § 1102(E). 
(Code 1986, § 18-73; Code 2002, § 20-104) 
Sec. 20-105. - Truancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person having custody of a child who is over the age of five years, and under the age of 18 years, to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school, unless other means of education are provided for the full term the schools of the district are in session or the child is excused as provided in this section. One-half day of kindergarten shall be required of all children five years of age or older unless the child is excused from kindergarten attendance as provided in this section. A child who is five years of age shall be excused from kindergarten attendance until the next school year after the child is six years of age if a parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the child notifies the superintendent of the district where the child is a resident by certified mail prior to enrollment in kindergarten, or at any time during the first school year that the child is required to attend kindergarten pursuant to this section, of election to withhold the child from kindergarten until the next school year after the child is six years of age. A kindergarten program shall be directed toward developmentally appropriate objectives for such children. The program shall require that any teacher employed on and after January 1, 1993, to teach a kindergarten program within the public school system shall be certified in early childhood education. All teachers hired to teach a kindergarten program within the public school system prior to January 1, 1993, shall be required to obtain certification in early childhood education on or before the 1996-97 school year in order to continue to teach a kindergarten program. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any child who is over the age of 12 years and under the age of 18 years, and who has not finished four years of high school work, to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school, or receive an education by other means for the full term the schools of the district are in session. 
    Provided, that this section shall not apply: 
(1)  If any child is prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical disability, to be determined by the board of education of the district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician, or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing physician; 
(2)  If any child is excused from attendance at school, due to an emergency, by the principal teacher of the school in which such child is enrolled, at the request of the parent, guardian, custodian or other person having control of such child; 
(3)  If any child who has attained his or her sixteenth birthday is excused from attending school by written, joint agreement between: 
a.  The school administrator of the school district where the child attends school, and 
b.  The parent, guardian or custodian of the child. Provided, further, that no child shall be excused from attending school by such joint agreement between a school administrator and the parent, guardian or custodian of the child unless and until it has been determined that such action is for the best interest of the child and/or the community, and that said child shall thereafter be under the supervision of the parent, guardian or custodian until the child has reached the age of 18 years; 
(4)  If any child is excused from attending school for the purpose of observing religious holy days if before the absence, the parent, guardian, or person having custody or control of the student submits a written request for the excused absence. The school district shall excuse a student pursuant to this subsection for the days on which the religious holy days are observed and for the days on which the student must travel to and from the site where the student will observe the holy days; or 
(5)  If any child is excused from attending school for the purpose of participating in a military funeral honors ceremony upon approval of the school principal. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the attendance officer to enforce the provisions of this section. In the prosecution of a parent, guardian, or other person having custody of a child for violation of any provision of this section, it shall be an affirmative defense that the parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the child has made substantial and reasonable efforts to comply with the compulsory attendance requirements of this section but is unable to cause the child to attend school. If the court determines the affirmative defense is valid, it shall dismiss the complaint against the parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the child and shall notify the school attendance officer who shall refer the child to the district attorney for the county in which the child resides for the filing of a child in need of supervision petition against the child pursuant to the Oklahoma Juvenile Code. 
(d)  Any parent, guardian, custodian, child or other person violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $50.00, or imprisonment for not more than five days, or both such fine and imprisonment; 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, or imprisonment for not more than ten days, or both such fine and imprisonment; and 
(3)  For the third or subsequent offense, a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00, or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
Each day the child remains out of school after the oral and documented or written warning has been given to the parent, guardian, custodian, child or other person or the child has been ordered to school by the juvenile court shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  At the trial of any person charged with violating the provisions of this section, the attendance records of the child or ward may be presented in court by any authorized employee of the school district. 
(f)  The court may order the parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the child to perform community service in lieu of the fine set forth in this section. The court may require that all or part of the community service be performed for a public school district. 
(g)  The court may order as a condition of a deferred sentence or as a condition of sentence upon conviction of the parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the child any conditions as the court considers necessary to obtain compliance with school attendance requirements. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Verifying attendance of the child with the school; 
(2)  Attending meetings with school officials; 
(3)  Taking the child to school; 
(4)  Taking the child to the bus stop; 
(5)  Attending school with the child; 
(6)  Undergoing an evaluation for drug, alcohol, or other substance abuse and following the recommendations of the evaluator; and 
(7)  Taking the child for drug, alcohol, or other substance abuse evaluation and following the recommendations of the evaluator, unless excused by the court. 
(Code 1986, § 18-74; Code 2002, § 20-105; Ord. No. 2625NS, § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Secs. 20-106-20-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

Sec. 20-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust or association, however formed. 
    Proof of age means a driver's license, license for identification only or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 18 years of age or over and contains a photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on its face to be valid. 
    Sample means a tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for the purpose of promoting the product. 
    Sampling means the distribution of samples to members of the public in a public place. 
    Tobacco product means any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption. 
(Code 1986, § 18-75(b); Code 2002, § 20-131) 
Sec. 20-132. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of restricting youth access to tobacco products is to prevent development of tobacco-related illnesses, including the shortening of life, among young persons in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 18-75(a); Code 2002, § 20-132) 
Sec. 20-133. - Furnishing prohibited; proof of age required; penalties; employee liability. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner any tobacco product to any person under the age of 18 years of age or to purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any such person. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under 18 years of age to handle tobacco products when required in the performance of the employee's duties. 
(b)  Persons engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude, on the basis of appearance, that the prospective purchaser may be under 18 years of age. 
(c)  Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon proof of age shall be a defense, provided however, that this defense is not available if said defendant failed to exercise reasonable diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture appearing on the license or identification used was that of the person who presented it. 
(d)  Proof of age includes a driver's license or other government-issued photo identification purporting to establish that the purchaser was 18 years of age or older and the defendant confirmed the validity of the driver's license or other government-issued photo identification presented by the purchaser while performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction device. 
(e)  Any person violating subsection (a) or (b) of this section hall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for the first offense and in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for any second and subsequent offense. 
(f)  If the sale is made by an employee of an owner of a store at which tobacco products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine. 
(g)  Upon failure of the employee to pay the fine within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk shall notify the department of public safety, and the department shall suspend or not issue a driver's license to such employee until proof of payment has been furnished to the department of public safety. 
(h)  For purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises for business operations and multiple locations for any violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, each individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a separate entity. 
(Code 1986, § 18-75.1; Code 2002, § 20-133; Ord. No. 2223NS, § 1, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 20-134. - Purchase, receipt or possession prohibited; falsifying proof of age. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person who is under 18 years of age to purchase, accept receipt of or have in his possession a tobacco product or present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which is false, fraudulent or not actually his own, for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product. However, it shall not be unlawful for such a person to handle such tobacco product when required in the performance of such person's duties. 
(b)  When a person violates subsection (a) of this section, that person shall be assessed a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for the first offense and a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for a second or subsequent offense. Upon failure of the individual to pay such fine within 90 days of the day of such fine, the court clerk shall notify the department of public safety, and the department shall suspend or not issue a driver's license to such individual until proof of payment has been furnished to the department of public safety. 
(Code 1986, § 18-75.2; Code 2002, § 20-134; Ord. No. 2223NS, § 2, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 20-135. - Distribution of samples. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute tobacco product samples to any person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, no person shall distribute tobacco product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk or park that is within 300 feet of any playground, school or other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under 18 years of age. 
(c)  When a person violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the person shall be assessed a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for the first offense, and a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for a second or subsequent offense. 
(d)  Upon failure of the person to pay the fine within 90 days of the assessment of the fine, the court clerk shall notify the department of public safety, and the department shall suspend or not issue a driver's license to such individual until proof of payment has been furnished to the department of public safety. 
(Code 1986, § 18-75.3; Code 2002, § 20-135; Ord. No. 2223NS, § 3, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 20-136. - Sale of cigarettes except in original, sealed packaging prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer. 
(b)  When a person violates subsection (a) of this section, that person shall be assessed a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-75.4; Code 2002, § 20-136) 
Sec. 20-137. - Tobacco vending machines. 
(a)  Conditions for operation of vending machines. It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of any building or business and any other person in lawful possession or control of the space upon which a tobacco vending machine sits to permit or allow to be operated a tobacco vending machine unless: 
(1)  In areas of factories, businesses, offices or other places that are not open to the public; and 
(2)  In places that are open to the public but to which persons under 18 years of age are not permitted. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for a first offense and in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for any second and subsequent offense. 
(Code 2002, § 20-137; Ord. No. 2222NS, § 1, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 20-138. - Display of tobacco age restriction signage. 
(a)  Any person who sells or displays tobacco products at retail must post conspicuously at the place of business a sign stating the following: 
"IT IS THE LAW. WE DO NOT SELL TOBACCO TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE." 
The sign shall also provide a toll-free telephone number for the purposes of reporting violations of the Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act. 
(b)  The violation of this section carries a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each day the violation occurs. 
(Code 2002, § 20-138; Ord. No. 2222NS, § 2, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 20-139. - Public access to tobacco products. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to display or offer for sale tobacco products in any manner that allows public access to the tobacco product without assistance from the person displaying the tobacco product or an employee or owner of the store. 
(b)  If the business does not admit into the store persons under 18 years of age, this section does not apply. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for a first offense, and fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for any second or subsequent offense. 
(Code 2002, § 20-139; Ord. No. 2222NS, § 3, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 20-140. - Tobacco paraphernalia. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner to a person under the age of 18 years of age any material or device used in the smoking, chewing or other method of consumption of tobacco, including cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, and other items designed primarily for the smoking or ingesting of tobacco products. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each offense. 
(Code 2002, § 20-140; Ord. No. 2222NS, § 4, 11-7-2005) 
Secs. 20-141-20-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY MINORS 

Sec. 20-160. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits or wine beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more, of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. This term includes intoxicating beverages and low point beer as defined herein. 
    Gathering is a party, gathering, or event where a group of three or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. 
    Intoxicating beverage includes beverages containing more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight. 
    Legal guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
    Low point beer means and includes beverages containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products. 
    Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
    Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or step-parent of another person. 
    Premises means any residence or other private property, place or premises, including any commercial or business premises. 
    Response costs are the costs associated with respect to responses by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative cost attributable to such responses; 
(2)  The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured, responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a gathering; 
(3)  The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a gathering; and 
(4)  Any other allowable costs relating to the enforcement of this section. 
(Code 2002, § 20-160; Ord. No. 2325NS, § 2, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 20-161. - Consumption of alcohol by minor in public place, place open to the public or place not open to the public. 
    Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to: 
(1)  Consume at any public place or any place open to the public alcoholic beverage; or 
(2)  Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage by a minor who is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Code 2002, § 20-161; Ord. No. 2325NS, § 3, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 20-162. - Hosting, permitting or allowing a party, gathering or event where minors are consuming alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
(a)  (1)  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the premises, either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic beverage, had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated and is found in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as at a non-family gathering. 
(d)  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated, and is found to be in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as at a non-religious gathering. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the state to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, or by imprisonment not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, plus all court costs and statutory penalties. 
(Code 2002, § 20-162; Ord. No. 2325NS, § 4, 8-20-2007) 
Sec. 20-163. - Reservation of legal options. 
(a)  Violations of section 20-162 may be prosecuted by the city criminally, civilly and/or administratively as provided by the Municipal Code. The city may seek administrative fees and response costs associated with enforcement of this section by using all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance or law. This section shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by division 3 of this chapter, nor shall they limit the city's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this section and section 20-162. 
(b)  This section shall not apply where prohibited or pre-empted by state or federal law. 
(Code 2002, § 20-163; Ord. No. 2325NS, § 5, 8-20-2007) 
Secs. 20-164, 20-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances, 11 O.S. § 22-121, 50 O.S. § 1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-166. - Applicability of article. 
    The sections of this article for the prevention, removal and abatement of nuisances shall not apply where a complete and adequate procedure is specially provided by this Code or any other city ordinance or any other laws. 
(Code 1986, § 18-81; Code 2002, § 20-166) 
Sec. 20-167. - Rights of city. 
    The city reserves the right to exercise its powers to abate public nuisances, but also in certain selected cases it reserves the right to resort to the courts for injunctive relief for abatement of nuisances. 
(Code 1986, § 18-82; Code 2002, § 20-167) 
Sec. 20-168. - Appeals. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to deny the right of appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, as defined by state law, and in the manner provided by state law. 
(Code 1986, § 18-83; Code 2002, § 20-168) 
State Law reference- Appellate jurisdiction of district court, 12 O.S. § 951. 
Sec. 20-169. - Maintaining or permitting nuisances. 
    No owner or occupant of any premises situated in the city or any other person shall permit any nuisance to exist or continue within the city in violation of this article. Any person violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punished with a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day in which such violation takes place shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1986, § 18-84; Code 2002, § 20-169) 
Sec. 20-170. - Enumeration. 
(a)  Public nuisances, except as provided in 50 O.S. § 1.1, are those things, acts, occupations or uses of property that: 
(1)  Annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of any considerable number of persons. 
(2)  Offend the public decency. 
(3)  Unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any lake, basin, public park, square, street, alley or highway. 
(4)  Shall in any way render any considerable number of persons insecure in life or in the use of property. 
(b)  The fact that certain acts, conditions or other things are declared in this article to be nuisances shall not be construed to deny that any other act, fact, condition or thing shall not be a nuisance if such other act, fact, condition or thing would have been a nuisance under this Code or any other city ordinance in the absence of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 18-85; Code 2002, § 20-170) 
Sec. 20-171. - Public peace and safety. 
    The following are declared to be public nuisances affecting public peace and safety: 
(1)  All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles approaching an intersection of public highways from having a clear view of traffic approaching such intersection from cross streets, for 30 feet along such cross streets measured from the property line. 
(2)  All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the ground and all wires not licensed by the city. 
(3)  Use or display of fireworks when fireworks are prohibited by law. 
(4)  All loud or unusual noises and annoying vibrations which offend the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(5)  All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected within the fire limits in violation of the regulations concerning the manner and materials of construction. 
(6)  Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such conditions as are provided by law. 
(7)  Radio or television aerials strung or erected in any way contrary to any law relating to the aerials. 
(8)  Any use of the public streets or sidewalks which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the streets or sidewalks. 
(9)  Accumulation of weeds and trash; abandoned automobiles; and dilapidated houses, buildings and accessory structures. 
(Code 1986, § 18-86; Code 2002, § 20-171) 
Sec. 20-172. - Loud sound from amplification systems in motor vehicles. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Plainly audible means any sound produced by a sound-amplification system from within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet, or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible, and base reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway. 
    Sound-amplification system means any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker or any other electronic device used for the amplification of the human voice. 
(b)  No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any sound-amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more, from the vehicle. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound amplification system and that any of the following apply: 
(1)  The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition. 
(2)  The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle. 
(3)  The vehicle was owned and operated by the city or a public or private utility company. 
(4)  The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as parades, fireworks, sports events or other activities, which have been approved by the city commission or city manager. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 18-89; Code 2002, § 20-172; Ord. No. 2194NS, §§ 1, 2, 4-18-2005) 
Sec. 20-173. - Loud sound from amplification systems in private residences. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Plainly audible means any sound produced by a sound-amplification system at the residence which clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible, and base reverberations are included. 
    Sound-amplification system means any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of the human voice. 
(b)  No person owing, renting or otherwise occupying a private residence within the city shall operate, or permit the operation of, any sound-amplification system at the residence so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the residence. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the person occupying the residence was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound amplification system and that any of the following apply: 
(1)  The system was being operated to request medical assistance. 
(2)  The residence and/or real property it is affixed to or located upon was used for authorized public activities which had been approved by the city commission or the city manager. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 18-90; Code 2002, § 20-173; Ord. No. 2194NS, §§ 3, 4, 4-18-2005) 
Secs. 20-174-20-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ACCUMULATIONS OF TRASH AND WEEDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Cleaning and mowing of property, 11 O.S. § 22-111. 

Sec. 20-201. - Prohibited. 
    No owner, occupant or other person in charge of any lot or piece of ground shall allow trash, litter, grass exceeding 12 inches in height or weeds to accumulate thereon or suffer or permit water or putrid substances, whether animal or vegetable, to accumulate thereon so as to cause an offensive odor to be emitted therefrom or to become in a condition injurious or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood or any inhabitant thereof. Any such condition is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as such. 
(Code 1986, § 18-102; Code 2002, § 20-201) 
Sec. 20-202. - Health nuisances. 
(a)  The city code enforcement officer shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises to abate or remove from such premises, at the owner's or occupant's own expense, any condition specified in section 20-201, any source of filth, any cause of sickness or condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease or any other condition adversely affecting the public health within ten days or within such other time as might be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  At least ten days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property by certified mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office, or any other source deemed by the city to be more accurate than said tax rolls before the community development director holds a hearing or takes action. At the time of mailing the notice to any property owner the municipality shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate, and said notice shall further state that unless such work is performed within ten days of the date of the notice, the work shall be done by the city and a notice of lien shall be filed with the county clerk against the property for the cost due and owing to the city. The notice shall further state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days after the date of the notice to determine whether the accumulation of trash or growth of weeds or grass has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or hazardous to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property. The notice shall also state that any accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owners property occurring within six months after the removal of trash, cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property pursuant to such notice may be summarily abated by the city; that the cost of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner. If the certified mail to the property owner is refused, service of the notice shall be deemed valid and complete. However, if the property owner cannot be located as shown by the certified mail being returned as unclaimed, notice shall be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property for ten days or by publication, by publishing in a legal newspaper published in the city, and which is of general circulation within the city, one time not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action by the city. 
(c)  The owner of the property may give his written consent to the city authorizing the removal or the abatement of other public nuisances. By giving written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing by the city. 
(d)  A hearing may be held by the city manager or his designee, the administrative officer, to determine whether the accumulation of trash or growth of weeds or grass or other public nuisance has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or has caused a hazard to traffic or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property. 
(e)  Upon finding that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or hazard and that the property would be benefitted by the removal of such conditions, the city agents are granted the right of entry on the property for the removal or abatement of the conditions and performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the city. 
(f)  The city manager or his designee, the administrative officer, shall determine the actual cost of abatement and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including the cost of notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward by certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the property owner at the address specified in subsection (b) of this section a statement of such actual costs and demanding payment. If the cleaning and mowing or abatement is done by the city, the cost to the property owner for the cleaning and mowing or abatement shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance and equipment required. If the cleaning and mowing or abatement of other public nuisances is done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. 
(g)  If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing of the statement, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer, and the costs shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. The cost and interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer, coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid. At any time prior to the collection as provided in this subsection, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon. Upon receiving payment, if any, the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and directing discharge of the lien. 
(h)  The property owner shall have the right of appeal to the city commission from any order of the city manager or his designee, the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the administrative order is rendered. 
(i)  If the city causes property within the city limits to be cleared of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedures provided for in subsection (b) of this section, any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the property occurring within a six-month period may be declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner. At the time of each such summary abatement, the city shall notify the property owner of the abatement and the cost thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days after the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided for in subsection (d) of this section. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as provided for in subsections (e) and (f) of this section. However, this subsection shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was transferred after notice was given pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(j)  Any person, owner or occupant who shall violate any subsection of this section shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day in which a violation takes place shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-330, 18-87(a)(1)-(8), (c), 18-88(a), 18-104; Code 2002, § 20-202; Ord. No. 2056NS, § 1, 5-20-2002) 
State Law reference- Health nuisances, 63 O.S. § 1-1011. 
Sec. 20-203. - Littering. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "litter" means any flaming or glowing substances, except those which by law may be placed upon highway rights-of-way; any substance that may cause a fire; or any bottles, cans, trash, garbage or debris of any kind, including excessive amounts of grass clippings left on city rights-of-way and streets. As used in this section, the term "litter" shall not include trash, garbage or debris placed beside a public road for collection by a garbage or collection agency or deposited upon or within public property designated by the city or by any of its agencies as an appropriate place for such deposits, if the person making the deposit is authorized to use the property for such purpose. 
(b)  Loose paper or paper materials lying on the streets, alleys, vacant lots or other premises increase the fire risk and are against the public health and safety and are declared to be a nuisance. The owner or occupant of the premises where such nuisance exists shall be guilty of a violation of this article when he permits such a nuisance to exist. 
(c)  No person shall commit or aid or abet in the creation or the continuation of a nuisance described in this section. 
(d)  An aider or abetter, within the meaning of this section, is a person who does or causes another to do the following: 
(1)  Throw, place, drop or leave any handbills, circulars or other paper material exclusively intended for advertising purposes on any street, alley, vacant lot, public place or other premises within the city. 
(2)  Throw any circulars, handbills or advertising literature into any car, automobile or other vehicle at any public place or other premises within the city. 
(3)  Tack, nail, hang, suspend or place any circulars, handbills or advertising matter in quantities of any size to poles, walls, fences, trees or other outside fixtures for the purpose of being pulled off by the public. 
(4)  Paste or stick any label or poster on the windshield or other part of any car, automobile or other vehicle. 
(e)  All materials under this section shall be deemed to be trash as specified in section 20-201. 
(f)  The operator of a vehicle shall be liable for any act of throwing, dropping, depositing or otherwise placing any litter from his vehicle upon highways, roads or public property unless any other person in the vehicle admits to or is identified as having committed the act. Any person who admits to or is identified as having committed such act shall be liable for the act. Further, any person who throws, drops, deposits or otherwise places any litter on highways, roads or public property, regardless of whether or not that person is in a motor vehicle, shall also be liable for the act. 
(g)  Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-10. 
(Code 1986, § 18-103; Code 2002, § 20-203; Ord. No. 1944NS, §§ 1, 2, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 20-204. - Escape of load from vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any road or street within the city, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom. However, sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(b)  No person shall operate on any street or road within the city any vehicle with any load, unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. Any vehicle loaded with sand, cinders or other loose materials susceptible to blowing or otherwise escaping shall have such load covered to prevent the blowing or escaping of the load from the vehicle. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to trucks loaded with livestock, poultry or agricultural products only except bailed agricultural products, provided that any such truck shall be so constructed or loaded as to prevent such livestock or poultry from escaping therefrom. 
(Code 1986, § 18-109; Code 2002, § 20-204) 
Secs. 20-205-20-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GRAFFITI 

Sec. 20-236. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Shawnee Graffiti Eradication Ordinance." 
(Code 1986, § 18-130; Code 2002, § 20-236) 
Sec. 20-237. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applies graffiti, apply graffiti or applying graffiti means the act of drawing, painting, chiseling, scratching or etching graffiti on public or private property within the city. 
    Director means the director of the public works department or designee. 
    Graffiti means, without limitation, any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing or other mark of any kind visible to the public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched or etched on a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other structure. However, the term "graffiti" does not include advertising or any other letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the property or by an authorized agent for such owner or occupant. 
    Occupant means any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as a tenant of property or any person in actual physical possession of property. 
    Owner means any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as the owner of a fee simple interest in property. 
    Removal, remove or removed, when used in relation to the eradication of graffiti, means the act of taking graffiti off or masking the presence of graffiti on a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other structure. 
(Code 1986, § 18-132; Code 2002, § 20-237) 
Sec. 20-238. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the prevention and removal of graffiti within the city. The intent of the city commission is to prevent and remove a public nuisance that is a growing blight on and a substantial detriment to the health, safety and general welfare of the community and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1986, § 18-131; Code 2002, § 20-238) 
Sec. 20-239. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    The city commission declares that graffiti on public or private property within the city constitutes a public nuisance to the detriment of the city and its inhabitants and visitors. The provisions for prevention and removal of such public nuisance are set forth in sections 20-240 and 20-241. 
(Code 1986, § 18-133; Code 2002, § 20-239) 
Sec. 20-240. - Application prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall apply graffiti to public or private property within the city. 
(b)  Any person who applies graffiti to public or private property within the city shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each act of applying graffiti shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person convicted of the offense of applying graffiti to public or private property within the city shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  This section shall be enforced by the city police department. 
(Code 1986, § 18-134; Code 2002, § 20-240) 
Sec. 20-241. - Removal from private property. 
    For the purpose of eradicating graffiti, the nuisance abatement procedures set forth in section 20-202 will be applied and followed by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 18-135; Code 2002, § 20-241) 
Sec. 20-242. - Sale of spray paint to minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Minor means any individual under the age of 18 years of age. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation selling or offering for sale any item prohibited by this section. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. The following conduct shall be prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall sell to any minor any aerosol container of paint (spray paint) capable of defacing property, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or a guardian. 
(2)  Any person selling or offering for sale any aerosol container of paint shall require bona fide evidence of majority and identity. Bona fide evidence of majority and identity shall be established only by a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. 
Proof that the defendant or his employee or agent demanded, was shown and acted in reliance upon such bona fide evidence in any sale transaction forbidden by this subsection shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution therefor. 
(c)  Posting of sign. Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of business wherein aerosol containers of paint capable of defacing property are sold shall conspicuously post, at the place of display of such containers for sale and at the place of sale (cash register), a sign in letters at least one-half inch in height stating, "Spray paint shall not be sold to minors." 
(d)  Consequences of providing paint used for graffiti. Any person who has reached the age of majority who shall give, trade or otherwise provide to any minor any aerosol container of paint used in the actual application of graffiti or defacement of property shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed. 
(e)  Penalty. The penalty for violation of this section shall be 60 days in the city jail and/or a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each individual violation. 
(Code 1986, § 18-136; Code 2002, § 20-242) 
Sec. 20-243. - Prohibitions on spray paint containers and broad-tipped indelible markers. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 years may possess an aerosol spray-paint container or broad-tipped indelible marker on any public property unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, employer, teacher or other adult in any similar relationship and such possession is for a lawful purpose. 
(b)  No person may possess an aerosol spray paint container or broad-tipped indelible marker on any private property unless the owner, agent, manager, or other person having control of the property consented to the presence of the aerosol spray paint container or broad-tipped indelible marker. 
(c)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be 60 days in the city jail and/or a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each individual violation. 
(Code 2002, § 20-243; Ord. No. 2293NS, § 1, 1-16-2007) 
Chapter 21 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Acquisition of park property, 11 O.S. §§ 22-104, 36-401 et seq.; parks and recreation, 11 O.S. § 33-101 et seq.; reservoirs, 11 O.S. § 37-102; improvement districts, 11 O.S. § 39-101 et seq.; City-County Park and Recreation Act, 19 O.S. § 1001 et seq.; public bathing places, 63 O.S. § 1-1013 et seq. 

Sec. 21-1. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any section of this chapter, either by doing anything which is prohibited or by failing or refusing to do that which is commanded, upon conviction, shall be punished in any sum as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by the city commission, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1986, § 19-1; Code 2002, § 21-1; Ord. No. 2598NS, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 21-2. - Applicability of chapter. 
    All places owned by the city and used as parks are declared to be public parks within the meaning of this chapter and are subject to all rules, regulations and provisions set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 19-2; Code 2002, § 21-2) 
Sec. 21-3. - Enforcement. 
    The city manager or designee shall enforce all regulations relating to the city's public parks. 
(Code 1986, § 19-3; Code 2002, § 21-3) 
Sec. 21-4. - Employment of engineers, architects and other help. 
    The city manager may employ such engineers, architects and other help as are necessary for the preservation, maintenance, ornamentation, landscaping and upkeep of the city parks, with the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 19-4; Code 2002, § 21-4) 
Sec. 21-5. - Approval of contracts. 
    All contracts for the employment of labor or for the purchase of materials, machinery or park equipment or otherwise for park purposes shall be presented to the city manager for approval. 
(Code 1986, § 19-5; Code 2002, § 21-5) 
Sec. 21-6. - Hours. 
    The city commission shall by resolution determine the hours public parks and recreation areas are closed to the public. If, in the opinion of the city manager, it is necessary to limit the hours the parks and recreation areas should be open, and it is impossible or impractical to obtain approval of the city commission, the city manager shall have the authority to make the changes in hours until approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 19-21; Code 2002, § 21-6; Ord. No. 2598NS, § 2, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 21-7. - Entering when closed; signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any public park or recreation area during hours such public park or recreation area is closed to the public. Appropriate signs shall be erected in conspicuous places notifying the public of the hours such public park or recreation area is closed to the public. 
(b)  The city manager may grant special permission to groups of persons to use public parks and recreation areas after closing hours when, in his judgment, such groups are properly supervised and will be engaged in lawful activities. 
(Code 1986, § 19-22; Code 2002, § 21-7) 
Sec. 21-8. - Emergency closings. 
    In an emergency, the mayor or city manager shall have the power to order public parks and recreation areas closed to the public, and any person who is in such closed public park and recreation area, after notice by a sign erected by the city or after notice by the police department, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 19-23; Code 2002, § 21-8) 
Sec. 21-9. - Vendors in recreational areas. 
(a)  The term "vendor," as used in this section, shall mean any person who sells, regardless of the character of property sold. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in the business of vending or to sell property of any kind in any of the city's recreational areas, without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk. 
(c)  The city manager is authorized to designate city recreation areas where vendors may operate. The city clerk is authorized to issue space designation permits for vendors who desire to operate in such city recreational areas. Vendors holding such space permits shall operate in only those spaces designated by such space permits. Such permits shall be issued on a daily basis. However, permits may be issued to cover specific events held in the recreational areas. The city clerk shall charge a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by the city commission per day for each of such permits issued on a daily basis or a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by the city commission for each specific event. 
(d)  Permit fees for vendors that are charitable organizations may be waived by the city commission. The term "charitable organization" is defined as an organization that has no capital stock and no provision for making dividends or profits, but derives its funds mainly from public and private charity, and holds them in trust to be expended for charitable purposes. 
(e)  Any vendor who operates within any of the city's recreational areas without first securing a permit as provided for in this section, along with his merchandise, vending equipment and other property relating to such vending, shall be subject to immediate removal from such place by the police department, and such vendors shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined up to an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by the city commission, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 19-6; Code 2002, § 21-9; Ord. No. 2598NS, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 21-10. - Advertising. 
    No person shall advertise in any manner or distribute or hand out any circulars, handbills, posters or political literature of any kind or of any commodity or other thing in any public park. No person shall affix any circulars, handbills or posters of any kind on any tree, lamppost, hydrant, curbstone, sidewalk, coping, flagstone, fence, wall, building or other place in any public park or on any street, avenue, alley or other public grounds under the supervision of the city. No person shall drive any animal or vehicle displaying any advertising of any kind in or through any public park in the city or under its supervision. 
(Code 1986, § 19-7; Code 2002, § 21-10) 
Sec. 21-11. - Music, vocals or instrumentals. 
    No person shall render any music, whether vocal or instrumental, in any of the city parks or recreational areas in such a way as to disturb the peace and quiet enjoyment of other users of the area. 
(Code 1986, § 19-8; Code 2002, § 21-11; Ord. No. 2598NS, § 3, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 21-12. - Motor vehicles. 
    No motorized vehicle shall be operated, ridden or driven within any public park, except in such places specifically designated as places for such motorized vehicles. Such places shall be designated by appropriate signs erected by the city. However, this section shall not apply to city-owned vehicles. The city manager or designee may authorize the use of motor vehicles in public parks when in his judgment such use is necessary or advisable. 
(Code 1986, § 19-9; Code 2002, § 21-12) 
Sec. 21-13. - Picnics or meals. 
(a)  No person shall use the city parks for the purpose of picnics or meals of any kind except during the hours the parks are opened as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person using the city parks for the purpose of luncheons, picnics or meals of any kind to collect all waste, rubbish and garbage and to place the waste, rubbish and garbage in receptacles provided for the purpose. 
(c)  No person shall disturb or interfere with any picnic or social gathering or program of any group of persons lawfully assembled in any public park. 
(Code 1986, § 19-10; Code 2002, § 21-13) 
Sec. 21-14. - Injuring or defacing property. 
    No person shall use improperly, injure, cut, break or in any way deface any of the trees, shrubs, plants, turf, grass, lampposts, fences, bridges, buildings or other constructions of property in or upon any park. 
(Code 1986, § 19-11; Code 2002, § 21-14) 
Sec. 21-15. - Littering. 
(a)  No person shall throw, place, leave, scatter or otherwise deposit any papers, boxes, cartons or rubbish of any kind on any of the grounds, parking areas, walks, paths or places in any public park. 
(b)  No person shall throw stones or rubbish of any kind into any pool or pond or other place in the public parks, except into receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 19-12; Code 2002, § 21-15) 
Sec. 21-16. - Trespassing on flower beds or city plots. 
    No person shall go or walk upon any space in any public park reserved for flowers or other plants or appropriated to any special use or invade any plot reserved by the city for shrubbery, grass or flowers or for other special purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 19-13; Code 2002, § 21-16) 
Sec. 21-17. - Racing. 
    Horse racing and racing with automobiles or other vehicles is prohibited in any public park, unless permission therefor is given by the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1986, § 19-14; Code 2002, § 21-17) 
Sec. 21-18. - Attaching wires or devices to trees, plants or structures. 
(a)  No person, without a written permit from the city manager or designee, shall attach any electric wires, insulator or other device of any character to any tree, plant or structure in any park. 
(b)  No person shall establish, erect or maintain any telegraph wires, telephone wires or electric light and power wires or construction for the support of such in, through or across any public park, except with the written permission of the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1986, § 19-15; Code 2002, § 21-18) 
Sec. 21-19. - Climbing trees. 
    No person shall climb any trees within any public park. 
(Code 1986, § 19-16; Code 2002, § 21-19) 
Sec. 21-20. - Animals and fowl. 
(a)  No person shall permit any horse, cow or other domestic animal to go in or run at large in the public parks, and all such animals shall be taken up and impounded and disposed of as provided by law. 
(b)  No person shall permit domestic fowl which belong to him or are in his possession to escape into or run in any public park. 
(c)  No person shall chase, kill, set snares for, pet or tease any rabbit, squirrel, bird, fish or any other animal or thing belonging to the city in any parks or kept therein. 
(Code 1986, § 19-17; Code 2002, § 21-20) 
Sec. 21-21. - Fires. 
(a)  No person shall make a fire for any purpose in any public park, unless the fire is contained in a designated firepit, firebox or designated fireplace located within the park. 
(b)  All fires must be extinguished so that ashes are cool to the touch when fire is not in use. Portable fireboxes may be brought into the park, provided ashes are not dumped onto the ground after use. Ashes must be extinguished and placed in designated refuse receptacles. 
(Code 1986, § 19-18; Code 2002, § 21-21) 
Sec. 21-22. - Discharge of firearms. 
    No person other than a police officer in the performance of his duties shall discharge any firearm in any public park. 
(Code 1986, § 19-19; Code 2002, § 21-22) 
Sec. 21-23. - Begging; solicitations. 
    No person shall solicit, beg or accept any alms or gifts for charitable or other purposes in any public park within the city or belonging to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 19-20; Code 2002, § 21-23) 
Sec. 21-24. - Dogs. 
    No person shall permit any dog to be at large in a park or recreation area, except at the city's dog park. 
(Code 2002, § 21-24; Ord. No. 2598NS, § 4, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 21-25. - Fees. 
    The following city facilities and park infrastructure may include admission and rental fees, and the dollar amounts of the fees and the portion to be retained by the parks and recreation department shall be set from time to time by resolution of the mayor and the city commissioners and shall be listed in the city fee schedule, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Shawnee Splash admission and rental fees. 
(2)  Municipal gym rental fees. 
(3)  Community center rental fees. 
(4)  Park pavilion rental fees. 
(Code 2002, § 21-25; Ord. No. 2598NS, § 5, 3-20-2017) 
Chapter 22 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Buildings, zoning, planning and platting, 11 O.S. § 41-101 et seq.; vacating plats and public ways, 11 O.S. § 42-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Adoption of subdivision standards. 
    There is adopted, for the purpose of establishing standards and regulations for the subdivision of land within the city, that certain compilation entitled "Subdivision Regulations, Shawnee, Oklahoma, 1990," adopted by Ordinance No. 1549NS on June 18, 1990, of which compilation not less than three copies are filed in the office of the city clerk and are made a part of the public records of the city. The compilation is incorporated in this section as fully as if set out at length, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 20-1; Code 2002, § 22-1) 
State Law reference- Subdivisions generally, 11 O.S. § 41-101 et seq. 
Secs. 22-2-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commissions generally, 11 O.S. § 45-101 et seq. 

Sec. 22-21. - Established; composition. 
    A planning commission is established in the city. The planning commission shall consist of seven members. The mayor or designee and the director of planning shall be ex officio members of the planning commission. 
(Code 1986, § 20-16; Code 2002, § 22-31) 
Sec. 22-22. - Qualifications, appointment and terms of office. 
    All of the members of the planning commission shall reside in the city and shall be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the city commission, each for a term of three years. 
(Code 1986, § 20-17; Code 2002, § 22-32) 
Sec. 22-23. - Vacancies; chairman; compensation of members. 
    All vacancies in the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term. The planning commission shall elect its own chairman, who shall serve for a period of two years or until his successor is elected. The members of the planning commission shall serve without pay. 
(Code 1986, § 20-18; Code 2002, § 22-33) 
Sec. 22-24. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The planning commission shall prepare, from time to time, plans for the betterment of the city as a place of residence or for business. It may consider and investigate any subject matter tending to the development and betterment of the city and make recommendations as it may deem advisable concerning the adoption thereof to any department of the city government and for any purpose make or cause to be made surveys, maps or plans. The necessary expenses incurred by the planning commission shall be appropriated and paid out of the city treasury as are other legal expenses of the city, but in no event may the planning commission be authorized to create a deficiency. 
(b)  Before final action may be taken by the city or any department thereof on the location and design of any public building, statue, memorial, park, parkway, boulevard, street, alley, playground, public ground or bridge or a change in the location or grade of any street or alley, the question shall be submitted to the planning commission for investigation and report. 
(c)  All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in lots or blocks and the streets, alleys or other portions of the plans, plats or replats intended to be dedicated to public or private use, within the corporate limits, shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its approval or rejection. Before such plans, plats or replats shall be entitled to be recorded in the office of the county clerk, they must be approved by the city commission. It shall be unlawful for any person to receive or record any such plan, plat or replat in any public office unless the plan, plat or replat shall bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the city commission. The disapproval of any such plan, plat or replat by the city commission shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon. 
(Code 1986, § 20-19; Code 2002, § 22-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 45-103. 
Secs. 22-25-22-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN REVITALIZATION 

Sec. 22-52. - Project plan adopted. 
(a)  The Shawnee Downtown Revitalization Project Plan is hereby adopted and approved, without amendment, as recommended by the Shawnee Downtown Revitalization Project Review Committee. As used herein, "Shawnee Downtown Revitalization Project Plan" or "project plan" shall mean the document dated May 29, 2003, comprised of one cover sheet, five pages of text, four exhibits labeled "A", "B" "C" and "D" and titled "Shawnee Downtown Revitalization Project Plan." 
(b)  All actions taken and all recommendations and findings made in connection with the Shawnee Downtown Revitalization Project Plan by the city planning commission and the Shawnee Downtown Revitalization Project Review Committee are hereby ratified and confirmed including, but not limited to, designation and selection of representatives to the review committee from the taxing jurisdictions and the public at large, recommendations for approval, findings of conformance with the comprehensive (master) plan, eligibility of the increment district and financial impacts upon the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Code 2002, § 22-45; Ord. No. 2098NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 22-53. - Increment district number one. 
    For identification purposes, the name of the increment district shall be increment district number one, City of Shawnee. 
    Increment district number one, City of Shawnee, is hereby created as of the date of the adoption of this article [August 4, 2003]. 
    The boundaries of the Shawnee Downtown Revitalization Project Area ("project area") and the boundaries of increment district number one, City of Shawnee, which are identical to those of the project area, are hereby designated and adopted as follows: 
PROJECT AREA AND INCREMENT DISTRICT BOUNDARIES DESCRIPTION 
    The project area and increment district boundaries are identical and are shown on Exhibit A, "Shawnee Downtown Revitalization Project Area and Increment District Boundaries." The project area and increment district boundaries are described as follows: 
    The project area and the increment district boundaries are generally described as: 
Seventh Street on the south, Highland Avenue on the north, Philadelphia Avenue on the east, and Board Avenue on the west. 
    The project area and increment district boundaries embrace the following specifically described area: 
A portion of Section 19, Township 10 North, Range 4 East, City of Shawnee, Pottawatomie County, State of Oklahoma, consisting of: 
(1)  Woodland Park; and 
(2)  All of blocks One (1), Ten (10), Eleven (11), Twelve (12), Thirteen (13), Fourteen (14), Fifteen (15), Twenty-four (24), Twenty-five (25), Twenty-six (26), Twenty-seven (27), Twenty-eight (28) and Twenty-nine (29), of the Amended Plat of the NW Quarter of the City of Shawnee; and 
(3)  All of Blocks Five (5), Six (6), Fifteen (15), Sixteen (16), and Twenty-five (25) of Choctaw Addition to the City of Shawnee; 
Including the entirety of all the streets, adjacent rights-of-way and intersections lying within or adjacent to the described Blocks and Woodland Park. 
(Code 2002, § 22-46; Ord. No. 2098NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 22-54. - Findings. 
    The city commission hereby finds that: 
(1)  The project area and the increment district, which are coextensive, are a reinvestment area as defined by the Local Development Act, 62 O.S. § 851 et seq. 
(2)  The project area and the increment district, which are coextensive, are also located within an enterprise zone, approved by the state department of commerce on August 19, 1999, (enterprise zone) and, as such, are deemed unproductive, undeveloped, underdeveloped or blighted areas pursuant to article X, section 6(C) of the state constitution and, therefore, eligible for development and redevelopment through tax increment apportionment. 
(3)  The improvement of the project area is likely to enhance the value of other real property in the area and to promote the general public interest. 
(4)  The guidelines of paragraphs 1 and 2 of section 3 of the Local Development Act (62 O.S. § 852) shall be followed. 
(5)  The aggregate net assessed value of the taxable property in all districts, as determined pursuant to the Local Development Act (62 O.S. § 862), within the city does not exceed 25 percent of the total net assessed value of taxable property within the city. 
(6)  The aggregate net assessed value of the taxable property in all districts, as determined pursuant to the Local Development Act (62 O.S. § 862), within the city does not exceed 25 percent of the total assessed net value of any affected school districts located within the city. 
(7)  The land area of all districts within the city does not exceed 25 percent of the total land area of the city. 
(8)  The downtown revitalization project plan is feasible and conforms to the master or comprehensive plan of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 22-47; Ord. No. 2098NS, § 6, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 22-55. - Amendments. 
    The city shall have the authority to make minor amendments to the downtown revitalization project plan; provided that an amendment is defined as minor in accordance with the Local Development Act, 62 O.S. § 858(D). 
(Code 2002, § 22-48; Ord. No. 2098NS, § 7, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 22-56. - Implementation. 
    The city or, at the direction of the city, the community development director designated in paragraph VII.B of the project plan shall have the authority to carry out certain provisions of the project plan, and to incur project costs, pursuant to section VIII of the project plan. 
(Code 2002, § 22-49; Ord. No. 2098NS, § 8, 8-4-2003) 
Sec. 22-57. - Apportionment of ad valorem taxes. 
(a)  The increment of ad valorem taxes, as defined by the Local Development Act, 62 O.S. § 853(9), from increment district number one, City of Shawnee, in excess of ad valorem taxes generated by the base assessed value of the increment district, may be apportioned and used to pay project costs authorized pursuant to section VIII of the project plan. The direction of apportionment of increments from time to time is authorized for increments generated in current and prior fiscal years only. It is the intention of the city to carry out the project plan, but not to bind or limit future legislative action. The obligation of future increments of ad valorem taxes is prohibited. 
(b)  From and after apportionment, the apportioned increments shall constitute funds of the city. Apportioned increments may be used for the payment of project costs, provided, however, the pledge of apportioned increments toward repayment of debt incurred (if any) shall be limited to increments actually apportioned by the city and any debt instruments shall provide that the city has no legal obligation or promise to apportion increments in future years. 
(Code 2002, § 22-50; Ord. No. 2098NS, §§ 9, 10, 8-4-2003) 
Secs. 22-58-22-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITIZENS' ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON SUSTAINABILITY 

Sec. 22-88. - Established. 
    There is established the citizens' advisory committee on sustainability. 
(Code 2002, § 22-71; Ord. No. 2406NS, § 2, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-89. - Composition; terms. 
(a)  The citizens' advisory committee on sustainability shall consist of not more than seven voting members who are citizens of the city and the surrounding area. Members shall include, but not be limited to, representatives of the legal, medical, university, public school, industrial and nonprofit communities who have an interest in sustainable living. All positions shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city commission. One member of the city commission, in addition to the mayor, shall serve as an ex-officio member. 
(b)  Members other than students shall serve staggered terms of three years. Student members shall serve staggered terms for one year. 
(Code 2002, § 22-72; Ord. No. 2406NS, § 3, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-90. - Vacancies; removal. 
    If the death, resignation or removal of any member of the citizens' advisory committee on sustainability occurs, the mayor with the consent of the city commission, shall appoint a new member to serve for the unexpired portion of the term vacated. The mayor, with the consent of the city commission, may, for cause, remove any member of the citizens advisory committee on sustainability. 
(Code 2002, § 22-73; Ord. No. 2406NS, § 4, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-91. - Compensation. 
    Members of the committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 2002, § 22-74; Ord. No. 2406NS, § 5, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-92. - Rules and regulations. 
    The citizens' advisory committee on sustainability shall establish its own rules and regulations to govern its affairs. All rules and regulations shall be approved by the city commission. These rules and regulations shall designate: 
(1)  Officers of the committee, the time and manner of their election, the terms of each office and the powers and duties of each officer; 
(2)  The time, place and manner of notice of all regular and special meetings of the committee; 
(3)  The manner of adoption, amendment and repeal of rules and regulations of the committee. 
(Code 2002, § 22-75; Ord. No. 2406NS, § 6, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-93. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The citizens' advisory committee on sustainability shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To advise the city commission regarding the development, operation, and continuous evaluation of commission established sustainability policies and practices in the city; 
(2)  To investigate issues of environmental concern in our community as directed by the city commission and to make recommendations to the city commission; 
(3)  To promote awareness, knowledge and critical thinking related to sustainability issues to both the city commission and the citizenry of the city as a whole. Any costs related to this activity are to be approved by the city commission; 
(4)  To encourage a culture of sustainability among the citizens of the city by engaging in education, research, commission approved policy formation and information exchange; 
(5)  To supply the commission with information on such topics as water resources and conservation, trash services and recycling programs, community trails, green building ideas, environmental education and responsibility, applicable grants and other issues which fall under the umbrella of sustainable living. 
(Code 2002, § 22-76; Ord. No. 2406NS, § 7, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 22-94. - Renewal necessary. 
    The citizens advisory committee on sustainability shall terminate and be dissolved as of June 30 of each year unless the city commission renews the committee no later than the last regular city commission meeting of each fiscal year. 
(Code 2002, § 22-77; Ord. No. 2406NS, § 8, 9-8-2009) 
Secs. 22-95-22-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SHAWNEE TWIN LAKES LAKE PROTECTION ZONE (LPZ) 

Sec. 22-117. - Lake protection zone; purpose. 
    The purpose of the lake protection zone (LPZ) is to protect public health, safety and welfare and to ensure orderly development along and near Shawnee Lake Number 1. It is an overlay zone that is applied as specified below. An overlay zone is a set of zoning standards and regulations that are applied in addition to the existing standards of the base zone. A special zoning district is necessary to ensure adequate environmental protection for the Shawnee Lake Number 1, which serves as a municipal water source for the city. 
(Code 2002, § 22-101; Ord. No. 2442NS, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 22-118. - Application. 
    The LPZ overlay zone applies to all lake lot leases administered by the city and the state commissioners of the land office (CLO) on Shawnee Lake Number 1. These requirements shall supplement existing zoning and code provisions and where two or more provisions conflict, the more stringent interpretation shall prevail as determined by the community development director. These regulations shall not be extended to city and state lease areas that are not along the shoreline of Shawnee Twin Lakes No. 1, as determined by the city. These regulations do not apply to private property. 
(Code 2002, § 22-102; Ord. No. 2442NS, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 22-119. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lake lot lease shall mean those lease areas established by the city, most of which were created in 1936, around Shawnee Lake No. 1, for the purposes of private recreational and residential use. In general, such areas are a minimum of one acre in size and include the right to construct a permanent residence on the subject lease area. The term "lake lot lease" shall also include any newly created or defined lots that are or will be leased by the city or the CLO. 
    Ordinary high water mark, (OHWM) shall mean that line on the shore established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical characteristics such as clear, natural line impressed on the bank, shelving, changes in the character of the soil, destruction of terrestrial vegetation, the presence of vegetation and/or debris, or other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas. The city shall have final authority in determining the OHWM. 
(Code 2002, § 22-103; Ord. No. 2442NS, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 22-120. - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses are as specified below and shall not be superseded by the uses listed in the underlying district: 
(1)  Single-family detached residences. 
(2)  Manufactured and mobile homes, provided that any mobile or manufactured home placed on the lake after December 31, 2010, shall be multi-sectioned construction. No single-wide mobile or manufactured homes shall be allowed, with the exception of an approved guest cottage. A new single-wide manufactured or mobile home shall be allowed as a replacement to an existing single-wide unit which existed prior to the original adoption of this article. 
(3)  Boat docks and other similar uses as per section 16-225. 
(4)  Accessory uses customarily incidental and secondary to the uses permitted by right. 
(5)  Other uses specifically authorized by the city via an approved lease, provided that such use shall conform to the underlying zoning district. 
(6)  Home occupation. 
(7)  Community buildings, buildings associated with clubs/civic organizations and associations and similar uses as determined by the director and as acknowledged by the city commission. 
(8)  Guest cottages may be approved as an accessory use to an existing single-family residence with an approved conditional use permit 1 , provided that a guest cottage shall not exceed 600 square feet, shall not be sublet, and shall share a common driveway with the main residence. 
(9)  Bed and breakfast, subject to the granting of a conditional use permit 1 . 
(10)  Overnight camping for personal use (not a commercial campground), provided that it is done in a contained unit (e.g., motorhome, fifth-wheel, travel trailer, etc.) and the use is temporary and the unit does not remain on the site between use. Temporary use is considered a use which does not exceed 60 days in a calendar year and does not include any single stay greater than 14 days. 
Note: 1 An application for a conditional use permit within the LPZ shall provide public notice in accordance with the applicable section of the Shawnee Zoning Code, provided that the notice requirements are amended as follows: Notice shall be mailed to all holders of leased property within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject lease. Additional mailed notice is not required. 
(Code 2002, § 22-104; Ord. No. 2442NS, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 22-121. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses are expressly prohibited: All uses not specifically listed as permitted in section 22-120. 
(Code 2002, § 22-105; Ord. No. 2442NS, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 22-122. - Development standards. 
    The following development standards apply: 
(1)  Setbacks, other standards. Building setbacks, area, density and height standards are as follows: 
Rear/lake front setback 50 feet from OHWM (residence) 25 feet from OHWM (accessory structures, other than boat docks and boathouses) Front/road setback 25 feet Side yard setback 15 feet Lot area As per lease, no set standard Lot width As per lease, no set standard Frontage As per lease, no set standard Building height 35 feet Residential density One residential structure per lease area, with the exception of one or more approved guest cottages.  
Existing structures that do not meet the above standards shall be considered conforming uses and shall not be required to meet the new setback standards in cases where more than 50 percent of the structure is damaged fire, flood, or other disaster. 
(2)  Docks. Boat/fishing docks may be constructed. For the purposes of this section, all lease areas are assumed to have the right to use the abutting shoreline to construct a single floating dock. The city may charge an additional annual fee for dock area leases. Dimensional standards for docks shall be as set forth in section 16-235. 
(3)  Lakeshore buffer. A 25-foot buffer is hereby established landward of the ordinary high water mark on all leased lots for the purpose of watershed protection. This area shall not be used by the general public, except during an emergency situation. Within this buffer, leaseholders are encouraged to preserve existing native vegetation. The area within the lakeshore buffer shall not be fenced. Docks and other approved structures as per section 16-235 may be located within the buffer area. Fertilizers and other chemicals shall not be used within the buffer area. 
(4)  Impervious surface coverage. The maximum building coverage ratio shall be 20 percent inclusive of all primary and secondary structures. Total impervious area shall not exceed 30 percent of the lease area. Runoff from impervious surfaces, such as roof tops and paved driveways, shall be directed to maximize infiltration. Runoff water shall be maintained in sheet flow (not channelized flow) to the maximum extent practicable. 
(5)  Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials including, but not limited to solvents, oil, fertilizer, gasoline and other materials shall be stored in an enclosed shed, garage or other approved structure. New accessory structures other than boat docks shall be setback from the OHWM a minimum of 25 feet. 
(6)  Septic system standards. Septic tanks shall be installed and inspected in accordance with the standards set forth in sections 16-59 and 16-328. 
(7)  Erosion control. All new residential construction shall employ erosion control and utilize best management practices (BMPs) to control erosion and sedimentation during construction. All exposed soil must be mulched. A temporary seeding or cover crop must be used on sites where permanent groundcover will not be established until the following year. A site will not be allowed to remain as bare ground with the intention of planting the following growing season. Required erosion control best management practices shall be in place prior to all land disturbing activities. 
(8)  Shared driveways. Shared driveways may be utilized to prevent unnecessary disturbance of the lakeside area. Residential lease areas need not front upon a dedicated public street. 
(Code 2002, § 22-106; Ord. No. 2442NS, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
Secs. 22-123-22-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS 

Sec. 22-143. - Exterior construction requirements and standards. 
    The following building facade requirements shall apply to all new structures that are more than 200 square feet in size in the following zoning districts: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5 and C-P: 
(1)  All building facade shall be constructed to include masonry material covering at least 60 percent of the facade, except in the C-4 zone, which shall require 80 percent coverage. Windows and standard doors shall be included in the coverage total, but garage doors shall not. 
(2)  Metal roofs are permitted and coated aluminum siding may be used to cover clapboards on existing buildings. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, masonry materials shall mean and include brick, slump-faced or decorative concrete masonry unit (CMU), stucco, concrete (poured in place, pre-cast or tilt-wall) with aggregate, sandblasted or textured coating finish, stone, rock or other structural material of equal durability and architectural effect. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, facade shall mean any exterior wall or face of a building that fronts on a dedicated public street. 
(5)  Additions to existing buildings shall be deemed new construction under these provisions and the facade requirements shall apply to the new portion. 
(Code 2002, § 22-131; Ord. No. 2522NS, § 1, 11-18-2013) 
Secs. 22-144-22-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ZONING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-170. - Short title. 
    This code, in pursuance of the authority granted by the legislature of the state in title II, chapter 7, sections 401-410 of the state statutes, is known as the Zoning Code of the City of Shawnee and may be cited as such. 
(Code 2002, § 22-140.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-171. - Purpose. 
    The regulations contained in this code are necessary to encourage the most appropriate uses of land; to maintain and stabilize the value of property; to reduce fire hazards and improve public safety and safeguard the public health; to decrease traffic congestion and its accompanying hazards; to prevent undue concentration of population; and to create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan for transportation, water supply, sewerage, schools, parks, public facilities and other facilities. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(Code 2002, § 22-140.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-172. - Application. 
    This code classifies and regulates the land, buildings, and structures within the city limits set forth in this code. The regulations contained in this code are necessary to promote health, safety, convenience and welfare to the inhabitants by dividing the city into zones and regulating therein the use of the land and the use and size of buildings as to height and number of stories, the coverage of the land by buildings, the size of yards and open spaces, density of population and location of buildings. 
(Code 2002, § 22-140.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-173. - Regulations of use, height, area, yards and open spaces. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this code, no land shall be used and no building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure or improvement is located in this code relating to any or all districts. 
(Code 2002, § 22-140.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-174. - Final plats and development plans previously approved. 
    All final subdivision plats and, site development plans, conditional use permits and planned unit developments submitted prior to the effective date of this code shall remain valid and intact subject to those provisions in effect at the time of its approval. 
(Code 2002, § 22-140.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-175. - Completion of approved buildings. 
    Nothing herein shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this code or an amendment to this code; provided that actual construction of such building or structure commences in accordance with these provisions in effect at that time of the permit issuance and provided further that such construction and proposed use of such building or structure is not in violation of any other ordinance or law on the effective date of this code. 
(Code 2002, § 22-140.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-176-22-203. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 22-204. - General provisions. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 22-145.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-205. - Clarification and relationships of terms. 
(a)  For the purpose of these regulations, words used in the present tense shall include the future tenses; words in the singular number shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, the word "should" is that which ought to occur, but is not mandatory. The word "should" allows for interpretation. 
(b)  The term "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons, such as a club; the term "a building" includes a part thereof; the term "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied". 
(c)  Words not herein defined shall conform to standard American-English usage. 
(d)  Examples and lists shall not be considered to be all inclusive unless the content clearly states to the contrary. 
(Code 2002, § 22-145.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-206. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building or structure means a subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as a principle building. The use of an accessory structure must be similar and accessory to the use of the principal building. Accessory structures include garages. 

    Accessory dwelling unit means a second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure on the same lot as the main dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility with provisions within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. Such a dwelling is an accessory use to the main dwelling. 
    Accessory use means a use that is incidental and subordinate to that of the main building or use of land and that is located on the same lot and under the same ownership in all respects. 
    Administrative and professional office means uses that have very minimal impact to surrounding properties or the general public, which usually have low traffic volume and common business hours (if open to the public), such as 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. Examples include, but are not limited to, banks, general business offices, accounting and tax preparation, law offices, etc. The office may or may not be open to the general public. 
    Adult companion home means any home or establishment, funded and certified by the department of human services, which provides homelike residential accommodations and supportive assistance to three or fewer developmentally disabled adults. 
    Adult novelty store means a commercial establishment that displays, sells, or offers for sale instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs or for use in connection with sadomasochistic practices. 
    Agricultural animals means animals which are considered accessory to an agricultural use, whether for personal enjoyment or commercial purposes, including horses, mules, burros, sheep, cattle, rabbits, chickens, duck, geese, pigs, goats, ostrich or emus. 
    Agriculture means the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing produce; providing, however, that the operation, of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the principal use. The operation of commercial feed pens, sales yards and auction yards for horses, cattle or hogs is deemed an industrial and not an agricultural use. 
    Alcohol mixed beverage establishment means a business which sells alcohol beverages by the individual drink for on-premises consumption whose alcohol sales make up more than 50 percent of sales. Typical uses might be a bar or nightclub. 
    Alley means a minor right-of-way dedicated to the public use not more than 30 feet wide affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Animals, grooming and sales, means grooming of dogs, cats and other small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons, pet grooming shops or pet shops. No medical, training, or boarding services are permitted. 
    Auctioning means auctioning of livestock on a wholesale or retail basis with incidental on-site storage of animals on a temporary basis not to exceed 48-hour periods. Typical uses include animal auctions, livestock auctions or livestock auction yards. 
    Assisted living facility means a special combination of housing, supportive services, personalized assistance and health care designed to respond to individual needs of those who need help with activities of daily living. Interpreted definition shall be consistent with Oklahoma Continuum of Care and Assisted Living Act. 
    Automobile car wash means a building or structure designed primarily for washing automobiles using production line methods with a chain conveyor, blowers, steam cleaners, high pressure spray, or other mechanical devices. A self-service system may also be available for manual washing or vehicles. 
    Automobile wrecking or salvage yard means an area outside of a building where motor vehicles are dissembled, dismantled, junked or wrecked, or where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored. 
    Basement means a story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurements, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes other than by a janitor employed on the premises. 
    Bed and breakfast means a dwelling or area containing one or more structures occupied by the owner, where for compensation, lodging and breakfast are provided for up to a maximum of six guest rooms per building; and the owner thereof intends that the same guest occupy the bed and breakfast facility for less than 30 days. 
    Billboard (including poster and panel types) means a nonaccessory sign or sign structure upon which advertising may be posted, painted or affixed, and which is primarily designed for the rental or lease of the sign space for advertising not related to the use of the property upon which the sign is located. 
    Block means, in describing the boundaries of a district, the term "block" refers to the legal description. In all other cases, the term "block" refers to the property abutting on one side of the street between two intersecting streets or between an intersection street and a railroad right-of-way or between an intersecting street and a railroad right-of-way or between an intersecting street and a watercourse. 
    Board of adjustment means the board of adjustment of the city. 
    Boardinghouse and roominghouse means a facility where meals or lodging are provided for persons other than the family or their relatives and excluding facilities for transient persons such as hotels, motels, inns and other such facilities. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that is used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. 
    Building coverage (lot coverage) means the percentage of the lot area covered by the building. Overhanging roofs are not included in the area. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deckline of a mansard roof or the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
    Building line means a line established beyond which no part of a building shall project, except as otherwise provided by this code. 
    Building site means a lot or parcel of land, in single or joint ownership, and occupied or to be occupied by a main building and accessory buildings, or by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as required by this land use code. 
    Cellar means an underground structure separate from the foundation of the main building. 
    Cemetery means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, excluding columbarium, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries. 
    Child care center means facilities which provide care and supervision of children and which operate more than 30 hours per week. 
    Clinic means a place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and injured persons and those in need of surgical or medical attention but who are not customarily provided with board and room or kept overnight on the premises. The term "clinic" includes immediate care facilities, where emergency treatment is the dominate form of care provided at the facility. 
    Club means a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely and primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
    Community development director means the city planning director. Hereinafter referred to as the "director." 
    Comprehensive plan means the official plan of the city as adopted by the city commission. 
    Continuum of care facility means a home, establishment or institution providing nursing facility services as defined in 63 O.S. § 1-1902. 
    Convenience goods and personal services means establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of frequently needed, day to day retail commercial goods and services. Such uses are designed and intended to serve a limited local market, and to be generally within walking or short driving distance of a residential area. 
    Court means an open unoccupied space, other than a yard on the same lot with a building or group of buildings and which is bordered on two or more sides by such building or buildings. 
    Coverage means the lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision. 
    Drinking establishment, sit-down, alcohol permitted, means establishments or places of business where customers are seated and served and which are primarily engaged in the sale, mixing or dispensing of beverages containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume for consumption on the premises. Typical uses include a tavern, bar, nightclub or private club with minimal or no kitchen facilities and little or no food items served. 
    Dry cleaning or laundry, self-service, means any attended or unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical appliance which is operated primarily by the customer. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. The term "dwelling unit" does not include a tent, cabin, travel trailer, boardinghouse or roominghouse, hotel or motel. 
    Dwelling, attached, means a dwelling having a portion of each of two walls in common with adjoining dwellings. 
    Dwelling, fourplex, means a single structure containing four dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, modular, means a relocatable living unit manufactured off-site and transported on an independent carrier unit, to a permanent site which has been constructed in accordance with the adopted building code. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a building containing four or more individual dwelling units with independent living facilities, containing separate or joint entrances, including apartments and condominiums. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building containing one dwelling unit and designed for or used exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, townhouse, means a building on its own separate lot containing one dwelling unit, with a private entrance, that occupies space from the ground to the roof and is attached to one or more other townhouse dwelling units by an approved wall. 
    Dwelling, triplex, means a building containing three individual dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building containing two dwellings and designed for or used exclusively by two families; the term "two-family dwelling" also includes the term "duplex". 
    Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms arranged, intended or designed as a habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities for not more than one family living independent of any other family. 
    Eating establishments, sit down, with no or incidental consumption of alcohol, means establishments or places of business where customers are seated and served, and that are primarily engaged in the sale, mixing or dispensing of beverages containing more than 0.5 percent alcohol by volume for on-premises consumption as accessory to a restaurant operation. Annual receipts from the sale of permitted beverages containing alcohol may not exceed 50 percent of the combined total receipts from food and beverages. All requirements of title 37 of the state statutes shall apply. 
    Eating establishment, drive-in, drive-through restaurant (fast-food), means restaurants where most customers order and are served their food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages prepared to leave the premises, or able to be taken to a table or counter to be consumed. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other government agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communications, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories thereof, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. 
    Family means one or more persons related by blood or marriage, including adopted children, or a group of not to exceed five persons (excluding servants) not all related by blood or marriage, occupying premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse or lodginghouse, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. The term "family" is deemed to include domestic servants employed by the family. 
    Family child care home means a facility which offers care and supervision for up to seven children in a family home for part of a 24-hour day. A large family child care home means a residential family home that provides care and supervision for eight to 12 children for part of a 24-hour day. 
    Farmers market means the seasonal selling or offering for sale a retail of home-grown vegetables or produce, occurring in a pre-designated area, where the vendors are generally individuals who have raised the vegetables or produce or have taken the same on consignment for retail sales. 
    Fence, sightproof, means an opaque screen of earth, fencing or vegetation which conceals a required part of a parcel from view of an adjoining parcel or public way. 
    Flood, 100-year frequency, means a flood having an average frequency of occurrence once in 100 years although the flood may occur in any year, based on statistical analyses of the rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the watershed, as determined by the city engineer, or as determined by the U.S. Corps of Engineers and confirmed by the city engineer or as determined by a registered professional engineer and certified by the city engineer. 
    Flood hazard area means the land areas adjoining a floodway which is not reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood but which would be inundated by the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood based on full urbanization of the watershed. 
    Floodway means the channel of a watercourse or drainageway and those portion of the adjoining lands which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the combined floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls separating two buildings. 
    Garage apartment means a dwelling for one family erected as a part of a private garage. 
    Garage, parking, means any building or portion thereof used for storage of four or more automobiles in which any services which may be provided is incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities are not provided. 
    Garage, private, means a detached accessory building or a portion of the principal building used or intended for use by the occupants of the premises for storage of passenger vehicles, boats or trailers but not commercial vehicles on residential lots. 
    Garage, public, means the structure or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repairing or refinishing of any vehicles. 
    Garage, repair, means a building in which are provided facilities for the care, servicing repair or equipping of automobiles. 
    Gasoline service station means any area used for retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels or automobile accessories, and incidental services, including facilities for lubricating, and washing and cleaning, but not including painting, major repair, or the sale of butane or propane fuels. 
    Group home means any establishment for not more than 12 residents who are 18 years of age or older and who have developmental or physical disabilities, which offers or provides supervision, residential accommodations, food service, and training and skill development opportunities designed to lead to increased independence of the residents and which offers or provides supportive assistance to any of its residents requiring supportive assistance. 
    Health spa means and includes any person, firm, corporation, organization, club or association engaged in a program of physical exercise, which includes the use of one or more of a sauna, whirlpool, weight-lifting room, massage, steam room, or exercising machine or device, or exercise rooms. Any interpretation of this definition shall be consistent with 59 O.S. ch. 46 (59 O.S. § 2000 et seq.). 
    Home occupation means any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings. 
    Homeowners association means an incorporated nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which each lot and/or homeowner in a planned unit or other described land area is automatically a member and each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common property, and the charge if unpaid becomes a lien against the property. 
    Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for human in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
    Hotel, motel or inn, means a building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended, or designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including a sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage, or building where persons are housed under restraint. 
    Incidental repair-Automobile, means accessory use of repairing automobiles which is incidental to main use of the building or structure. 
    Industry means the manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction, or destruction of any article, substance, or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character or appearance thereof, and includes storage elevators, truck storage yard, warehouses, wholesale storage, and other similar types or enterprises. 
    Institutional uses means those uses organized, established, used or intended to be used for the promotion of a public, religious, educational, charitable, cultural, social, or philanthropic activity and normally operated on a nonprofit basis. 
    Junk or salvage yard means a place where waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, bailed, packed, disassembled or handled, including all wrecking yards, house-wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house-wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawnshops and establishments. 
    Kennel means an establishment where three or more dogs over four months of age are boarded, trained, raised or bred for show or profit. 
    Kennels and veterinary, general, means kennel and veterinary services for domestic animals, with incidental outdoor storage and runs permitted. 
    Kennels and veterinary, restricted, means kennel and veterinary services for small domestic animals, such as dogs, cats or other household pets, with all operations and storage conducted within an enclosed building. 
    Loading space means a space on the same lot as the principal use of at least ten feet in width and 30 feet in length and having a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet, designated for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Long-range plan/comprehensive plan means the long-range comprehensive physical development plan for the city which has been officially adopted to provide long-range development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision, circulation and community facilities. 
    Lot means, for the purpose of this code, a lot is a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on at least one approved street built according to the subdivision design standards. specified in the subdivision and development standards and may consist of: 

(1)  A single lot of record; 
(2)  A portion of a lot of record; 
(3)  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record and a parcel of land described by metes and bounds; 
(4)  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residential lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this code. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot located at the intersection of an abutting two or more streets. 
    Lot, depth, means the average distance from the street line of the lot to its rearline, measured in the general direction of the sidelines of a lot. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, frontage, means the front of a lot shall be constructed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yard shall be provided as indicated under Yard in this section. 
    Lot measurements : 
(1)  Lot depth means the distance between the midpoints of the side lot lines in front with the rear most point of the side lot lines in the rear. 
(2)  Lot width means the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than 80 percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of culs-de-sac, where the 80 percent requirement shall not apply. 
    Lot-of-record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the county clerk, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
    Manufactured home means a single-family dwelling built according to the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, which is a national preemptive building code. A manufactured home also: 
(1)  Includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems; 
(2)  Is built on a permanent chassis; and 
(3)  Can be transported in one or more sections with each section at least eight feet wide and 40 feet long when transported, or when installed on the site is 320 square feet or greater. 
    Homes built prior to June 15, 1976, even with modifications, do not meet the HUD standards and cannot be accepted as compliant with the HUD Code. 
    Medical facilities include: 
(1)  Nursing home, rest or convalescent homes. 
(2)  Dental or medical clinic meaning a building used for the examination and treatment of the physically ill, provided that no facilities are provided for patients remaining overnight except under emergency conditions. 
(3)  Dental or doctor's office meaning the same as dental or medical clinic, including the various dental or medical specialties. 
(4)  Hospital meaning an institution provided physical and mental health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical core for the sick or injured, and including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff office which are an integral part of the facilities. 
(5)  Public health center meaning a facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health services, including related facilities. 
    Mobile home means a factory-built dwelling built prior to June 15, 1976, to standards other than the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Code, and acceptable under applicable state codes in effect at the time of construction or introduction of the home into the state. Mobile homes have not been built since the introduction of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act. 
    Mobile home space means a plot of land within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home, and not located on a mobile home sales lot. 
    Mobile/manufactured home park means any plot of land upon which one or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Nightclub means an establishment which regularly provides facilities for dancing and/or live entertainment, either alone or in conjunction with a restaurant or bar. 
    Nonconformance means a condition that occurs when, on the effective date of adoption of this code or a previous ordinance or on the effective date of an ordinance text amendment or rezoning, an existing lot, structure, building, sign, development, or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one or more of the regulations currently applicable to the district in which the lot, structure, building, sign, development or use is located. 
    Nursery, plan, means an area where plants (as trees and shrubs) are grown for transplanting, for use as stocks for budding and grafting, or for sale. 
    Nursing facility means an establishment or an institution, a distinct part of which is primarily engaged in providing: 
(1)  Skilled nursing care and related services for residents who require medical or nursing care; 
(2)  Rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of injured, disabled or sick persons; or 
(3)  On a regular basis, health-related care and services to individuals who because of their mental or physical condition require care and services beyond the level of care provided by a residential care home and which can be made available to them only through a nursing facility. 
    Off-street parking means a type of parking wherein the maneuvering of the vehicle while parking and unparking, as well as parking itself, is done entirely off of the street right-of-way, and where access to the area is by means of driveway approach built to the standards of the city. 
    Open space means open space areas within a development which are designated or intended for the use and enjoyment of the residents and their guests. 
    Overlay district means an area where certain additional requirements are superimposed upon a base zoning district or underlying district and where the requirements of the base or underlying district may or may not be altered. 
    Parking space means a permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one automobile together with a permanently surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of an automobile. 
    Personal storage means buildings containing enclosed individual rental storage facilities not exceeding 800 square feet per unit. These facilities are not used for sales purposes or storage of highly combustible materials. Typical uses include mini-warehouses or mini-storage and storage for recreational vehicles, boats or trailers. This category does not allow any outdoor storage. 
    Personal services means establishments providing nonmedically related services, including beauty shops and barbershops; clothing rental, dry cleaning pick-up stores, nail salon, shoe repair shops; tanning salons. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided. 
    Planned unit development means a form of development characterized by a unified site design which may include provided common open space, density averaging and mixing of building types and land uses. 
    Planning commission means the city planning commission, as established by the statutes hereinabove cited. The planning commission shall also be the zoning commission for the city. 
    Religious facility means a building, together with its accessory buildings and use, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious ceremonies and purposes. 
    Residential care home means any home, establishment, or institution licensed pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Residential Care Act, other than a hotel, motel, fraternity or sorority house, or college or university dormitory, which offers or provides residential accommodations, food service, and supportive assistance to any of its residents or houses any resident requiring supportive assistance. The residents shall be persons who are ambulatory and essentially capable of managing their own affairs, but who do not routinely require nursing care; provided, the term "residential care home" shall not mean a hotel, motel, fraternity or sorority house, or college or university dormitory, if the facility operates in a manner customary to its description and does not house any person who requires supportive assistance from the facility in order to meet an adequate level of daily living. 
    Residential child care facility means a 24-hour residential facility where children live together with or are supervised by adults who are not their parents or relatives. 
    Retail sales and services means establishments engaged in the sale or rental of goods and services, both retail and wholesale of commonly used goods, merchandise and services. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, wastewater line, stormwater line, other public utilities or facilities, or other similar use. 
    Setback means the distance between the lot lines and the building line on which it is located. 
    Signs means any device (including, but not limited to, letters, words, numerals, figures, emblems, pictures, or any part or combination) used for visual communication intended to attract the attention of the public and visible to the public right-of-way or other properties. 
    Special use permit-Exception means a use of a design element of a use which is not permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse effect, but which is controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the board of adjustments, where specifically authorized by this code, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of this code. 
    Site plan means a plan showing location and size of water and sewer lines and storm sewers, paving, contours at two foot intervals, building pad elevations, spot elevations at each lot corner for all lots in the subdivision, lot and street drainage arrows, street light locations, water and sewer service connections, top of curb elevations, lot dimensions, fire hydrants, manhole locations, right-of-way widths and utility easements. 
    Story means that portion of a building including between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street means a public right-of-way more than 30 feet in width which provides the primary means of access to abutting property and used primarily for vehicular circulation. 
    Street, arterial, means any street designated on the comprehensive plan as an arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial, major street, etc. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the room or in the exterior walls. 
    Structure means anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having permanent location to the ground (not including sidewalks, driveways and similar improvement areas). 
    Subdivision means the division or re-division of land as further specified in the city subdivision standards and state statutes. 
    Thoroughfare plan means the part of the comprehensive plan referring to transportation development goals, principles and standards; also includes use of the words "major street plan" and "trafficway plan." 
    Trailer, hauling means a vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
    Trailer, travel or camping means all vehicles and portable structures built on a chassis, designed as a temporary or permanent dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use, this is meant to include tent trailers and motor-driving travel vehicles, not included in the definition of "independent mobile homes". For the purpose of these regulations, a dependent mobile home is considered the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise specified. 
    Treatment facility means any facility that offers either in-patient, intermediate or outpatient treatment to any person suffering from alcohol or drug abuse, or alcohol or drug related problems, and is certified by the board of mental health and substance abuse services. Interpretation of a "treatment facility" and "treatment" shall be consistent with 43A O.S. § 3-403. 
    Use means the legal enjoyment of property that consists of its employment, occupation, exercise or practice. 
    Variance means a modification of a restriction of the zoning district regulations granted by the board of adjustment, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition or circumstances of a particular property, the literal enforcement of the restriction would result in unnecessary hardship. 

    Yard means a required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. 
    Yard, depth, means the depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost points of the side lot lines, in the case of rounded property corners as street intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met without such rounding. Front and rear yard lines shall be parallel. Depth of a required rear yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line. 
    Yard, interior-side, means any side yard that does not abut a street. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards. 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending from the rear lines of the required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of front yard required. In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after full- and half-depth front yards have been established shall considered side yards. 
    Yard, width, means the width of a required side yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line. 
    Zoning district means any section or sections of the city for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and area of buildings are uniform. 
(Code 2002, § 22-145.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-207-22-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 22-236. - Zoning districts established. 
(a)  For the purpose of this code and the promotion of public health, peace, safety and general welfare of the community, the city is divided into zoning districts as shown on the zoning map and filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  Zoning districts shall be designated as follows: 
Agriculture A-1 Rural agricultural district Residential RE Residential estates district R-1 Single-family residential district R-2 Combined residential district R-3 Multifamily residential district Commercial C-1 Neighborhood commercial district C-2 Suburban office commercial district C-3 Restricted automotive and commercial recreation district C-4 Central business district C-5 General commercial district CP Planned shopping center district Industrial I-1 Restricted light industrial district I-2 Light industrial district I-3 Heavy industrial district Overlay/Floating Zones TN Traditional neighborhood AP Airport LPZ Lake protection zone  
(Code 2002, § 22-150.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-237. - Zoning map incorporated. 
    The location and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be established by ordinance and shall be delineated and shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma," and the zoning map is hereby incorporated as a part of this code. 
(Code 2002, § 22-150.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-238. - Maintenance of official zoning map. 
    It shall be the duty of the director to maintain an up-to-date official zoning map of the city including all amendments directly adopted by the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 22-150.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-239. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline; 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines; 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits; 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks; 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line, boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines; 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section, shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map, shall be determined by the scale of the map; 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in the other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) of this section, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries; and 
(8)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this code, the board of adjustment may permit, as a variance, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(Code 2002, § 22-150.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-240. - Vacation of public easement. 
(a)  Whenever any street, alley or other public easement is vacated, the district classifications of the property to which vacated portions of land accrue shall become the classifications of the vacated land. 
(b)  No vacation of any plat or public way, or part thereof, shall operate or invalidate or impair the right-of-way municipal utility or regulated transmission company to continue to possess, occupy, and use that part of the public way, utility easements, or rights-of-way existing within the affected area and occupied and used by any municipal utility or regulated transmission company for the performance of its public service undertaking. Said easements shall be defined in any decree of vacation. The municipal utility or regulated transmission company may maintain, replace, repair and operate its facilities, have unrestricted ingress and egress to said locations, and remove its facilities without impairment by reason of the vacation or partial vacation of any plat or public way. 
(Code 2002, § 22-150.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-241-22-258. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - AGRICULTURAL USES 

Sec. 22-259. - Purpose. 
    The regulations for the agricultural zoning district are designed to protect undeveloped areas from intensive uses until a use pattern is approved. 
(Code 2002, § 22-155.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-260. - Uses. 
(a)  The permitted uses in the agricultural district are set forth in the table below. Where the letter "X" appears on the line of a permitted use and in the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district subject to the general provisions of the zoning code as set forth in the preceding sections. Where the letter "P" appears instead of the letter "X", this use is permitted subject to a conditional use permit as set forth in section 22-605. 
(b)  For a complete list of additional requirements, please refer to division 8 of this article. 
Table 22-260. Permitted Uses in Agricultural Districts 
Table Of Permitted Uses 

In Agricultural Districts ZoningDistrict Permitted Uses A-1 Accessory identification signs X Agricultural land uses, buildings and activities X Aircraft transportation (conditional use requirement shall apply only to establishing and enlarging of airports, flying fields and heliports and to establishing, relocating and lengthening of runways P Airway beacon or marker X Animal hospital (with or without outside runs) X Apiary X Arboretum or botanical garden X Boarding or training animals X Carnival, circus, tent revival or similar temporary open air enterprise P Cemetery P Communication towers/cell phone towers P Community center; public P Construction facilities, accessory P Drilling, operating, equipping, and maintaining of wells for oil and gas P Earth moving, excavating or depositing gravel, minerals, rock, sand or stone on the ground P Electric regulating substation X Family child care home X Farm for raising dogs, cattle, goats, horses, sheep, rabbits, poultry, or other farm animals X Field crop farm (farming, grazing, fishery, livestock, poultry) X Fire protection and related activities facility X Flood control works P Golf course; public or private X Home occupation (shall comply with home occupation provisions) X Horticultural specialty farm X Large family child care home P Library; private or public P Manufactured home P Mental institution P Mining, quarrying or earth extractions P Monastery, convent or novitiate P Motion picture theater; drive-in P Museum or art gallery P Nursery (trees and shrubs) X Parish house, parsonage or rectory X Public buildings and facilities X Radio transmitting station or tower, other than amateur P Ranching X Religious retreat facility P Religious facilities X Retail sale of farm products sold on-premises X Riding arena or stable X Rodeo grounds P Sanitary landfill P School, elementary and secondary; public or equivalent private X Single-family detached dwelling X Skeet and/or trap shooting range P Veterinarian facilities P Wildlife area (public) X In the cases a use is not listed above and which, in the opinion of the director, is similar in character and is not more obnoxious or detrimental to the area in which it is located, by reason of noise, offensive odor, smoke, dust, vibration, traffic congestion or danger to life and property is also permitted.  
(Code 2002, § 22-155.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-261. - Classification of zones. 
    A-1, Rural agricultural district. The A-1 rural agricultural district is intended to provide an area primarily for agricultural uses or extraction of the various products such as oil, minerals, rock and gravel from the earth and/or to prevent such land from being prematurely developed for urban purposes. The rural nature and low density of population in this district requires only that buildings and facilities related to the uses of this district have a reasonable setback from streets and highways. It is the purpose of this district to protect such agricultural or extractive uses from unplanned urbanization so long as the land is not programmed for essential municipal services. 
(Code 2002, § 22-155.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-262. - Dimensional standards. 
    Table 22-262 provides the density and dimensional standards for each zone. No building, structure or use shall hereafter be erected, constructed or established on a lot that does not meet the requirements for lots as contained in this article and for the district in which said lot is located, except for nonconforming lots of record. 
Table 22-262. Agricultural Dimensional Standards 
Standard Agricultural Zoning 
Districts Minimum lot size Five acres Minimum lot width (all lots of 10 acres or less) (feet) 330' Minimum street frontage (feet) None Front yard setback (feet) 50' Side yard setback (feet) 30' Side yard setback-Accessory building (feet) 10' Rear yard setback (feet) 50' Maximum site coverage (Interior lot) 30% Maximum site coverage (Corner lot) 35% Maximum site coverage (Accessory buildings) 20% of rear yard Maximum building height (feet) 35' *See each classification of zones for additional regulations that may apply to specific zonings  
(Code 2002, § 22-155.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-263. - Area regulations. 
(a)  There shall be a lot area of not less than five acres including street dedications, and not more than one principal building shall be permitted on any one lot. 
(b)  Where a lot has less area than required in this article and all the boundary lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership on the effective date of these regulations codified in this code. That lot may be used for any of the uses permitted by this section. 
(c)  The raising of animals or poultry in accordance with the ordinances of the city and in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  There shall be provided a fenced area of not less than 20,000 square feet exclusive of the area covered by main buildings and required front and side yards, for each large animal, including horses, cattle, sheep and all structures and buildings for the care and protection of animals shall be located not closer than 20 feet to a side or rear lot line. 
(2)  Animals and poultry may not be kept on any lot of less than two acres which does not contain an occupied dwelling. 
(3)  The raising of hogs shall be prohibited on all tracts of less than 40 acres. The number of hogs over two months of age shall not exceed 20 grain-fed or five garbage-fed hogs. Hogs shall not be located closer than 100 feet to the property line of the tract on which they are located. 
(d)  If 25 percent or more of the lots on one side of the street between two intersecting streets are improved with buildings, all of which have observed an average setback line of greater than 50 feet, and no building varies more than five feet from this average setback line, then no building shall be erected closer to the street line than the minimum setback so established by the existing buildings; but this regulation shall not require a front yard of greater depth than 65 feet. 
(Code 2002, § 22-155.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-264-22-289. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL USES 

Sec. 22-290. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the city's intent that residential neighborhoods and uses be developed and preserved against intrusions by incongruous land uses. These zone classifications are established, in order to permit a variety of housing and population densities with minimal conflict. Protection is provided against hazards, objectionable influences, traffic and building congestion, undue strain on municipal services, and lack of light, air and privacy. Certain essential and compatible public service facilities and institutions are permitted in these districts. 
(b)  There are four primary residential zoning districts established for the city, including one rural residential designation (RE), one low density designation (R-1), one medium density designation (R-2) and one high density zone (R-3). In addition, a traditional neighborhood (TN) floating zone is also established to address infill development on lots legally existing prior to 1960. More limited (secondary) residential development is allowed in some commercial zone designations as provided for in other sections. 
(Code 2002, § 22-160.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-291. - Uses. 
    The permitted uses in the residential districts are set forth in Table 22-291. Where the letter "X" appears on the line of a permitted use and in the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district, subject to the general provisions of this chapter as set forth in the preceding sections. Where the letter "P" appears, the use is permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit as set forth in section 22-605. 
Table 22-291. Permitted Uses in Residential Districts 
Table Of Permitted Uses In Residential Districts RE R-1 R-2 R-3 TN Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) to single-family residential - - P P P Accessory structure and/or use, not including dwelling unit X X X X X Apartments, multifamily dwellings (high density) - - - X - Duplex or triplex - - X X - Home occupation (shall comply with the home occupation provisions set forth section 22-410) X X X X X Mobile and/or manufactured home parks - - - P - Single-family detached dwelling (on individual lots) X X X X X Townhouse (single-family attached on individual lots) - - X P - Institutional and/or Nonresidential uses: Adult companion home X X X X - Assisted living, nursing, continuum of care facility - - - P - Bed and breakfast P P P P - Boardinghouse or roominghouse - - - P - Cemetery or memorial garden P P P P - Communication towers/cell phone towers - P P P - Community uses (swimming pools, community centers) P P P P - Family child care home X X X X - Golf course P P P P - Group home X X X X - Hospital, outpatient medical facilities - - - P - Large family child care home P P P P - Privately owned primary and secondary educational facilities P P P P - Public buildings and facilities, including schools X X X X - Religious facilities X X X X - Residential care home - - P P - Residential child care facility - - P P - Agricultural uses: Agricultural land uses, buildings and activities on tracts over 2 acres X - - - - Apiary X - - - - Community garden X X X X X Greenhouses/nursery - no products sold on the premises X X X X - In the cases a use is not listed above and which, in the opinion of the director, is similar in character and is not more obnoxious or detrimental to the area in which it is located, by reason of noise, offensive odor, smoke, dust, vibration, traffic congestion or danger to life and property is also permitted  
(Code 2002, § 22-160.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-292. - Classification of zones. 
(a)  RE, Residential estates district. This residential estates district is intended to provide for very low density single-family housing with rural amenities, where partial urban services are provided by the municipality and health and safety standards may be otherwise insured by the individual on large lots. It is anticipated that the tracts in this district will be in close proximity to residential and commercial uses and be adequately served by police and fire protection and all city services when available. 
(b)  R-1, Single-family residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities, and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. 
(c)  R-2, Medium density residential district. This is a residential district to provide for a slightly higher population density but with basic restrictions similar to the R-1 district. The principal use of land is for medium density and related recreational, religious and educational facilities normally required to provide a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities, and through the consideration of the proper functional relationship and arrangement of each element. 
(d)  R-3, Multifamily residential district. This R-3 multifamily residential district is intended to provide for multiple-family developments which have a concentration of dwelling units served by open spaces including common areas and facilities. The principal use of land is for townhouses and multiple-family dwellings and recreational, religious and educational uses normally located to serve the basic elements of convenient, balanced, and attractive living areas. 
(Code 2002, § 22-160.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-293. - Dimensional standards. 
    Table 22-293 provides the density and dimensional standards for each zone. Note that other dimensional standards may be approved as part of an approved PUD. No building, structure or use shall hereafter be erected, constructed or established on a lot that does not meet the requirements for lots as contained in this article and for the district in which said lot is located, except for nonconforming lots of record. 
Table 22-293. Density and Dimensional Standards by Zone 
Standard Residential Zoning Districts RE R-1 R-2 R-3 TN Minimum lot size (square feet) One acre or larger if required by health department or state DEQ 6,000' 1,800 (townhouse) 6,000 (one unit) 10,000 (2-3 units) *maximum density for townhouse development is 3 units per 10,000 square feet 1,800' (townhouse) 6,000' (one unit) 10,000' (2-3 units) 10,000' + 2,000' per unit over three (multifamily) As established per 
legal lot of record 
(see section 22-295) Minimum lot width (feet) 120' 60' 20' (townhouse) 60' (one unit) 80' (2-3 units) 20' (townhouse) 60' (one unit) 80' (2-3 units) 100' (more than 3 units) As established per 
legal lot of record 
(see section 22-295) Minimum street frontage (feet) 75' 35' 20' (townhouse) 35' (one unit) 50' (2-3 units) 20' (townhouse) 35' (one unit) 50' (2-3 units) 80' (over 3 units) As established per 
legal lot of record 
(see section 22-295) Front yard setback (feet) 40' 25' 20' (cul-de-sac lot) 25' 25' See section 22-295 Front yard setback-rear loading or front recessed loading garage (feet) 1 N/A 15' 15' Only approved through 
PUD process N/A Side yard setback (feet) 10' 5' 5' 5' 5' Side yard setback-corner lot (feet) 15' 15' 15' 10' See section 22-295 Rear yard setback (feet) 40' 20' 10' 10' 10' Setback, side and rear for unattached accessory structures (feet) 10' 10' 10' 10' 5' Maximum site coverage (building footprint) 15% 35% 35% 50% 60% Maximum building height-residential (feet) 35' 35' 35' 45' 35' Maximum building height-accessory structure (feet) 20' 20' 20' 35' 20' 1 Applicable only to residences with attached or detached garages located in the rear of the yard and accessed from an alleyway or if accessed from the front yard, the garage shall be set back five feet from the front building line of house  
(Code 2002, § 22-160.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-294. - Townhouse development standards. 
    Townhouse development on new or existing lots shall adhere to the following standards: 
(1)  Each townhouse shall be located on its own legal lot of record. 
(2)  Townhouse buildings shall include no more than eight townhouse units and shall be separated by not less than 15 feet, inclusive of setback areas. 
(3)  Townhouse development shall be designed so that garage doors do not dominate the ground level street-facing facade and do not project beyond the front plane of the residence. This can be accomplished by incorporating alley access into site design and locating garage and parking areas to the rear. Garage doors shall not comprise more than 50 percent of the front yard-facing facade of a townhouse and shall not extend beyond the front building elevation (plane of the structure). 
(4)  Townhouses with street-facing garages may have one driveway access located between the street and the primary building entrance for every two dwelling units, provided they meet the following criteria: 
a.  Where two abutting townhouses have street-facing garages, they shall share one driveway access that does not exceed 20 feet in width where it intersects the street; 
b.  All primary building entrances shall be connected to a driveway (and sidewalk) via a pedestrian walkway that is not less than three feet wide; 
c.  The maximum number of consecutively attached townhouses with garages facing the same street is six (three shared driveways). 
(5)  Building facade modulation or appropriate architectural treatment shall occur at least every 30 feet along the length of facade facing adjacent properties or a public street. Minimum modulation depth shall be two feet. The use of covered front porches, end wall windows, building offsets/modulation, dormers and other design techniques shall be included in the design, although there is not a specific architectural requirement. 
(6)  Additional conditions for townhouse developments including provisions for landscaping, architectural design, recreation and open space, stormwater management, street and infrastructure improvements and other topic, may be required by the city as part of the platting, PUD and development process in accordance with applicable rules. 
(Code 2002, § 22-160.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-295. - Traditional neighborhood infill standards. 
    The traditional neighborhood (TN) floating zone is applied to legally created lots that are located in plats or replats recorded prior to 1960. The underlying base zoning of the lot does not change, but rather additional zoning standards are applied (as an overlay) to the base zoning to ensure that construction is compatible with the neighborhood. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as limiting the re-platting of existing lots. 
(1)  Build-to line. The intent of a build-to line is to ensure that new residences constructed in established neighborhoods are placed in a manner that is compatible and consistent with the placement characteristics of existing neighborhoods, and to maintain a consistent building line. If existing residences are close to the street with shallow front yards, so too should be the residential infill development. 
(2)  Requirement. The build-to line in an established neighborhood shall be as determined by the director pursuant to this intent. In the case of residential infill development on a corner lot, the prevailing principal building setbacks along the side street shall establish the build-to line along the side street. 
(3)  Setback averaging. The front yard setback shall be as required by the build-to-line as established by the director, unless the adjacent residential setbacks vary in distance. In this case, the setback is based on the average of the respective as-built setbacks on the two adjoining lots. See Figure 22-160.6.1 for an example of setback averaging. The resulting average setback shall be the minimum setback. The maximum setback shall not exceed the adjacent residence with the greatest setback. If the undeveloped lot is a corner lot, the build-to-line shall be consistent with the residential structures on either side. Figure 22-160.6.2 illustrates such a scenario. 
(4)  Setback variance. The zoning board of adjustment may grant a variance to any build-to line established by the director, in cases where site constraints (e.g., protection of existing trees, topographic limitations, etc.) or other practical difficulty would warrant such a variance. 
  

(Code 2002, § 22-160.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-296. - Multifamily development standards. 
    Multifamily housing (more than three units) developments shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Parking lots shall be located to the side and/or behind buildings and shall not dominate the front yard area. A five-foot landscape buffer shall rim the perimeter of the parking lot and planting islands shall be included in accordance with the established landscaping requirements. 
(2)  Units adjacent to public or private streets shall have the primary building entrances located on the facade facing the street. 
(3)  Pedestrian access routes shall be provided from the public or private street(s) to all primary building entrances in the form of a continuous separated pathway of at least five feet in width. 
(4)  Building facade modulation or appropriate architectural treatment shall occur at least every 30 feet along the length of facade facing adjacent properties or a public street. Minimum modulation depth shall be two feet. All buildings shall incorporate design features such as varying roof lines, offsets, balconies, projections (e.g., overhangs, porches, or similar features), recessed or covered entrances, window reveals, or similar elements to break up large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces (blank walls). 
(5)  Developments with multiple buildings shall use appropriate architectural variations and use of colors to differentiate buildings within the development. 
(6)  Large multifamily complexes that have more than 25 units shall include an open space and recreational component into the site design, which comprises at least 15 percent of the gross site area. This requirement can be accomplished through the use of landscaping, play areas and common open space. 
(7)  Lighting shall be directed downward, inward and away from public rights-of-way and adjoining uses. All lighting shall be shielded so that the direct illumination shall be confined to the property boundaries of the light source. 
(8)  The director reserves the right to approve an alternative design that does not meet the above standards when unique site conditions make strict adherence to the standards of this section impractical; provided, that in doing so, the director may levy additional conditions as mitigation. 
(Code 2002, § 22-160.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-297. - Other residential standards. 
    The following supplemental standards apply to all zoning districts in the city, but are located in this section because they are most often applied to residentially-zoned property. The regulations set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the specific zoning district regulations appearing in section 22-293. 
(1)  Street access for dwellings. The following standards apply: 
a.  No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on an approved street built according to the subdivision and development standards specified in the adopted city subdivision and development standards. This abutment shall be at in accordance with the dimensional standards in section 22-293. A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress of all dwelling units. Alleyways are permitted as a means of providing access to parking locations and ease of access to main structure. The front facade of the structure shall generally face the public right-of-way, even if the street is not the main point of access to the residence. 
b.  Provided however, the provisions herein relating to streets built according to said subdivision and development standards shall not apply to dwellings built on dedicated streets constructed prior to the adoption of said standards and accepted by the city for maintenance, or to dwellings built on streets constructed prior to their being annexed to the corporate limits of the city, if such streets were part of the county road system prior to annexation. 
(2)  Sight line at intersections. On all corner lots on which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure or any plant growth having a height in excess of three feet above the elevation of the lowest point of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring from the point of the intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of 30 feet along said front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. 
(3)  Adjoining property. Where a lot has less area than required and all the boundary lines of that lot abut land under other ownership on the effective date of these regulations, the lot may be used for any of the uses permitted. 
(4)  Accessory building construction. Except in the A-1 zone, no accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has been commenced and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used. Accessory uses shall not include the conduct of trade unless permitted in conjunction with a permitted use. The accessory building and use must be clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal use or building. 
(5)  Institutional and nonresidential development standards. In order to address impacts and compatibility issues between residential and nonresidential development, nonresidential uses and institutional uses not addressed elsewhere in this article shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  The multifamily design standards set forth in section 22-296 shall apply to new institutional and nonresidential buildings. 
b.  For the purposes of this section, institutional and nonresidential development shall include hospitals, medical clinics congregate/elder care facilities, office buildings, hotels, motels, churches, community centers, fraternal lodges, schools and similar nonresidential/institutional uses. 
c.  Those uses that require a conditional use permit are also required to meet all applicable criteria set forth in this section. 
(6)  Area requirements for dwellings not served by sanitary sewer system. Sites for dwellings which are not served by a sanitary sewer system shall conform to the requirements of the state department of health. 
(7)  Trailer and boat parking. No trailer used for hauling or boat shall be stored or parked in any residential front yard or unscreened side yard or public utility easement; nor shall such trailer or boat project beyond the front of any building in a residential district. However, any boat that is tagged for the current year and is in working condition may be parked on a trailer in a residential, hard-surfaced (asphalt/concrete) driveway providing the boat is covered with a tarpaulin. 
(8)  Accessory dwelling units (ADUs). Accessory dwelling units are designed to allow for a secondary residence which is attached to the main structure or over a current detached garage. The intent of this regulation is to allow additional options for homeowners in relation to allowing family members or renters housing while still maintaining a neighborhood feel. In addition to a conditional use permit, accessory dwelling units must also meet the following criteria: 
a.  The property owner must reside in either the principal structure or the ADU. 
b.  Only one ADU is allowed per lot in conjunction with a single-family house. ADUs are not allowed in conjunction with duplexes, triplexes or multifamily dwelling units. 
c.  An instrument shall be recorded with the register's office covenanting that the structure is being established as an accessory dwelling unit and may only be used under the conditions expressed herein. 
d.  The ADU may only be located in the established rear yard. 
e.  The living space of the ADU shall not exceed 900 square feet. 
f.  The footprint of a single story detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed 50 percent of the first floor area of the principal structure. 
g.  The footprint of a two-story detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed 40 percent of the first floor of the principal structure. 
h.  ADUs with a second story dwelling unit shall enclose the stairs interior to the structure. 
i.  The ADU shall be of similar style, design and material color and used for the principal structure and shall use similar architectural characteristics, including roof form and pitch, to the existing principal structure. 
j.  A home occupation shall not be based out of the ADU. 
k.  The ADU must provide, at minimum, one off-street parking space. 
l.  A separate driveway providing exclusive access to the ADU from a road shall not be allowed unless problematic, lot-specific circumstances exist which requires approval from the director. 
m.  The lot area shall be larger than 10,000 square feet. 
(9)  Setback other than dwelling s. In all residential districts, churches and main and accessory buildings, other than dwellings and buildings accessory to dwellings, shall set back from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than 35 feet. 
(Code 2002, § 22-160.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-298. - Large family child care home. 
    Large family child care homes may be permitted as an accessory use to a permitted residential use within single-family residential zoning districts provided that such use shall: 
(1)  Be permitted only with a conditional use permit; 
(2)  Comply with all rules, regulations and licensing requirements adopted by the state through its department of human services; 
(3)  Provide off-street (on-site) loading areas convenient to customers; 
(4)  Provide adequate off-street (on-site) parking for employees, volunteers and visitors; 
(5)  Shall limit the operation and provision of services thereof to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily; 
(6)  Be designed such that there is no play equipment or care of children in the front or exterior side yard, and such that all outdoor facilities shall be enclosed by a fence with an automatically closing and latching gate; 
(7)  Be developed, maintained and operated so that the building and yards have the appearance and character of a single-family dwelling, and do not detract from abutting single-family dwelling properties: 
a.  Meet the distance separation requirements. 
b.  Have a capacity not exceeding 12 children who are not related to the owner or operator thereof. 
(Code 2002, § 22-160.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-299-22-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - COMMERCIAL USES 

Sec. 22-330. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the city's intent that commercial districts and uses be developed with minimal intrusion on incongruous land uses. These zone classifications are established, in order to permit a range of commercial uses and varying levels of intensity. Protection is provided against hazards, objectionable influences, traffic and building congestion, undue strain on municipal services, and lack of light, air and privacy. 
(b)  There are six primary commercial zoning districts established for the city, including one neighborhood commercial district (C-1), one suburban office commercial district (C-2), one automotive and commercial recreation district (C-3), one central business district (C-4), one general commercial district (C-5), and one planned shopping center district (CP). 
(Code 2002, § 22-165.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-331. - Uses. 
    The permitted uses in the commercial districts are set forth in Table 22-331. Where the letter "X" appears on the line of a permitted use and in the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district, subject to the general provisions of the zoning code as set forth in the preceding sections. Where the letter "P" appears, the use is permitted subject to acquiring a conditional use permit (CUP) as set forth in section 22-605. If the box is blank or the use is not listed, it is not permitted outright or conditionally. 
Table 22-331. Permitted uses in Commercial Zoning Districts 
Uses Zoning Districts C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 CP Accessory uses commonly secondary and accessory to a permitted use X X X X X X Accessory uses that require parking, but utilize a very small footprint such as ice-vending machines, snow cone stands, and similar-type businesses/uses P - X - - - Administrative and professional office (with drive-through facility) P - X X X X Administrative and professional office, stand-alone (without drive-through facility) X X X X X X Animal boarding, kennel - - P P P P Animal sales, pet store, grooming, incidental use of kennel X - X X X X Automotive repair, tires and service, towing and other road services - - X X X X Automotive sales and service - - X X X - Bakery, food manufacturing and preparation, catering business (not associated with another permitted use) X - X X - - Drinking establishments; sit-down, alcohol permitted - - P P P P Bed and breakfast inn X - - X - - Beer, wine, or liquor store (off-premises consumption of alcohol) - - P P P P Bus, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle dealers, truck, or large vehicle dealers - - X - X X Car washes or car care centers P - X - X X Car, truck, trailer or recreational vehicle rental and leasing - - X X X - Communication towers/cell phone towers - - P P P - Eating establishment; drive-in, drive-through restaurant (fast-food) - - X P X X Eating establishment; sit-down, with no or incidental consumption of alcoholic beverages P - X X X X Farm equipment sales and service, including feed store, nursery - - X X X X Department store/superstore building - - X X X X Gasoline service station - - X X X - Grocery stores, food markets X - X X X X Ground floor residential uses, subject to section 22-336 - - - P - - Hotel, motel, inn - - X X P X Laundry service, dry cleaning - - X X X X Light automobile dealer - - X - P P Lumberyard, building materials, hardware store - - X X X X Outdoor sales and storage of materials - - X X - - Pawnshops - - X - X - Personal services X X X X X X Retail sale of low-point beer for off-premises consumption - - X X X X Retail sales and service X - X X X X Sales and service for mobile homes, travel trailers, campers, trailers, large trucks and equipment - - X - P P Scrap operators, automobile towing with storage and salvage - - P - - - Sidewalk dining, seating within public right-of-way - - - X - - Personal storage (mini-storage) - - X - - - Tattoo parlors - - X X X X Veterinary clinic, including: pet services and grooming, incidental boarding - - X X - - Warehousing, light industrial assembly, manufacturing - - - X - - Wholesaling, storage and distribution - - X X - - Residential uses: Home occupation X - X X - - Multifamily dwellings P - P X - - Residential uses within existing buildings, subject to section 22-336 - - - X - - Townhouses X - - X - - Public assembly uses: Active open space/athletic fields/golf courses, except city parks P P P P P P Amusement, sports or recreation establishment (not specifically enumerated) - - P P P P Bowling, billiards, pool, etc. - - P P P P Fitness, recreational sports, gym, health spa or athletic club X - X X P P Outdoor miniature golf establishment - - P P P P Performance or movie theater - - X X X X Indoor recreation, amusement activities (mini-golf, arcade, bowling, etc.) - - X X X X Religious facilities X X X X X X Community or institutional uses: Assisted living, nursing, continuum of care facility - - X X - - Cemetery, monument, tombstone or mausoleum - - X - - - Child and youth services P - X X X X City, county or federal facilities X X X X X X Clubs or lodges P - X X - - Communication facilities, towers, except public emergency communication facilities P P X X X X Community centers, library services X X X X X X Community gardens X X X X X X Cremation facilities - - P P - - Child care center P P X X X X Funeral homes - - X X - - Hospital building, medical clinic over 15,000 square feet P - X P P X Medical clinic building, hospital, under 15,000 square feet P - X X X X Museum, exhibition or similar structure P - X X X X Public safety-related or public administration facility, including ambulance service X X X X X X Public services or utilities X X X X X X Residential care home - - - P - - Residential child care facility - - - X - - School or university buildings (privately owned) - - X X X X Services for elderly and disabled P - X X X X Social assistance, welfare and charitable services (not otherwise enumerated) P - X X X X Treatment facility - - P P - - Transportation-related facilities: Automobile parking facilities X X X X X X Bus stop shelter X X X X X X Bus terminal - - X X X P Bus or truck maintenance facility - - X - X - School and employee bus transportation X X X X X X In the cases a use is not listed above and which, in the opinion of the director, is similar in character and is not more obnoxious or detrimental to the area in which it is located, by reason of noise, offensive odor, smoke, dust, vibration, traffic congestion or danger to life and property is also permitted.  
(Code 2002, § 22-165.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 2580NS, § 2, XX-XX-2016) 
Sec. 22-332. - Classification of zones. 
(a)  C-1 Neighborhood commercial district. This C-1 neighborhood commercial district is intended for a unified grouping in one or more buildings of retail shops and stores and personal services of limited size and service area that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the citizens residing in the adjacent residential neighborhood where retail shops and personal services are not otherwise readily available. Because these shops and offices are lower intensity uses, they may be designed to be located along arterial streets in close proximity to housing areas or as limited service facilities in larger planned high density housing areas. This district is limited to the types of uses that will not cause an adverse impact (i.e., noise, lighting traffic) upon the surrounding areas. This district is also intended to reduce auto trips by permitting a limited group of commercial uses to be located in close proximity to residential areas. It is intended that the suburban convenience center be developed as a unit with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate screening and landscaping. 
(b)  C-2 Limited office district. This commercial district is intended primarily for business and professional offices that are compatible with residential use. The district is suitable for business, consulting, executive or administrative offices which can occupy low rise structures in a low density landscaped setting. This district is designed to serve as a transition zone between commercial and residential districts, and to provide a district for office space without the more intensive retail uses of the commercial zone. 
(c)  C-3 Highway commercial district. This C-3 automotive and commercial recreation district is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for establishments offering accommodations, supplies or services to motorists, and for certain specialized uses such as retail outlets, extensive commercial amusement and service establishments which serve the entire community but do not, and should not necessarily, locate in more restrictive commercial districts. All servicing of vehicles and assembly of equipment carried on as an incidental part of the sales operation shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(d)  C-4 Central business district. This C-4 central business district is designed for the conduct of the personal and business services and the general retail trade of the community. It is designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial uses in the central business district or areas of mixed business enterprises. It will not normally be applied in the case of new commercial areas. Direct location restriction: Request for C-4 CBD zoning district shall only be granted as an extension of an existing CBD zoning district. To be eligible for rezoning to this district, a parcel shall abut or be adjacent across from a street or alley from the existing CBD district. The C-4 zoning district is a limited geography associated with the historic downtown. 
(e)  C-5 General commercial district. The C-5 general commercial district is intended to provide a place for those types of commercial activities that require separate buildings and building groups surrounded by landscaped yards, open space and adequate parking with major access available. This district should be utilized at points of direct access from freeways and arterial intersections or in areas identified for heavy commercial activity that will be well separated from nearby residential areas. Traffic generated by the uses will be primarily passenger vehicles and only those trucks and commercial vehicles required for stocking and delivery of retail goods. 
(f)  CP Planned shopping center district. This CP planned shopping center district is established as a district intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops and stores that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. Because of the varied uses permitted, it is important to be separated as much as possible visually and physically from any nearby residential areas and to limit the harmful effects of increased traffic, noise, and general nonresidential activity which will be generated. It is intended that the neighborhood shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate off-street parking spaces for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening materials. 
(1)  Area regulations. The following shall apply to all uses permitted in this CP district: There shall be more than one shop or store in the CP planned shopping center and the combined total gross floor area shall be a minimum of 7,000 square feet. 
(2)  Common parking facilities. Off-street parking requirements set forth in division 10 of this article, may be complied with by providing a permanent common off-street parking facility for all of the uses within a permanent common off-street parking facility for all of the uses within the planned shopping center, provided that the lot of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements; provided, however, that in no case shall the amount of off-street parking area, including driveways required for ingress and egress and circulation, be less than 21/2 times the gross floor area of the shopping center. 
(Code 2002, § 22-165.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-333. - Dimensional standards. 
    Table 22-333 provides the density and dimensional standards for each zone. Note that other dimensional standards may be approved as part of an approved PUD. No building, structure or use shall hereafter be erected, constructed or established on a lot that does not meet the requirements for lots as contained in this article and for the district in which said lot is located, except for nonconforming lots of record. 
Table 22-333. Density and Dimensional Standards by Zone 
Standard Commercial Zoning Districts * C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 CP Minimum lot size (square feet) 5,000' 5,000' 10,000' 2,500' 10,000' 200,000' Minimum lot width (feet) 50' 50' 100' 25' 100' 300' Minimum street frontage (feet) ** 50' 50' 100' 25' 100' 300' Front yard setback (feet) 25' 25' 25' 0' 25' 25' Front yard setback-with parking in rear (feet) 15' 15' 25' 0' 25' 25' Side yard setback (feet) 0 0 0 0' 0 0 Side yard setback-abutting a residential district (feet) 2' for every 1' of building height 2' for every 1' of building height 2' for every 1' of building height 0' 2' for every 1' of building height 2' for every 1' of building height Side yard setback-abutting a public right-of-way (feet) 15' 15' 15' 0' 15' 15' Rear yard setback-business serviced from rear (feet) 30' - Does not 
include parking spaces 30' - Does not 
include parking spaces 30' - Does not 
include parking spaces 0' 30' - Does not 
include parking spaces 30' - Does not 
include parking spaces Rear yard setback-business not serviced from rear (feet) 15' 15' 15' 0' 15' 15' Accessory structure Rear yard only - must meet all setbacks Rear yard only- must meet all setbacks Rear yard only - must meet all setbacks None Rear yard only - must meet all setbacks Rear yard only - must meet all setbacks Maximum site coverage (building footprint) No more than 40% No more than 40% 30% - The gross floor area of main building shall not exceed area coverage None No more than 40% 25% - The gross floor area of main building shall not exceed area coverage Maximum building height-Commercial (feet) 35'45' (with CUP) 35'45' (with CUP) 45' 35'45' (with CUP) 35'45' (with CUP) 35'45' (with CUP) * See each classification of zones for additional regulations that may apply to specific zoning districts. ** An access agreement may be approved by the director in lieu of public street frontage in the C-3, C-5 and C-P zones to allow for outlot development that utilizes an internal roadway network that is privately maintained. Such allowance shall not require a variance.  
(Code 2002, § 22-165.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-334. - Commercial building design standards. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to promote architectural design standards and aid in the creation of structures that are visually interesting and an asset to the community. With building design standards, the image residents hold of the community are reflected in the style of construction and enhance the attractiveness of streetscapes and reflect the community as a whole. With the use of design standards the community can ensure variety and create a positive community image that can improve the quality of life for all residents. 
(b)  General requirements. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all commercial, nonresidential structures, including development, renovation or redevelopment. This includes major nonresidential office or retail building structure. 
(1)  Metal construction. All metal construction must include masonry facade as outlined below. These requirements shall apply to all principal structures and accessory buildings larger than 200 square feet. For purposes of this section, the term "masonry materials" means and includes brick, slump-faced or decorative concrete masonry unit (CMU), stucco, concrete (poured in place, pre-cast or tilt-wall) with aggregate, sandblasted or textured coating finish, stone, rock or other structural material of equal durability and architectural effect. 
a.  Masonry requirements on building sides: All metal buildings constructed on nonresidential property, or residential property whose use is nonresidential, zoned RE, R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5 or CP, according to the city's Official Zoning Map, shall have exterior walls constructed using masonry material covering at least 60 percent of the facade, except in the C-4 Zone, which shall require 80 percent coverage. Windows and standard doors shall be included in the coverage total, but garage doors shall not. 
b.  Facade means any exterior wall or face of a building that fronts on a dedicated public street. 
c.  Metal roofs are permitted and coated aluminum siding may be used to cover clapboards on existing buildings. 
d.  Additions to existing buildings shall be deemed new construction under these provisions and the facade requirements shall apply to the new portion. 
(2)  New infill construction. The construction of new buildings on vacant lots downtown should be encouraged. Buildings should be designed to look appropriate and compatible with surrounding buildings. The central idea behind good infill construction is to be consistent with the design around it. These design guidelines shall be adhered to: 
a.  Height. Infill construction should share a similar height to surrounding buildings. It shall, at the least, be the average height of the adjacent buildings. 
b.  Width. The infill building shall reflect the style of the facades on either side along the street. If the site is large, the mass of the facade can be divided into a number of small bays. 
c.  Proportion. The relationship between height and width of existing facades shall be respected. 
d.  Consistent setback. The new building shall have consistent front setback with that of its neighboring building. 
e.  Composition. The composition of infill facade should be similar to that of surrounding facades. 
(3)  Refuse facilities. A concrete approach loading pad shall be constructed in front of all refuse enclosures. Such pad shall be at least 12 feet wide by 12 feet long, and a minimum of six inches thickness of concrete at a standard of 3,500 PSI. 
a.  All refuse shall be enclosed and screened on all four sides so that they are not visible from adjacent public right-of-way. 
b.  Required enclosures shall have a minimum inside dimension of 12 feet by 12 feet with an enclosure gate opening of not less than 12 feet in width. The height of any such enclosure shall be that necessary to prevent refuse material from protruding above the enclosure. 
c.  Waste container enclosures shall have steel-framed grates with spring-loaded hinges and fasteners. Keeper latches shall be required to hold gates in the fully opened position while refuse containers are being serviced. Four-inch diameter pipe bollards shall be required inside each enclosure to protect the enclosure from truck operation. 
d.  All required enclosures shall be at a minimum a combination of brick columns matching the building and sightproof wood fencing. 
e.  An unobstructed approach path of not less than 50 feet in length shall be required for a 35-foot long collection truck to access the refuse facility. A turnaround area shall be provided of sufficient length to allow the collection truck to exit without backing onto a public right-of-way. 
(Code 2002, § 22-165.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-335. - Major nonresidential office or retail building design standards. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  This subsection shall apply to new development, with a gross floor area of more than 40,000 square feet and/or when a building wall length is 150 feet or greater along a public right-of-way. 
(2)  These standards shall be in addition to the general requirements of the building design standards. In case of conflict, the standards in this section shall overrule general requirements. 
(b)  Facades and exterior walls. 
(1)  Facades greater than 150 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recessed having a depth of at least three percent of the length of the facade and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet. 
(2)  Ground floor facades that face public right-of-way shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings or other such features along no less than 60 percent of their horizontal length. Building structure facades shall include a repeating pattern that includes no less than three of the following elements: 
a.  Color changes; 
b.  Texture change; 
c.  Material module change; or 
d.  An expression of architectural or structural bays though a change in plane no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or project rib. 

(c)  Roofs. Roofs shall have no less than two of the following features: 
(1)  Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet past supporting walls; 
(2)  Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run; or 
(3)  Three or more roof slope planes. 
(d)  Materials and colors. 
(1)  Predominant exterior buildings materials shall be high quality materials, including, but not limited to, brick, sandstone, other native stone and tinted/textured concrete masonry units. 
(2)  Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Building trim and accent areas shall be no more than 15 percent of the exterior finish and may feature EIFS, brighter colors, including primary colors, but neon tubing, fiber optic or similar lighting shall not be an acceptable feature for building trim or accent areas. 
(e)  Entryways. 
(1)  Each applicable establishment shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than three of the following: 
a.  Canopies or porticos; 
b.  Overhangs; 
c.  Recessed/projections; 
d.  Arcades; 
e.  Raised corniced parapets over the door; 
f.  Peaked roof forms; 
g.  Arches; 
h.  Outdoor patios; 
i.  Display windows; 
j.  Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design; or 
k.  Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. 
(2)  Where additional stores are located in the applicable establishment, each such store shall have at least one exterior customer entrance, which shall conform to the above requirements. 
(f)  Sidewalks and walkways. 
(1)  Perimeter sidewalks shall at a minimum meet the city standards and be provided where required along all public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Walkways of not less than five feet in width should be provided along the length of any building facade with a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting a parking area. 
(3)  Internal pedestrian walkways should provide weather protection features such as awnings and arcades within 30 feet of all customer entrances. 
(4)  All internal pedestrian walkways should be distinguished from driving surfaces. 
(g)  Central features and community space. Each structure subject to these standards shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community and public spaces by providing at least two of the following features. Any such feature shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network and shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape: 
(1)  Patio/seating area; 
(2)  Pedestrian plaza with benches; 
(3)  Transportation center; 
(4)  Window shopping walkway; 
(5)  Outdoor playground area; 
(6)  Kiosk area; 
(7)  Water feature; 
(8)  Clock tower; 
(9)  Public art; or 
(10)  Other such deliberately shaped area and/or focal feature or amenity that, in the judgment of the planning commission adequately enhances such community and public space. 
(Code 2002, § 22-165.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-336. - Residential standards in C-4 zone. 
    All residential construction in the C-4 zoning district shall adhere to the following standards: 
(1)  For the purposes of implementing this section, the term "existing" means structures that were in existence at the time of original adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(2)  For the purposes of implementing this section, the term "ground floor" means the first floor of a building other than a cellar or basement. 
(3)  For the purpose of implementing this section, the term "accessory ground floor residential" means a use that is incidental and subordinate to the commercial use located on the ground floor level. Commercial space shall account for at least 50 percent of the ground floor area. 
(4)  For the purpose of implementing this section, the term "commercial space" means the physical space accounted for by a commercial use. 
(5)  Permitted residential uses shall be allowed, by right, on the ground floor level only on properties located outside of the downtown core area as shown in Figure 22-165.7.1. 
(6)  Residential uses are permitted on upper floors of all buildings, existing or new, within the downtown core as shown in Figure 22-165.7.1. Accessory ground floor residential uses may be approved by conditional use permit (CUP). Commercial space shall in all cases front upon the primary public right-of-way. 
(7)  New multifamily or townhouse development not within existing structures shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards within the C-4 zone: 
a.  Parking lots shall be located to the side and/or back of buildings and shall not front upon Main Street. 
b.  Units adjacent to public streets shall have the primary building entrances located on the facade facing the street. All building elevations facing a public street right-of-way shall provide clearly marked and prominent primary entrances, and a combination of windows, porches, and/or balconies. A minimum of 35 percent of front (i.e., street-facing) elevations and a minimum of 25 percent of side and rear building elevations shall meet this standard. Percent of elevation is measured as the horizontal plane (lineal feet) containing doors, porches, balconies, terraces and/or windows. The standard applies to each full and partial building story. 
c.  Townhouse and multifamily development shall be designed so that garage doors do not dominate the ground level street-facing facade and do not project beyond the front plane of the residence. This can be accomplished by incorporating alley access into site design and locating garage and parking areas to the rear or by limiting and including design elements. Garage doors shall not comprise more than 40 percent of the front yard facing facade of a townhouse and shall not extend beyond the front building elevation (plane of the structure). There shall be no garage doors along Main Street. 
d.  Sidewalks are required along any public street that fronts a multi-family or townhouse development in the C-4 zone and shall be installed by the developer. The minimum width shall be eight feet. 

(Code 2002, § 22-165.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014; Ord. No. 2580NS, § 1, 2016) 
Sec. 22-337. - Outdoor storage. 
(a)  With the exception of permanent outside sales and display areas for retail stores, such as garden centers, no article or material shall be kept, stored or displayed outside the confines of the building unless it is so screened by fences, walls, or planting so that it is substantially screened from all public streets. 
(b)  If sightproof screening is required, no outdoor sales and displays, and outdoor storage shall be stacked or extended above the required sightproof screening. 
(c)  Special sales merchandise may be temporarily displayed outdoors for up to three times per year and for no longer than 30 consecutive days. An extension may be permitted for up to 30 days, at the discretion of the director. 
(d)  No required parking lot area shall be used as a display or sales area. 
(e)  With the exception of the C-4 designation, no public sidewalk or street right-of-way shall be used for outside sales or display, except for an approved temporary special merchant promotion authorized by city regulation. 
(f)  Outside sales and display shall be only material or products actively offered for sale and may remain outside only during the normal working hours of the business. 
(Code 2002, § 22-165.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-338-22-362. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INDUSTRIAL USES 

Sec. 22-363. - Purpose. 
    It is the city's intent that industrial districts and uses be developed with minimal intrusion on incongruous land uses. These zone classifications are established, in order to permit a range of industrial uses and varying levels of intensity. Protection is provided against hazards, objectionable influences, traffic and building congestion, undue strain on municipal services, and lack of light, air and privacy. There are three primary industrial zoning districts established for the city, including one restricted light-industrial designation (I-1), one light industrial (I-2) designation, and one heavy industrial (I-3) designation. More limited commercial activity is designated. The intent is to preserve this land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and to limit nonindustrial uses. 
(Code 2002, § 22-170.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-364. - Uses. 
    The permitted uses in the industrial districts are set forth in the table below. Where the letter "X" appears on the line of permitted uses and in the column of a district, the listed uses are permitted in that district, subject to the general provisions of the zoning code as set forth in the preceding sections. Where the letter "P" appears instead of the letter "X", this use is permitted subjected to acquiring a conditional use permit as set forth in section 22.605. For a complete list of additional requirements, please refer to section 22-365. 
TABLE 22-364: PERMITTED USES IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Permitted Uses Zoning District Permitted Uses Zoning District I-1 I-2 I-3 I-1 I-2 I-3 Accessories for vehicles or equipment whose sale is permitted, but not including the rebuilding or recapping of tires - X X Carpentry, woodworking or furniture works X X X Acid manufacturer - - P Ceramic or glass products X X X Adult novelty store P P P Chemicals, compounding or packaging - - X Advertising agency X X X City, county, school district, state or federal facilities X X X Aerosol containers: filling on contract basis - X X Communication towers/cell phone towers P P P Agricultural services and sales - X X Compounding or cosmetics, toiletries, drugs and pharmaceutical products - X X Air conditioning and heating equipment - X X Construction equipment repair, sales or storage X X X Aircraft parts: sales, services, rental or repair, including airframes and engines - X X Contract sorting, grading and packing of fruits and vegetables for grower - - X Aircraft transportation - P P Contractor (general or heavy construction) facilities - X X Animal bones, offal or waste: assembly incinerator, processing or utilization - - P Disinfecting, deodorizing or exterminator service X X X Animal and poultry slaughter and processing - - P Drug and pharmaceutical products manufacturing - X X Apparel and other textile products or manufacturing X X X Dry cleaning and dyeing plant - X X Armored car service X X X Electric generating plant P P X Auction barn, excluding sale or trade of livestock X X X Electric utility maintenance facility - X X Automobile body shop or accessory, tire or battery stores, and wash services, including self-service X X X Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture and electrical appliance, equipment and supplies P X X Automobile, bus, truck dismantling, salvaging, assembly, wrecking and repair - - P Extraction of sand, gravel, clay and quarrying of rock - - P Automobile parking or storage, as a principal use X X X Farm equipment: sales, services, rental, repair and supplies X X X Automobile sales, new or used X X X Farm products, wholesaling or public warehousing - X X Batching or mixing plant, asphaltic or Portland cement, concrete, mortar or plaster - P P Feed and fertilizer sales X X X Battery manufacturing - - P Fertilizer mixing - - P Blacksmiths, tinsmiths and sheet metal shop - X X Food products, including bakery products, candy, fruit and vegetable processing and canning, bottling, packing and processing of meats, poultry and grains, but not including slaughtering of animals or poultry P X X Blueprinting, photocopying and similar reproduction services X X X Foundry, lightweight nonferrous metal - - P Boarding or training of animals X X - Freight depot, railroad or truck X X X Boat rental, storage or accessory storage X X X Furniture manufacturing and upholstering X X X Bottling gas X X X Gas pressure control station P P X Brick, tile or clay manufacturing - - X Gas utility maintenance facility - P X Buildings materials sales maintained inside building X X X Gases or liquids, flammable, storage - - P Building materials or lumber; outside building - X X Gasoline service station X X X Hair, felt, feather or leather products - P X Radio transmitting station or tower X X X Hardware, industrial sales - X X Railroad equipment storage or maintenance - - X Hay, grain or feed store X X X Railroad freight terminal X X X Heating, air conditioning or plumbing sales or service X X X Railroad yard - P X Laundry (except self-service) and laundry services X X X Repair, renting and servicing of commodities - - X Leather goods fabrication X X X Retail sales on premise as an accessory use, but in relation to the current industrial use P X X Linen supply or industrial laundry - X X Rubber products, natural or synthetic manufacturing - - P Livestock feeding, sales, shipment, auction sales barn and pens - - P Rug cleaning or repairing X X X Lumberyards X X X School, commercial or trade X X X Machine shop X X X Scraps and waste materials handling, including building and vehicles wrecking establishments and junkyard - - P Medical supplies, manufacturing and sales X X X Scrap steel cutting on control basis - - X Metals or minerals (except petroleum products or scrap) sales - X X Sporting or athletic equipment manufacturing X X X Mini-storage warehouse X X X Steel products, fabrication and assembly - X X Mobile homes, travel trailers, or campers-sales and services X X X Tar or tar products - - X Monument works and engraving - X X Textile production and distribution - X X Motion picture theater-drive-in X X X Transfer station (trash-garage) - P P Musical instruments production and distribution - X X Truck, bus, train terminals - X X Nonmetallic mineral preparation - - X Truck sales, service, rental or repair X X X Office: professional, business X X X Vending machines: sales, service, rental or repair X X X Oil field equipment and supplies: sales, service, rental or repair X X X Warehousing, other than warehousing X X X Optical goods manufacturing X X X Water treatment plant, storage facility or pressure control station P P X Packing and crating service X X X Welding shop X X X Paint, enamel, lacquer, turpentine, varnish manufacturing - - P Wood or lumber processing - - X Paper manufacturing or processing, paper products including envelopes, stationery, wallpaper manufacturing - P X Petroleum pipeline or pressure control station P P X Petroleum products, storage - - X Petroleum or its products, refining of - - P Photo finishing service X X X Pipeline pressure control station P P X Poultry and small game dressing and packing - - X Production of crude petroleum, natural gas and natural gas liquids - - P Propane gas, sales and storage - P P Public buildings and facilities X X X Quarrying of stone - - P  
(Code 2002, § 22-170.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-365. - Industrial performance standards. 
(a)  Any use constructed, established, altered or enlarged in any industrial district after the effective date of the code, shall be operated so as to comply with the following standards. No use already established on the effective date of said code shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the applicable standards established hereinafter for any industrial district: 
(1)  No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
(2)  No retail sales or services shall be permitted except those listed in Table 22-364. 
(3)  All operations, activities and storage (but not to include off-street parking and loading of motor vehicles in operating condition) shall be conducted and maintained wholly inside buildings, except that storage may be maintained outside a building if no part is less than 15 feet from any lot line of the tract on which the use is located, and provided any such storage area is screened from other property with a decorative sightproof fence or planting. 
(4)  No noise from any operation conducted on the premises, other than that emanating from vehicular traffic, either continuous or intermittent, shall be detectable at any boundary line of the district. 
(5)  All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of goods, wares and merchandising shall be carried on in such a manner so as not to be injurious or offensive by reasons of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odor, glare or heat, fire or explosive hazards. 
(6)  No fuel or energy with the exception of electricity, natural and/or liquefied petroleum, and solar, should be used. 
(7)  All buildings shall be furnished with all-weather, hard-surfaced sidewalks, and the grounds shall be planted and landscaped. 
(8)  The manufacture, or the use, of any materials which produce explosive vapors or gases is prohibited. 
(9)  No activities involving storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted. 
(10)  Any operation that produces intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building, and exposed sources of light shall be screened so as not to be detectable beyond the lot lines. 
(11)  No vibration shall be detectable beyond the lot lines of the lot on which the use is located. 
(b)  The following shall apply only to the I-3 heavy industrial district: 
(1)  No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
(2)  No retail sales or services shall be permitted except those listed in Table 22-364 for I-3 district. 
(3)  No storage, manufacturing or assembly of goods shall be conducted outside of a building unless the nearest point of said activity is more than 300 feet from the boundary of any residential zoning district. 
(4)  Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid direct light upon property located in any residential district. 
(5)  All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing and testing of goods, wares and merchandise, shall be carried on in such a manner as not to be injurious or offensive by reasons of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odor, glare or heat, fire or explosive hazards. 
(6)  No activities involving storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted. 
(Code 2002, § 22-170.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-366. - Classification of zones. 
(a)  I-1 Restricted light industrial district. This I-1 restricted light industrial district is intended primarily for production and assembly plants that are conducted so as the noise, odor, dust and glare of each operation is completely confined within an enclosed building. These industries may require direct access to rail, air or street transportation routes; however, the size and volume of the raw materials and finished products involved should not produce the volume of freight generated by the uses of the light and heavy industrial districts. Building in this district should be architecturally attractive and surrounded by landscaped yards. 
(b)  I-2 light industrial district. The purpose of the I-2 light industrial district is to provide a location for industry which may generate low levels of noise, odor, smoke, dust or glare which shall be contained within an enclosed building, and is not a hazard to the surrounding areas. The intent is to preserve this land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and to prohibit nonindustrial uses. 
(c)  I-3 Heavy industrial district. The purpose of I-3 heavy industrial district is to provide a location for industries which may by their very nature create nuisances, but which do not create noxious nuisances or a hazard to surrounding areas. The intent is to preserve this land especially for industry in locations with access to primary major arterials and rail service. Even though this district caters to industries which may create a substantial nuisance, it does not permit industries which by the nature of their operation emit odors, gases, dust, noise, smoke, heat, glare or vibrations in sufficient quantities so as to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 2002, § 22-170.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-367. - Dimensional standards. 
Table 22-367 Density and Dimensional Standards by Zone 
Standard Industrial Zoning Districts I-1 I-2 I-3 Minimum lot size (square feet) 10,000' 20,000' 20,000' Minimum lot width (feet) 100' 150' 150' Minimum street frontage (feet) 60' 60' 60' Front yard setback (feet) 35' 35' 35' Side yard setback within district (feet) 0' 0' 0' Side yard setback - abutting a residential district (feet) 2' with every 5' of height with minimum 15' 2' with every 5' of height with minimum 15' 2' with every 5' of height with minimum 50' Side yard setback - abutting secondary street (feet) 15' 15' 15' Side yard setback - abutting a federal, state or county highway public right-of-way (feet) 50' 50' 50' Rear yard setback (feet) 30' 30' 30' Rear yard setback - abutting a residential district (feet) 50' 50' 50' Maximum site coverage (building footprint) No more than 35% 45% 60% Maximum building height (feet) 35' 45' No limit - defer to fire and building code *See Industrial use unit classification and classification of zones for additional regulations that may apply to specific zonings.  
(Code 2002, § 22-170.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-368-22-392. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - GENERAL USE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 22-393. - Open space to serve one building. 
    No open space or lot area for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by, or counted as open space for, any other building or structure. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-394. - Projections into yards. 
    Open eaves, cornices, windowsills, and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet. Open porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-395. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard; provided, that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building line shall exceed three feet in height. On corner lots, with the condition that appropriate sight line restrictions provided in section 22-399 are adhered to, fencing along the secondary frontage shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(b)  Fences shall be constructed with customarily used fencing materials, and shall be designed and arranged to provide visual separation of uses irrespective of vegetation. Fences shall be kept in an attractive state, in good repair, and in safe and sanitary condition at all times by the property owner. Any required fence or screening which are damaged shall be repaired. 
(1)  Residential. An opaque, ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge not less than six feet high shall be constructed and maintained in good condition alongside rear lot lines up to, but not beyond, the abutting building setback line, except where front yard is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of division 10 of this article, pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. Fences, walls and hedges in residential districts may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard; provided that no fence, wall or hedge located in front of the front building line shall exceed three feet in height, and no other wall or fence shall exceed six feet in height. On corner lots, fencing shall not obstruct established building lines. 
(2)  Commercial. Whenever any commercial district or parking or parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential district, an opaque, ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge of not less than six feet high and no greater than eight feet high shall be constructed and maintained in good condition alongside rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the abutting building setback line, except where the front yard is used for off-street parking, then the provisions of division 10 of this article, pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. 
(3)  Industrial. Whenever any industrial district or parking lot or parking area is established so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in any other zoning district, an opaque, ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge not less than six feet high shall be constructed and maintained in good condition and rear lot lines up to, but not beyond, the abutting building setback line, except where front yard is used for off-street parking, then the provision of division 10 of this article, pertaining to off-street parking lots shall apply. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-396. - Lighting. 
    Lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward residential buildings in a residential district. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-397. - Street right-of-way width. 
    Where the dedicated right-of-way is less than 50 feet, the depth of the front yard setback shall be measured at a starting point 25 feet from the existing street easement unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-398. - Street access for dwellings. 
(a)  No dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one paved and approved street. This abutment shall be at least 35 feet in length and the lot shall have a width of at least 60 feet at the building line. A street shall form the direct and primary means of ingress and egress of all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall form only as a secondary means of ingress and egress. 
(b)  Provided however, the provisions herein relating to streets built according to said subdivision and development standards shall not apply to dwellings built on dedicated streets constructed prior to the adoption of said standards and accepted by the city for maintenance, or to dwellings built on streets constructed prior to their being annexed to the corporate limits of the city, if such streets were part of the county road system prior to annexation. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-399. - Sight line at intersections. 
    On all corner lots on which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure or any plant growth having a height in excess of three feet above the elevation of the lowest point of the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of 30 feet along said front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a right triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-400. - Location of private garages. 
    An attached or detached private garage which faces on a street shall not be located closer than 25 feet to the street right-of-way line, unless in a cul-du-sac where the setback shall be 20 feet. If specific zoning districts require a greater setback, then the greater shall be observed. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-401. - Accessory building construction. 
    Except in the A-1 rural agricultural district, no accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has actually been commenced and no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-402. - Site planning requirements. 
    Whenever one or more residential, institutional, commercial or industrial buildings are proposed to be located in a cluster or grouping which has a different arrangement, orientation, or innovative site planning variation from that of other buildings, structures or uses in the area or on adjacent properties, the architectural design, location, orientation, service and parking areas of such buildings shall be planned so as not to adversely affect the use of adjacent or other properties in the area, as determined by the planning commission. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.10; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-403. - Area requirements for dwellings not served by sanitary sewer system. 
    Sites for dwellings which are not served by a sanitary sewer system shall conform to the requirements of the state department of health. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.11; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-404. - Height requirements. 
    The regulations set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the specific zoning district regulations appearing in divisions 4 through 7 of this article. 
(1)  In measuring height, a habitable basement or attic shall be counted as a story; provided, that a story in a sloping roof, the area of which story at a height of four feet above the floor does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the floor immediately below it and which does not contain an independent apartment, shall be counted as a half story. 
(2)  Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other projects not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit. 
(3)  Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums and other public and semi-public buildings may exceed the height limitations of the district if the minimum depth of the rear yards and the minimum width of the side yards required in the district are increased one foot for each two feet by which the height of such public or semi-public structure exceed the prescribed height limit. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.12; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-405. - Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles. 
    The parking and/or storage of trailers and commercial vehicles in residential districts are restricted by the regulations set out in section 19-487. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.13; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-406. - Storage of liquefied petroleum gases. 
    The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with this code and regulations of the state liquefied petroleum gas administration. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.14; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-407. - Sightproof screening. 
(a)  Sightproof fencing and/or landscaping, as herein defined, composed of decorative fencing, evergreen vegetation or landscaping earth berms maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the property or structure behind such fence, evergreen vegetation, or berms which is sought to be screened from the abutting property. 
(b)  When the provisions of this code require the construction of a sightproof screen as a condition for the initiation and subsequent continuance of a use, the screening shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Sightproof fence: 
a.  A minimum of six feet but not more than eight feet in height; 
b.  Attractive; 
c.  Made of wood, masonry, decorative metal, stockade poles, or other suitable materials; 
d.  Stable and able to withstand wind forces of 15 pounds of pressure per square foot; 
e.  Permanently anchored to the ground by a base which is wholly upon its owner's property; 
f.  Sufficient to screen from view the property or structure sought to be screened from the abutting properties; and 
g.  Kept in an attractive state and in good repair at all times by the property owner. 
(2)  Sightproof landscaping: 
a.  Consisting of evergreen vegetation or landscaped earth berms; 
b.  A minimum of six feet in height; 
c.  Sufficient to screen from view the property or structure sought to be screened from the abutting properties; and 
d.  Kept in an attractive state and in good repair at all times by the property owner. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.15; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-408. - Service station (gas station) requirements. 
(a)  Motor vehicle fuels shall be transferred from underground storage tanks by means of approved dispensing units located at least 15 feet from all property lines. All dispensers shall be protected from vehicle damage by rigidly mounting them in a concrete platform of at least six inches in height extending a minimum of 12 inches beyond the dispenser in all directions. When adequate protection is not provided by the concrete platform alone, additional safeguards shall be provided by a pipe bollard or guard rails. 
(b)  Underground tanks for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids shall be located at least five feet from any wall, foundation or property line. The top of the flammable liquid tanks shall be below the lowest floor elevation of any building within 20 feet of said tanks. 
(c)  All service station, gas station canopies constructed as an accessory building to any said building or any commercial establishment dispensing flammable liquids shall be constructed at a minimum vertical clearance of 15 feet. All canopies shall be set back 15 feet from all property lines. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.16; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-409. - Home occupations. 
    Home occupations shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No exterior alterations of the structure shall be made which are of a nonresidential nature, and shall change the character of the residence. 
(2)  Except for one non-illuminated name plate attached to the building entrance which is not more than two square feet in area, no evidence of any home occupation shall be perceptible to an observer in the street or on any other property in the agricultural or residential district. 
(3)  No trading in merchandise shall be carried on and in connection with which there shall be no display of merchandise. 
(4)  No mechanical equipment shall be used or activity conducted which creates any noise, dust, odor, or electrical disturbance beyond the confines of the lot on which said occupation is conducted. 
(5)  Outside storage or display of materials or items associated with the home occupation shall be prohibited. 
(6)  No person shall be employed at any time, other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises. 
(7)  Home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes. 
(8)  The use shall be conducted entirely within the main or accessory building. 
(9)  No home occupation shall cause excessive traffic. Excessive traffic shall be considered more than 20 vehicle trips per day in accordance with the most current addition of the Trip Generation Manual, published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers. 
(10)  All associated parking shall be accommodated on the property upon which the home occupation is conducted. All parking areas shall be hard surfaced as either concrete or asphalt. 
(11)  The total square footage of the home occupation shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the structure within which it is conducted. 
(12)  Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with internal combustion engine or of large appliances or any other work related to automobiles and their parts is prohibited. 
(13)  A home occupation may not serve as headquarters or dispatch centers where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.17; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-410. - Boardinghouse; roominghouse; overnight shelter. 
    The purpose of this section is to authorize the operation of shelters for homeless persons in the community under circumstances which protect and enhance the health, safety and welfare of city residents, while ensuring that adequate support services exist for shelter occupants. In addition to filing for a conditional use permit, a homeless shelter must also meet the following requirements in addition to any other conditions the city commission may require: 
(1)  Ownership. The shelter shall be fully contained within a building owned and/or operated by a governmental agency or nonprofit organization. 
(2)  Location. A homeless shelter shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a city park, public school or residential property. 
(3)  Supervision. The operator of a shelter for the homeless shall provide continuous, on-site supervision by an employee and/or volunteer during all hours of operation. Full-time security may be required as a condition of approval. 
(4)  Operations plan. Any organization proposing to establish a homeless shelter shall provide a detailed operations plan specifying their target clientele, proposed operation expenses, funding and staffing levels. 
(5)  Sales. No retail sales shall take place on the property of shelter for the homeless. 
(6)  Maximum occupancy. The city may set a maximum occupancy load for the shelter based on documented need. 
(7)  Inspection. The fire marshal shall inspect the site before occupation and provide a letter noting the number of residents to be permitted. 
(8)  Permit. There shall be a permit from the health department on file at all times as applicable by state statute. In addition, the applicant is strongly encouraged to consult the health department and other pertinent health providers about measures that may be taken to prevent the spread of diseases like tuberculosis and other communicable diseases. 
(9)  Code of conduct. All homeless shelters shall create and adopt a code of conduct that shall be enforced at all times. The code of conduct shall include, at a minimum, the following language: 
a.  Possession or use of illegal drugs is not permitted on the premises. 
b.  Alcohol is not permitted on the premises. 
c.  Weapons are not permitted on the premises. 
d.  Violence is not permitted on the premises. 
e.  Fires are not permitted on the premises. 
f.  Loitering in the surrounding neighborhood is not permitted. 
g.  Littering on the premises or surrounding neighborhood is not permitted. 
A copy of this code of conduct shall be provided to the planning commission at the time of the conditional use permit request. 
(10)  Lighting. Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purpose. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of intensity compatible with the neighborhood. 
(11)  Laundry facilities. The development shall provide laundry facilities or laundry services adequate for the number of residents. 
(12)  Common facilities. The development may provide one or more of the following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents and staff: 
a.  Central cooking and dining room(s). 
b.  Recreation room. 
c.  Counseling center. 
d.  Child care facilities. 
e.  Other support services. 
(13)  Outdoor activity. For the purposes of noise abatement in residential districts, organized outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(14)  Staff assistance. Staff and services shall be available to assist residents in obtaining permanent shelter and income. 
(15)  Management plan. The operator of a shelter for the homeless shall have a written management plan including, as applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to ensure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and for training, counseling and treatment programs for residents. 
(16)  Revocation. The city commission may revoke a permit issued under this section if it determines that the shelter is not operating in accordance with the terms of the permit. 
(17)  Exception. This article does not apply to a temporary emergency homeless shelter established immediately after a natural disaster which results in a local disaster proclamation by the city commission. A temporary emergency homeless shelter may operate for a maximum of 45 days. The city manager may extend that period for additional periods of 45 days each upon approval of the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.18; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-411. - Adult novelty stores. 
(a)  Requirements for adult novelty establishments. The location of an adult novelty shop shall be specifically prohibited within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  Any building primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities; 
(2)  Any public or private school; 
(3)  Any public park or playground; 
(4)  Any public library; or 
(5)  Any land zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(b)  Provided, that if any such building used for worship and religious activities, any public or private school, any public park or playground, any public library or any land zoned or used for residential purposes shall be established within 1,000 feet of any such premises after the premises have been established, this shall not be a bar to the continuation of the business so long as it has been in continuous force and effect. The distance indicated in this subsection shall be measured from the nearest property line of such church or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of the adult novelty store along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street from such church or school shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with such church or school. 
(c)  Any interpretation of this section shall be consistent with 11 O.S. § 22-109.1. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.19; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-412. - Communication towers/cell phone towers. 
    A radio, television or microwave communication tower, either commercial or amateur, as defined herein, is allowed within the city limits of the city pursuant to site restrictions, appropriate permitted use tables and the following conditions: 
(1)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Guyed tower means a steel lattice supported by guy wires, so designed to support the tower which holds one or more antennas and related equipment for wireless communication. 
    Lattice tower means a steel lattice, self-supporting structure with no guy wire support, so designed to support fixtures which hold one or more antennas and related equipment for wireless communication transmission. 
    Monopole means a self-supporting pole type structure with no guy wire support, tapering from base to top and so designed to support fixtures which hold one or more antennas and related equipment for wireless communication transmission. 
(2)  Conditions for approval: 
a.  Maximum height of all towers shall not exceed 199 feet. 
b.  All monopole towers shall maintain a setback 120 percent of the tower height from the property line. All sectional towers shall maintain a setback of 80 percent of the tower height from the property line. 
c.  Any unmanned equipment building shall not contain more than 750 square feet of gross floor area and shall not be more than 12 feet in height. 
d.  Satellite and microwave dishes attach to a monopole shall not exceed one meter in diameter or two meters in diameter if attached to a lattice tower. 
e.  A sightproof fence not less than seven feet in height from finished grade shall be installed around a transmission tower or monopole and equipment building with access through a locked gate. 
f.  No excess equipment or parts shall be stored within the site. 
g.  Lights for illumination shall be determined by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the city on all tower locations. 
h.  No commercial advertising or signage shall be allowed on any tower. 
i.  All towers shall meet the minimum construction and structural load standards specified in the adopted building code. 
j.  All towers must setback its height distance from any structure that is being occupied. 
k.  Monopole and lattice towers are allowed to affix themselves to existing city or private structures as long as they meet all other requirements. These towers are not to exceed 20 feet above the roof line of the existing structure. In no case shall the height of the tower be located to fall beyond the edge of the roof line. 
l.  Any tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. If not removed within 90 days, the city may remove said tower at owner's expense. 
m.  A site plan shall be submitted which shows parking spaces and access easement to the property line/tower site. 
n.  The application should look at co-location on an existing tower, and if not feasible, indicate why it is not feasible. 
o.  Must show written approval from property owner as to placement of the tower. 
p.  After installation of the tower, the owner must submit as-built plans to be kept on file. 
q.  The applicant must provide a certificate of design by the design engineer as to compliance with this code upon completion of the tower. 
r.  As part of the approval process the owner must submit annually to the city inspection department an inspection report on each tower as to compliance with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and FAA standards. 
s.  An appeal to any interpretation of the ordinance codified in this article must be appealed to the board of adjustment. 
(Code 2002, § 22-175.20; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-413-22-437. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 22-438. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these regulations is to use landscaping elements in proposed developments with the intent to enhance, protect and promote the economic, ecological and aesthetic environment of the city for the safety, comfort and enjoyment of its citizens. The city recognizes the value of landscaping in achieving the following goals: 
(1)  Preserving the existing native trees and other physical site values where possible; 
(2)  Screen and buffer undesirable views; 
(3)  Reduce soil erosion and reduce stormwater runoff; 
(4)  Aid in energy conservation for structures; 
(5)  Soften the visual impact of paved areas, parking lots and adjoining right-of-way; 
(6)  Complement the building on the property; and 
(7)  Mitigate the impact of site lighting. 
(Code 2002, § 22-180.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-439. - Landscaping plan. 
    A landscaping plan shall be submitted concurrent with building permit submittal and be made part of the file. The plan shall be its own document. No landscaping plans are required for single-family, two-family and three-family residential lots or for agricultural uses. Commercial, multifamily and nonresidential development within residential zones, shall be subject to these rules. All landscaping plans shall include the following information: 
(1)  North arrow. 
(2)  The location of existing property lines and dimensions of the tract accurately drawn to scale. 
(3)  Exact locations and outline of all rights-of-way. 
(4)  Location of all existing and proposed buildings, and parking areas, including the exact number of parking spaces provided. 
(5)  The location and size of any permanent fixtures or structures including, but not limited to, sidewalks, fences, trash, enclosures, project storage, lighting fixtures, signs and benches, which are relevant to the landscaping plan. 
(6)  The location, size and type of all above ground and underground public utilities with notation, where appropriate, as to any safety hazards to avoid during installation of landscaping. Alternatively, a letter of no objective provided by the utility company may be provided. 
(7)  The location, size, type, spacing (on center), and quantity of all proposed plant materials and existing plant materials credited for points shall be graphically represented and referenced on the plan by a common name and/or scientific name, or an appropriate key of all plant species. 
(8)  All screening required by these regulations. 
(9)  A table listing the square footage of the developed area, number of proposed parking spaces, and all plant materials by scientific and common name, size, type, quantity, point value and totals. 
(Code 2002, § 22-180.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-440. - Landscaping specifications. 
    All new development and redevelopment areas shall be landscaped to provide visual buffering, enhance the beautification of the city, and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. Property owners in all zoning districts shall be responsible for landscaping the area within the street right-of-way between the curb line and property line and other utility easements. Landscaping within this area shall not count towards required landscaping. This area shall not be hard surface other than permitted drives, parking or sidewalk. The following landscaping standards apply to all new nonresidential development and to the expansion by more than 25 percent of an existing building mass or site in any zone: 
(1)  Required landscaping. The applicant shall professionally landscape the lot, according to an approved landscape plan as a condition precedent to receiving a certificate of occupancy for all commercial uses. Landscape plans shall meet the standards set forth in Table 22-440. The director or their designee shall evaluate landscape plans for all uses. Landscape plan approval is a condition precedent to issuance of a building permit for the parcel. All landscaping shall be in place prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, unless seasonal conditions make installation unfeasible, in which case the improvements shall be bonded. A minimum of ten percent of any site shall be landscaped. 
(2)  Landscape materials and plant selection. Permitted landscape materials include trees, shrubs, groundcover plants, nonplant groundcovers, and outdoor hardscape features, the selection of which shall be based on local climate, exposure, water availability, potential allergens and drainage conditions. When new vegetation is planted, soils shall be amended, as necessary, to allow for healthy plant growth. In general, planting should consist primarily of native plantings and noninvasive species in accordance with any approved planting/species list maintained by the city. Trees and shrubs shall meet the minimum size and spacing standards set forth in Table 22-440. 
(3)  Existing vegetation. Existing noninvasive vegetation may be used in meeting landscape requirements. When existing mature trees are protected on the site (e.g., within or adjacent to parking areas) the decision-making body may reduce the number of new trees required by a ratio of one-inch caliper of new tree(s) for every one-inch caliper of existing tree(s) protected. 
(4)  Nonplant groundcovers. Bark dust, chips, aggregate, or other nonplant groundcovers may be used, but shall cover no more than 60 percent of the area to be landscaped and shall be confined to areas underneath plants. Nonplant groundcovers cannot be a substitute for groundcover plants. 
(5)  Species and irrigation. The use of drought-tolerant native plant species is encouraged, and may be required when irrigation is not available. Irrigation shall be provided for plants that are not drought-tolerant. If the plantings fail to survive, the property owner shall replace them with an equivalent specimen. Table 22-440 provides a list of recommend species. 
(6)  Parking areas. Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Table 22-440. Landscaping shall consist of evenly distributed shade trees with shrubs and/or groundcover plants that conform to the criteria in this section. "Evenly distributed" means that the trees and other plants are distributed around the parking lot perimeter and between parking bays to provide a partial canopy. At a minimum, one tree per six parking spaces on average shall be planted to create a partial tree canopy over and around the parking area. All parking area landscapes shall have dimensions of not less than 24 square feet of area, or not less than four feet in width by six feet in length, to ensure adequate soil, water and space for healthy plant growth. 
(7)  Front yards and frontage landscaping improvements. Front yards, excluding ingress and egress points, shall be landscaped to include landscaping that enhances the property, softens the building and parking areas and provides an aesthetically pleasing streetscape. Landscaping shall be located within the front yard setback area in accordance with the criteria of this section and Table 22-440, while providing reasonable opportunity for signage, entrance features, parking and ingress/egress areas. Street trees planted within city right-of-way shall not count towards required landscaping. Adequate sight distance as determined by the city engineer shall be maintained. 
(8)  Deviations. Whenever there are practical difficulties in meeting these standards that result from variations of specific property characteristics, a deviation from this section may be approved by the reviewing authority during the review process. This deviation shall not require a variance. Any such deviation so granted shall be specifically identified in the approval authority decision of a development application. Approved deviations shall not be used to grant a special privilege that is inconsistent with the limitations placed on other properties with similar circumstances. 
(9)  Zero lot lines. Any development that utilizes zero lot line setbacks as permitted by applicable zoning specifications shall be exempt from landscaping requirements for each applicable yard area. 
Table 22-440. Landscaping Requirements by Area for Commercial and Nonresidential Uses 
Area Requirement Front yard: 
10' landscaped setback  1 tree per 35' (linear) of frontage  Trees may be clustered as approved by the city  Deciduous trees, 2" caliper min.  Evergreen trees, 6' min. height Side yard: 
5' landscaped setback, unless greater landscaped area required for residential buffer  1 tree per 400 s.f.  Deciduous trees, 2" caliper min.  Ornamental trees, 1.5" caliper min.  Evergreen trees, 6' min. height Rear yard: 
10' landscaped setback, unless greater landscaped area required for residential buffer  1 tree per 400 s.f.  Deciduous trees, 2" caliper min.  Ornamental trees, 1.5" caliper min.  Evergreen trees, 6' min. height Parking lots perimeter: 
landscaping of at least 5' in width on at least three sides, or perimeter landscaping of at least 10' on two sides. In addition, one landscaped island for every 12 spaces For all parking areas:  One tree and three shrubs per 6 spaces (average)  Deciduous trees, 2" caliper min.  Ornamental trees, 1.5" caliper  Evergreen trees, 6' min. height Overall site 
10% of overall site to be landscaped, where yard areas are legally not required and not provided by the applicant, above standards do not apply, but overall 10% standard shall be met  50% of landscaping must be evergreen  All irrigation shall be automatic  
(Code 2002, § 22-180.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-441. - Landscaping maintenance. 
    The following landscape maintenance standards shall apply: 
(1)  All landscaping improvements shall be maintained in a live and healthy condition. It shall be the continuing duty of the property owner, its successors, or anyone having beneficial use of the property, to maintain landscaping in a live and healthy condition and, if necessary, to replace any dead, diseased or damaged plants as soon as natural conditions allow. 
(2)  Nothing herein shall reduce the lines of sight and traffic visibility standards adopted in the zoning regulations. Plantings within the sight triangle shall not exceed a mature height of 24 inches. 
(3)  Property owners in all zoning districts shall be responsible for landscaping the area within the street right-of-way between the curb line and property line and other utility easements. Landscaping within this area shall not count towards required landscaping. 
(4)  The type and location of vegetation shall not interfere with utilities or the safe and efficient flow of street traffic. Approval by the appropriate city departments responsible for street and utilities shall be required. 
(5)  Trees that reach a mature height of more than 15 feet shall not be planted within ten feet of an overhead utility line. This requirement may be waived by the director providing that the applicant submits a letter stating no objection from the utility company. 
(6)  Vegetation, other than groundcover or turf grass shall not be planted with three feet of a fire hydrant or above ground traffic control box. 
(7)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in good condition all the improvements required by this section. Any required fence or screening which are damaged shall be repaired, and any vegetation which dies shall be replaced no later than the following planting season (spring or fall). 
(8)  Failure to provide the improvements required by this code or failure to maintain required improvements in the manner prescribed by this code shall constitute an offense and violation of this code. 
Table 22-441. Recommended Tree Species 
Common Name Note Botanical Name Recommendations and Cultivars Large Trees: Trees that mature over 60 feet in height. These trees need spacing of at least 35 feet. Cypress, Bald ** Taxodium disticum Ginko (male) ** Ginko biloba Princeton Gold, Autumn Gold, Pendula Hackberry, Common Celtis occidentalis Chicagoland, Dleta, Windy City Oak, Black Quercus veluntia Oak, Burr Quercus macrocarpa Oak, Northern Red Quercus rubra Oak, Pin Quercus palustris Plant only in bottomlands Oak, Shumard ** Quercus shumardi Oak, Southern Red Quercus falcate Oak, Water Quercus bicolor Oak, White Quercus nigra Oak, Willow Quercus phellos Pine, Limber Flecilis Pine, Loblolly Pinus taeda Pine, Shortleaf Pinus echinata Planetree, London Platanus X acerifolia Bloodgood, Columbia, Liberty, Yarwood Tulip Tree Platanus x acerifolia Medium Trees: Trees with mature size from 30 feet to 60 feet. These trees need a spacing of at least 25 feet. Ash, Green * (improved cultivars) ** Fraxinus pennslyvanica "Urbanite" Cedar, Atlas Cedrus atlantica Chittamwood Bumelia lanuginose Coffeetree, Kentucky (male) Gymnocladus dioica Espresso, Prairie Titan, Stately Manor Cypress, Arizona Cupressus arizonica Cypress, Leyland Cupressocyparis leylandii Birch, River Betula nigra Dogwood, Kouse Cornus kousa Elm, Lacebark ** Ulmus parvifoila Allen, Athena, True Green and others with approval Elm, Chinese Ulmus crassifolia Goldenrain Tree* (improved cultivars) ** Koelreuteria paniculata Fastigiata, September, Stadher's Hill, Panicled Hackberry, Sugar Celtis, laevigata Hophornbeam, Eastern Ostrya virginiana Hornbeam, European Carpinus betulas Japanese Pagoda Tree Sophora japonica Juniper, Rocky Mountain Juniperus scopulorum Linden, Greenspire * (improved cultivars) ** Tilia cordata "Greenspire" Bicentennial, Bhjlie, Shamrock, Turesi Magnolia, Sweetbay Magnolia virginiana Maple, Norway* (improved cultivars) Acer platanoides Maple, Red* (improved cultivars) Acer rubrum Maple, Shantung Acer truncatum Norwegian Sunset, Pacific Sunset Mulberry, White (male) Morus alba "Fruitless" Caddo, Legacy, Green Mountain Oak, Blackjack Quercus marilandica Oak, Chinquapin ** Quercus muehlenbergi Oak, English ** Quercus robur Oak, Live Quercus virginiana Oak, Post Quercus stellata Oak, Sawtooth ** Quercus acutissima Pear, Callary* "improved cultivars" ** Pyrus calleryana var. Aristocrat, Autumn Blaze, Callary, Cleveland Select, Chanticleer, Trinity, Capitol Pine, Austrian Pinus nigra Pine, Japanese Black Pinus thunbergiana Pistache, Chinese ** Pistacia chinesis Western Soapberry Sapindus drummondi Zelkova, Japanese Zelkova serrate Aurea, Autumn Glow, Spring Grove Small Trees: Trees with a mature size of less than 30 feet. These trees need a spacing of at least 15 feet. Cherry, Japanese Prunus serrulata Chokecherry Prunus virginiana Crabapple, Flowering* (improved cultivars) ** Malus spp. 20-30 Crabapple species Crapemyrtle* (improved cultivars) Largerstromia indica Many Various Species Hawthorn, Washington* (improved cultivar) Crataegus phaenopyrum Holly, Deciduous Ilex deciduas Warren's Red Foster Holly Ilex x attenuate Holly, American Ilex opaca Holly, Yaupon Ilex vomitoria Hornbeam, American Carpinus caroliniana Lilac, Japanese Syringa reticulate Magnolia, Saucer Magnolia aoulangiana Maple, Amur Acer ginnala Mockorange, Sweet Philadelphis coronaries Ninebark, Purple "Diabolo" Physocarpus opulifolius Redbud, Eastern ** Cercis canadensis Redbud, Oklahoma* (improved cultivar ** Cercis reniformus Russian Olive ** Elaeagnus angustifolia Serviceberry, Downy Amelanchier arborea Smoketree ** Ctinus coggygria Whitebud, Eastern Cercis canadensis, alba Notes: 
* Improved cultivars available 
**Best trees for parking lot application  
(Code 2002, § 22-180.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-442-22-465. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 22-466. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided off the street for each use of land covered by these zoning regulations. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. Unless otherwise stated, these requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-467. - Off-street parking and loading required. 
    Permanent off-street parking and area in the amount specified by this section for each use shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased, in the amount required for the enlargement or increase in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats, or floor area, or before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another. No such parking requirements shall apply to the C-4 central business district. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-468. - Use of right-of-way prohibited. 
(a)  No portion of any required off-street space shall occupy or use any public street, right-of-way, alley or other public property. 
(b)  Parking spaces which use any street, or public right-of-way as a direct means of access without the intermediate use of service aisles and entrances of at least the minimum standards specified by this section shall be prohibited. A public alley shall not be the only public right-of-way area permitted for maneuvering space to reach a required parking stall. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-469. - Location. 
    The off-street parking lot shall be located within 300 feet, exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-470. - Joint parking facilities. 
    Whenever two or more uses are located together in a common building, shopping center, or other integrated building complex, the parking requirements may be complied with by providing a permanent common parking facility, cooperatively established and operated, which contains the requisite number of spaces for each use. The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements. Spaces provided for permanent residents of dwellings shall be clearly designated and separated from spaces provided for employees, customers and service. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-471. - Ownership or control of lot. 
    The land upon which the off-street parking is located shall be owned or controlled by the same entity which owns or controls the land on which the principal use is located. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-472. - Design requirements for off-street parking. 
    Size and access: 
(1)  Standard car parking space shall be: nine feet by 20 feet. Compact car parking space shall be: 8.5 feet by 16 feet. 
(2)  All maneuvering, except parallel parking, shall be designed so that a vehicle may enter an off-street parking space in one forward motion and may exit in one reverse and one forward motion. 
(3)  Circulation within a parking area shall be designed so that a car entering the parking area need not enter a street to reach another aisle. 
(4)  All required parking spaces shall be clearly outlined on the surface of the lot with paint or other easily distinguishable material. 
(5)  Handicapped parking shall be per section 22-474 and the A.N.S.I. Code. 
(6)  Minimum one-way service aisles shall be: 14'-0".Minimum two-way service aisles shall be: 24'-0". 
(7)  The off-street parking spaces required may be satisfied with compact or small car spaces, not exceeding 25 percent of the required total. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-473. - Sight triangle prohibited. 
    On any corner lot formed by two intersecting streets, no parking shall be permitted, and no wall, fence, sign, structure or plant growth shall have a height in excess of three feet above the elevation of the crown of the adjacent roadway. Surface shall be maintained in a triangle formed by measuring a distance of 30 feet along the said front and side lot lines, from their point of intersection, and connecting the points so established to form a triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-474. - Accessible parking spaces. 
    Parking lots shall meet the Americans with Disabilities Act standards for accessible design and all applicable building code requirements. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-475. - Amount of space required. 
    Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in all districts in accordance with the schedule found in Table 22-475. For uses not specifically covered in Table 22-475, the director shall make a determination of the parking demand to be created by the proposed use, and the amount of parking thus determined shall be the off-street parking requirements for the permitted use. This decision can be appealed to the board of adjustments. 
Table 22-475. Parking Space Requirements 
Residential Uses Residential 2 spaces per DU up to 4 DU's; 1.5 spaces per DU after 4 DU's Assisted living, nursing home, continuum of care facility 0.5 spaces per DU Rooming or boarding home 0.5 spaces per DU Daycare 1 per 6 children, plus 1 per employee Public and Civic Uses Places for public assembly 1 space per each 3 persons at max occupancy Religious institution 1 space per each 4 seats (Bench seating equals 1 space per 24 lineal inches) School  Elementary/middle 2 spaces per classroom  High school 6 spaces per classroom  College 6 spaces per classroom; plus requirements for auditorium, arena, and stadium Hospital 2 per bed + 1 per 500 SF of emergency room and outpatient care Commercial Uses Service establishment 1 space per 400 SF Restaurant 1 space per 150 SF Retail 1 per 250 SF Hotel/motel 2 spaces per 3 guest rooms plus 1 per 200 SF of GFA in all accessory uses including restaurant and meeting rooms Office 1 space per 300 SF Medical 1 space per 250 SF Wholesaling 1 space per 2 employees Industrial Uses Industrial 1 space for each 2 employees at maximum shift Unlisted 1 space per 250 SF, or as established by the director.  
(Code 2002, § 22-185.10; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-476. - Parking lot construction and maintenance. 
    Off-street parking lots for commercial, industrial or multiple-family complexes of more than two parking spaces shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  All sides of a lot abutting a residential use shall be enclosed with an opaque, ornamental fence, wall or dense evergreen hedge having a height of not less than six feet. Such fence, wall, or hedge shall be maintained in good condition. 
(2)  No parking shall be permitted within a front yard setback line established ten feet back to the property line of the interior and corner lots whenever the parking lot is located in a residential district or immediately abuts the front of a residential unit. In all other cases no setback shall be required; provided, however, that on any corner lot formed by two intersecting streets, no parking shall be permitted, within the 30-foot sight triangle. 
(3)  All parking areas shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs, trees and evergreen groundcover, and maintained in good condition the year-round as required by division 9 of this article. 
(4)  Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed 30 feet in width, exclusive of curb returns. 
(5)  All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved as follows in a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use. Minimum pavement requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  11/2-inch asphaltic concrete hot mix with five-inch compacted base; 
b.  A double surface treatment with five-inch compacted base; or 
c.  Four-inch concrete slab. 
Also provided appropriate bumper guards where needed as required by the director. 
(6)  The intensity of light and arrangement of reflectors shall be such as not interfere with residential district use. 
(7)  No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to state the conditions and terms of the use of the lot. Only non-intermittent incandescent lighting of signs shall be permitted. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.11; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-477. - Off-street loading space required. 
    Every industrial, commercial and civic building hereafter erected or expanded shall provide space, as indicated herein, for loading and unloading of vehicles. The number of off-street loading spaces required by this section shall be considered as the absolute minimum, and the owner/applicant shall evaluate his own needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum specified by this section. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.12; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-478. - Size of off-street loading spaces. 
    Unless otherwise specified, all off-street loading spaces shall have a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 50 feet and an overhead clearance of 15 feet. In no case shall required off-street loading spaces encroach upon off-street parking spaces required by this section, or on public right-of-way. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.13; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-479. - Number of off-street loading spaces required. 
    Table 22-480 illustrates the number of required loading spaces required by use category according to floor area. 
(Code 2002, § 22-185.14; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-480. - Design of loading spaces. 
    The following requirements shall apply to all loading spaces: 
(1)  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed so that vehicles shall maneuver entirely within the property lines of the premises and not on public right-of-way. Unenclosed off-street loading areas shall be permanently paved with hard-surfaced pavement. A six-inch header curb must also be constructed to separate a loading area from public right-of-way. 
(2)  All motor vehicle loading spaces which abut or are adjacent to a residential district shall be completely screened therefrom by building walls, or a uniformly solid fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet in height. No permitted or required loading space or berth shall be located within 40 feet of the nearest point of intersection on any two streets or highway. No loading space or berth shall be located in a required front or side yard, and any loading space or berth located shall be open to the sky. 
Table 22-480. Truck Berth 
Commercial Land Use Floor area (sq. ft.) Truck berths 0-5,000 0 5,001-50,000 1 50,001-250,000 2 Each Additional 100,000 1 Industrial Use Floor area (sq. ft.) Truck berths 0-10,000 1 10,001-40,000 2 40,001-60,000 3 60,001-100,000 4 Each additional 80,000 sq. ft. 1 Wholesaling, Storage and Distribution Floor area (sq. ft.) Truck berths 0-2,000 0 2,001-10,000 1 10,001-25,000 2 25,001-40,000 3 40,001-60,000 4 60,001-100,000 5 Each additional 80,000 sq. ft. 1 Civic Use Floor area (sq. ft.) Truck berths 0-15,000 0 15,001-75,000 1 75,001 and above 2  
(Code 2002, § 22-185.15) 
Secs. 22-481-22-498. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - GENERAL PROVISIONS OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) 

Sec. 22-499. - General. 
(a)  A planned unit development, herein referred to as PUD, is a special zoning district category that provides an alternate approach to conventional land use controls. The PUD may be used for particular tracts or parcels of land that are under common ownership and are to be developed as one unit according to a master development plan. Approval of a PUD is not a substitute for platting property, when required. 
(b)  The PUD is subject to special review procedures. Once approved by the city commission, it becomes a special zoning classification for the property it represents. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-500. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to encourage unified design of residential, commercial, industrial or institutional areas and facilities, or combinations thereof, and to provide for integrated development having harmony of design and variety of function. It is also the intent of this section to encourage the development of planned commercial and industrial sites to eliminate the adverse impacts of traditional strip zoning. 
(b)  The purpose of the PUD provision is to: 
(1)  Encourage innovative land development while maintaining appropriate limitations on the character and intensity of use, assuring compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties, and following the guidelines of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Permit flexibility within the development to maximize the unique physical features of the particular site; 
(3)  Encourage efficient use of land, facilitate economic arrangement of buildings and circulation systems, and encourage diversified living environments and land uses; 
(4)  Achieve a continuity of function, and design within the development; 
(5)  To encourage innovative development of smaller parcels of land that have been passed over; and 
(6)  Provide a vehicle for negotiating modifications in standard development requirements in order to both encourage innovative development and protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-501. - Planned unit development authorized. 
(a)  A PUD may be authorized by an amendment to the official zoning districts map after public hearing by the planning commission and city commission. A PUD shall be considered a special zoning district; and it may be authorized for any use or a combination of uses permitted in this zoning code. 
(b)  A PUD must comply with the following requirements: A PUD master plan is required as the basis for review and approval of a PUD application. The PUD master plan shall be adopted as a part of the ordinance of rezoning and shall be in conformance with the requirements of these regulations and the following: 
(1)  The PUD master plan shall consist of two elements, the design statement and the master development plan map; 
(2)  The PUD master plan shall establish residential densities, as well as amounts, type, and general location of all land uses; and 
(3)  The PUD master plan shall serve as the basis for review approval of all subdivision plats and building permits within the PUD. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-502. - Effect of planned unit development approval. 
(a)  Approval of a zoning change to PUD adopts the master plan prepared by the applicant and reviewed as part of the application. The master plan establishes new and specific requirements for amount and type of land use, residential densities, development regulations and location of specific elements of the development, such as open space, landscaping and screening. 
(b)  The PUD classification replaces any previous zoning district classification on a parcel. 
(c)  Where there is no provision in the PUD master plan for special development regulations, the requirements of the most restrictive conventional zoning district in which a proposed use or a structure is permitted, shall be applied to the development. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-503. - Criteria for planned unit development review and approval. 
    Because the PUD provides the opportunity for higher densities, greater design flexibility, mixed land uses, and improved marketability; the applicant should be prepared to provide amenities and services that might not be required or possible in a conventional development. Review and approval of a PUD is, therefore, a process of negotiation between the city government and the applicant to achieve the intents and purposes of these regulations and the comprehensive plan. The following factors should be specifically included as review criteria for the evaluation of a PUD application. Other factors not listed herein may also be considered in the review process in order to respond to specific design and land use proposals. 
(1)  The following design standards shall be specifically included as review criteria for the evaluation of a PUD application. 
a.  Purpose. The proposed PUD shall be designed to provide for the unified development of the area in accordance with the spirit and purpose of the comprehensive plan and the land use and zoning districts adjacent to it. 
b.  Design. Design of the PUD may provide for modifications of any conventional zoning, subdivision, or other development standard requirements set forth in the this code. In addition, a unified/master signage plan may be approved which modifies advertising and sign allowances, provided that in no case, shall the overall signage of a development exceed what would have been permissible under the standard code provisions if the development was not part of a PUD. 
c.  Usage. Density, land use, and intensity of use requirements shall be based on the PUD master plan and shall be reviewed carefully for conformance to the comprehensive plan. 
d.  Adherence to code. Building code requirements shall not be reduced or modified in the design of a PUD. 
e.  Gross density. The maximum number of dwelling units with a PUD shall be based on calculation of gross density. Gross density shall be established in the PUD master plan and shall be calculated by dividing the total land area to be developed for residential uses (exclusive of arterial streets) by the number of dwelling units. 
f.  Housing type. Location and type of housing shall be established in a general pattern and shown on the master development plan map. 
g.  Open space. Open space and landscaping requirements shall not be reduced in the design of a PUD. 
h.  Amenities. Amenities should be considered as an important justification for development and city approval of a PUD. Where gross or net densities are to be increased to promote economy of development, or where other methods of land use intensification are proposed, useable open space should be furnished along with provision for its permanent retention and continued maintenance. Sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall be planned where it is necessary to provide for amenity and public safety. 
i.  Minimum land area and frontage. The minimum area and frontage for a PUD request involving office, commercial and industrial land uses should generally be at least the minimum required by the conventional zoning associated with the proposal; provided, that a private street network may also be authorized as a substitute for public street frontage. 
j.  Streets. The following are general design standards for streets: 
1.  Street design should be innovative and should restrict through traffic from residential areas as much as possible. 
2.  Encouragement should be given to design of short local streets serving limited areas, such as the residential cul-de-sac. 
3.  Development of a private street system should be considered appropriate under certain conditions subject to approval of the city engineer. However a private street system shall not serve as a reason for reduction in minimum design and paving standards in urban areas. 
4.  On-street parking bays or other similar areas shall not be approved. 
k.  Adjacent land uses. The following general guidelines shall be used to establish the relationship of the PUD to abutting land uses: 
1.  The master development plan map shall show graphically the treatments that will be employed to separate the PUD from abutting properties, including commitments to landscaping, screening, earth berms or similar techniques. 
2.  It is appropriate to specifically establish area with height limitations where a transition to more intense uses is proposed or where a higher intensity development is proposed to abut a lower intensity area. 
l.  Mixed land use developments. Where a PUD proposes a mix of uses which would generally be incompatible with a conventional development, the PUD master plan should specifically establish appropriate guidelines to ensure a harmonious development. 
m.  Common access. In commercial or industrial developments, the PUD master plan should establish specific standards and locations for common access driveways both within the development and abutting arterial streets. 
(2)  Streets and alleys for PUDs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standards and specifications for right-of-way width and paving cross sections. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-504. - Planned unit development application. 
(a)  The developer and/or builder of a PUD shall follow a five step application and review procedure: 
(1)  Pre-application review. 
(2)  Application for rezoning if required, submission of PUD master plan, including the design statement and master development plan. 
(3)  Preliminary plat, where required by the subdivision and development standards. 
(4)  Final plat, where required by the subdivision and development standards. 
(5)  Application for building permit and site plan review. 
(b)  Each required step shall be completed and approved before the following step is reviewed; provided that, the director may waive the pre-application review. Where appropriate, other methods authorized in the subdivision and development standards may be substituted in subsections (3) and (4) of this section. The planning commission and city commission may, however, review more than one step at the same public meeting. 
(c)  Public hearing shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Public hearing shall be held on the application for rezoning and/or the PUD master plan in accordance with regular procedures for zoning applications. 
(2)  Public hearing on required plats shall be held in accordance with regular procedures established in the subdivision and development standards. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-505. - Pre-application review of PUD. 
    Prior to submission of an application for rezoning to a planned unit development (PUD), the applicant shall submit to the director a draft plan drawn to approximate scale showing streets, lots, public areas, and other significant features. The applicant should discuss with the director the procedure for adopting a PUD and the requirements for the general layout of streets and utilities, access to arterials, or general design and narrative, the availability of existing services, and similar matters. The intent of the pre-application review is to ascertain whether the development is feasible as proposed and to expedite and facilitate the approval of a PUD master plan. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-506. - Application for rezoning and/or PUD master plan; submission requirements. 
    The PUD application for rezoning shall be filed in accordance with regular procedures and on the application forms of the city. Ten copies of the PUD master plan, shall be submitted with the application for rezoning and shall consist of a design statement and a master development plan map. The applicant shall also provide other supporting maps as necessary to meet the submission requirements of this code. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for a single phase project and an additional fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each additional phase of a multiple phase project. 
(1)  The master development plan map shall be a graphic representation of the development plan for the area, prepared at a scale appropriate for the size of the project but not less than the minimum required for preliminary plats in the subdivision and development standards. It shall show the following: 
a.  Location of proposed land uses, residential densities, structures and facilities; 
b.  Location of collector streets within the PUD and adjacent arterial streets, in addition to a general circulation plan for the development, including all proposed private streets and drives; 
c.  Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed; 
d.  Location and approximate size of proposed open space, landscaping, and public or private recreation areas; 
e.  Areas where access to streets will be limited and location of driveways where appropriate; 
f.  Design of all off-street parking facilities with design of ingress and egress; and 
g.  Any other pertinent information necessary for review, approval, and administration of the PUD as determined by the director. This could include, but is not limited to, showing the location of oil wells, towers, or private utilities. 
(2)  The PUD design statement shall be a written report submitted as a part of the PUD master plan containing a minimum of the following elements: 
a.  Title of PUD; 
b.  List of owners and developers; 
c.  Statement of the general location and relationship to adjoining land uses; both existing and proposed; 
d.  Description of the PUD concept, including an acreage or square foot breakdown of land use areas and densities proposed, a general description of proposed building use types, proposed restrictions and typical site layouts; 
e.  The existing PUD zoning districts in the development area and surrounding it; 
f.  A list of all special development regulations or the conventional zoning district regulations which will be applicable; 
g.  A statement on the existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way standards and street design concept; 
h.  The following physical characteristics: elevation, slope analysis, soil characteristics, tree cover and drainage information; 
i.  A topographical map with minimum two-foot contour intervals; 
j.  Drainage information, including number of acres in the drainage area and delineation of applicable flood levels; 
k.  A statement of utility lines and services to be installed, including which lines will be dedicated to the city and which will be private; 
l.  The proposed densities, and the use types and sizes of structures; 
m.  A description of the proposed sequence of development; and 
n.  If there is no plat required or if other methods authorized in the subdivision and development standards are appropriate, then section 22-508(1) and (2) shall be submitted and approved as part of the PUD master plan at the time of rezoning. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-507. - Preliminary plat. 
    Upon approval of the PUD master plan and the ordinance of rezoning, the developer shall prepare a preliminary plat for the entire development area. Where there is a recorded plat and where there will be no extensive easements, no property owner's association, no plat restrictions, and no sales of lots which do not conform to the platted lot lines, the planning commission may waive the platting requirements. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-508. - Final plat. 
    Where a subdivision plat has been required, the developer shall prepare a final plat for review, approval, and filing of record according to procedures established by the subdivision and development standards. In addition to these procedures, the final plat shall include: 
(1)  Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common space. Said open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the public, provided that dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the city commission; 
(2)  A homeowner or property owner association shall be created if other satisfactory arrangements have not been made for improving, operating, and maintaining common facilities, including private street drives, service and parking areas and recreation areas; and 
(3)  Covenants shall be submitted to reasonably ensure the continued compliance with the approved PUD master plan, unless not required by the city. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.10; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-509. - Plot plan. 
    A plot plan or site plan shall be submitted upon the application for a building permit and reviewed in accordance with applicable rules. The plot plan shall provide enough detail to ensure full compliance with any approved PUD. The building permit may be conditioned to ensure compliance. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.11; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-510. - Planned unit development review and approval. 
(a)  Design review. 
(1)  All planned unit development applications shall be reviewed through the internal design review process. Upon receipt of a completed application and application fee for PUD master plan review, the director shall transmit the application and all supporting materials to the various city departments involved with the design review process and to appropriate officials or agencies of other official bodies as deemed necessary or as mandated by law. Each participant shall consider all pertinent information, and shall provide the director with a report of their findings, comments and recommendations. 
(2)  After receiving all comments, the director shall advise the applicant whether or not significant changes or modifications should be made to the PUD master plan application prior to the proposal's consideration by the planning commission. The applicant may choose to present the application to the planning commission without modification. 
(3)  This process shall conform to the design review process in the subdivision and development standards. Where a preliminary plat and a PUD master plan are submitted together, they may be reviewed concurrently. 
(b)  Approval. 
(1)  Upon final approval by the city commission of the PUD master plan and the appropriate ordinance of rezoning, these elements shall become a part of the official zoning district map. The ordinance of rezoning shall adopt the PUD master plan by reference, and it shall be attached to said ordinance and become a part of the official records of the city. 
(2)  The PUD master plan shall control the use and development of the property, and all building permits and development requests shall be in accord with said plan until it is otherwise amended by the city commission. The developer shall furnish a reproducible copy of the approved master development plan map for signature by the chairman of the planning commission, the mayor and attested by the city clerk. The PUD master plan, including the signed map and all supporting data, shall be made a part of the permanent file and maintained by the planning department. 
(3)  Public hearing. Public hearings shall be required prior to approval of the PUD master plan. Notice shall be provided in accordance with regular procedures established by these regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.12; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-511. - Modifications and minor amendments. 
(a)  The director shall be permitted to approve minor amendments and adjustments to the PUD master plan provided the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The project boundaries are not altered by more than five percent. 
(2)  Uses other than those specifically approved in the PUD master plan are not added. Uses may be deleted but not to the extent that the character of the project is substantially altered. 
(3)  The allocation of land to particular uses or the relationship of uses within the project are not altered by more than 15 percent. 
(4)  The density of housing is not increased by more than ten percent or decreased by more than 30 percent. 
(5)  The land area allocated to nonresidential uses is not increased or decreased by more than ten percent. 
(6)  Floor area, if prescribed, is not increased or decreased by more than ten percent. 
(7)  Floor area ratios, if prescribed, are not increased. 
(8)  Open space ratios, if prescribed, are not decreased. 
(9)  Height restrictions, yard requirements, parking standards, signage allowances, lot coverage restrictions and other areas, height, and bulk requirements prescribed in the PUD master plan are not substantially altered. 
(10)  The circulation system is not substantially altered in design, configuration or location. 
(11)  The design and location of access points to the project are not altered either in design or capacity, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  The director shall determine if proposed amendments to an approved master development plan satisfy the above criteria. If the director finds that these criteria are not satisfied, an amended PUD master plan shall be submitted for full review and approval according to the procedures set forth in these regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.13; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-512. - Reversion. 
(a)  Property owner request. If the property owner decides to revert the PUD concept and nullify the PUD master plan, he shall make application for rezoning either to the original status or to a new classification. Said application shall be heard according to regular procedures by the planning commission and city commission. 
(b)  Continuing review by city. If development of the PUD has not been started within three years of the date of approval of the PUD master plan it shall be deemed expired and the area contained within the PUD boundaries shall revert to the previous zoning designation. The planning commission may allow a one-time extension of up to two years from the original approval date, subject to approval by the city commission, after a public hearing is held. The fee for an extension request shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 2002, § 22-190.14; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-513-22-532. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USE OF LAND 

Sec. 22-533. - Intent. 
    If within the districts established by this code or amendments that may later be adopted, there exists lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this code was passed or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this code or future amendments, it is the intent of this code to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this code to be incompatible with permitted uses in the district involved. It is further the intent of this code that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses, except as specified in the following sections. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-534. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    In any district in which a lot exists of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this code which does not conform in size or area to the provisions of this code, buildings for the use permitted in such district may be erected on such lot, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this code, provided that all applicable building code rules apply. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-535. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendments of this code that could not be built under the terms of this code by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure can be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-536. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
    If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this code is derived that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this code, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this code in the district in which it is located shall be, enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which where manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this code, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  Any structure, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(4)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(5)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-537. - Nonconforming use of land. 
    Where, at the effective date of adoption of amendment of this code, lawful uses of land exist that are no longer permissible under the terms of this code as enacted or amended, such uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this code is derived. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this code is derived. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this code for the district in which such land is located. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-538. - Change in nonconformity. 
    The use of nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a use of the same or a more restricted district classification, but, where the use of a nonconforming building or structure is changed to a use of a more restrictive district classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restricted district classification. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-539. - Restoration of damaged use. 
    When a nonconforming use of a building is damaged by fire, explosion, natural cause, or public enemy, by more than 50 percent of its true value, said building shall only be restored when it conforms with the district regulation on which it is located. However, should such damage occur as a result of a federally-declared or state-declared disaster (e.g., flood, tornado, or similar-type event), rebuilding may occur if it is commenced within 12 months of the actual disaster event. All building code standards and floodplain regulations apply. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-540. - Remodeling. 
    Improvements or remodeling which do not increase the building size or intensity of use shall be permitted. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-541. - Nonconforming buildings and structures that have conforming uses. 
    Although a structure or building does not conform to the district regulations of this code for a minimum lot size, lot width, yard requirement, height, lot coverage, parking, other characteristics of the structure, or its location on the lot, the lawful existence of a structure or building at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance from which this code is derived may continue, subject to the provisions in the following sections. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-542. - Alteration or enlargement of building and structures. 
    A nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged in any manner unless said building or structure, including additions and enlargements, are made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located; provided, however, that if a building or structure is conforming as to use, but nonconforming as to yards or height, or off-street parking space, the building or structure may be enlarged or added to provide that the enlargement or addition complies with the yard or height requirements and the existing building and the addition complies with the off-street parking requirements of the district in which said building or structure is located. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.10; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-543. - Violations not authorized. 
    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as authorizing approval of a building or premises in violation of zoning regulations in effect at the time of the effective date of this section. 
(Code 2002, § 22-195.11; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-544-22-564. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 22-565. - Established. 
    There is hereby created within and for the city a board of adjustment with the powers and duties as set forth in this section. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-566. - Membership. 
    The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be appointed for a term of three years and removable for cause by the city commission, upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. Members appointed shall be citizens of the city, each appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-567. - Meetings and rules. 
    The zoning board of adjustment shall elect one of its members as chairman to serve for a term of two years. The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this code. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or, in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board of adjustment shall be subject to the open meeting laws of the state and all meetings, deliberations, and voting of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of all official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-568. - Powers. 
    The board of adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning code; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the code upon which the board of adjustment is required to pass under such codes; 
(3)  To authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms, standards and criteria that pertain to an allowed use within a zoning district as authorized by the zoning ordinance when such cases are shown not to be contrary to the public interest if, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the code will result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of the code will be observed and substantially justice done; and 
(4)  Exceptions and/or variance may be allowed by the board of adjustment only after notice and hearing as provided in this section. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-569. - Extent of relief. 
(a)  In exercising the previous mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of the code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)  The concurring vote of at least three members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement and decision or determination of any such administrative officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant, or to decide any matter upon which it is required to pass under the code or to effect any variation in such code. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall have no power to authorize variances as to use excepting special exceptions noted herein. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-570. - Special exceptions granted by board. 
    Upon appeal, the board of adjustment is empowered to permit the following exceptions: To authorize, upon application in specific cases such exceptions as hereinafter provided for, provided such exception together with such conditions as may be imposed by the board of adjustment is determined to be: 
(1)  Consistent with purpose and intent of the district within which the property is located; 
(2)  If granted would not tend to encourage further exceptions of a similar nature in the neighborhood which, when taken together, would be inconsistent with the purposes and intent of the district; and 
(3)  That the exception is necessary to render appropriate relief to the applicant for a fair and reasonable use of this property: Within the "A-1" district, the board of adjustment may permit not to exceed one auxiliary single-family structure on a lot for the purpose of housing a relative of the owner when it can be shown that such residence is necessary for the health, safety and/or care of the parties involved. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-571. - Variances. 
    A variance from the terms of the code may be granted, as provided in this section, only upon finding by the board of adjustment that: 
(1)  The application of the code to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(2)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
(3)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of the code or the comprehensive plan; and 
(4)  The variance, if granted, would be the minimum necessary to alleviate the unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-572. - Burden of proof. 
    Applicant for variance has the burden of showing that granting of a variance will not be contrary to public interest, that literal enforcement of the zoning code will result in unnecessary hardship, that by granting the variance the spirit of the code will be observed, and that by granting the variance, substantial justice will be done. The board of adjustment shall have the right to establish conditions on any granted variance. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-573. - Notice and hearing; contents of notice; minor variance or exception. 
(a)  Notice of public hearing before the board of adjustment shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality where the property is located and by mailing written notice by the clerk of the board of adjustment hearing to all owners of property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. A copy of the published notice may be mailed in lieu of written notice; however, the notice by publication and written notice shall be published and mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  The notice, whether by publication or mail, of a public hearing before the board of adjustment shall contain: 
(1)  Legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location in the municipality; 
(2)  Present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the appeal, variance or exception requested; and 
(3)  Date, time and place of the hearing. 
(c)  On hearings involving minor variances or exceptions, notice shall be given by the clerk of the board of adjustment by mailing written notice to all owners of property adjacent to the subject property. The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing and shall contain the facts listed in subsection (b) of this section. The board of adjustment shall have the powers to grant minor variances or exceptions as set forth in the board of adjustment Resolution No. 1-81, subject to the approval or amendment by the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-574. - Procedure for appeals to the board of adjustment. 
    The city commission shall provide by ordinance for appeals from any action or decisions of an administrative officer acting pursuant to any zoning code to the board of adjustment in the following manner: 
(1)  Appeals from the action of any administrative officer to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer; 
(2)  An appeal shall be taken within 30 days from the date of the decision by filing with the city clerk and filing with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefore, and by paying a filing fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule at the office of the city clerk at the time the notice is filed. The applicant shall provide at the time of application a certified list of property owners within 300 feet in question prepared by a bonded abstract company. Newspaper publication shall also include a map of the area to be affected which indicates street names or numbers, streams, or other significant landmarks in said area. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment certified copies of all the papers constituting the record of the matter, together with a copy of the ruling or order from which the appeal is taken; 
(3)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken on due cause shown; and 
(4)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.10; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-575. - Appeals from the board of adjustment. 
(a)  An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the board of adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality to the district court in the county in which the sites of the municipality is located. 
(b)  The appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk and with the clerk of the board of adjustment within ten days of the decision by the board. Day one begins the first day following the board's decision. The notice shall specify the grounds for the appeal. No bond or deposit for costs shall be required for such appeal. 
(c)  Upon filing the notice of appeal, the board of adjustment shall forthwith transmit to the court clerk the original, or certified copies, of all papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision or filing of the board. 
(d)  The appeal shall be heard and tried de novo (without jury) in the district court. All issues in any proceedings under this section shall have preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. 
(e)  An appeal to the district court from the board of adjustment stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the chairman of the board, from which the appeal is taken, certified to the court clerk, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay in his opinion cause imminent peril of life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by district court upon application or notice to the administrative officer in charge of the enforcement of the terms and provisions of the code, and upon notice to the chairman of the board from which appeal is taken, and upon due cause being shown. 
(f)  The district court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review. Costs shall not be allowed against the board of adjustment unless it shall appear to the district court that the board acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. An appeal shall lie from the action of the district court as in all other civil actions. 
(Code 2002, § 22-200.11; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-576-22-598. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 22-599. - Duty of the community development director. 
(a)  Unless specifically qualified otherwise, the provisions of this code shall be enforced by the community development director or their designee, hereinafter referred to as the "director", and/or their designee. 
(b)  In the administration of this code, the director shall be assisted by the appropriate officers, departments, commissions, agencies and boards of the city and such additional officers, departments, agencies, committees, of the city, county, state and federal governments as shall be specified and referred to under the various sections of this code. 
(c)  The director shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the city commission to administer and enforce the provisions of this code. Such authority shall include the ability to order, in writing, the remedy of any condition found in violation of this code and the ability to bring, in concert with the city attorney, legal action to ensure compliance with the provisions, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-600. - Zoning clearance permit requirements. 
    The zoning clearance permit is a permit issued by the director which states that a particular development meets all of the requirements of this zoning code. It is not a building permit and does not authorize construction; it certifies that the land and/or structure is in conformance with the terms of this zoning code. A zoning clearance permit shall be required on all building permits, provided that such clearance is not required for single-family residential structures. The zoning clearance process can be reviewed concurrently with the building permit process and the city can establish an administrative review process. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-601. - New construction. 
    No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, nor shall the use of any land or building or other structure be changed without a zoning clearance permit being issued authorizing such construction, alteration, or use changes as being in compliance with the provisions of this code, unless otherwise exempted. No building or other permit shall be issued for any construction not conforming to a valid zoning clearance permit. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-602. - Application; zoning clearance permit. 
    An application for a zoning clearance permit shall be made to the director by the owner or proposed occupant of the building or land to be occupied or used, and said application shall state the location and legal description of said property and set out in detail the character and nature of the use to be conducted thereon. Within ten business days, the director shall grant or deny said zoning clearance permit in accordance with the terms of this code. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-603. - Accompanying material. 
    All applications for zoning clearance permits shall be accompanied by a plot plan, drawn to scale on suitable paper, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to satisfy the requirements of these regulations. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-604. - Zoning clearance fee. 
    Zoning clearance permit shall not be issued until a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule has been paid. This fee shall also include the issuance of a certificate of occupancy at the completion of the building permit process. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-605. - Conditional use permit. 
    Where the letter "P" appears for certain uses in the tables of permitted uses, their use may be permitted if a conditional use permit is approved and attaches to the real property. For the purposes of interpreting the city's zoning code and development regulations, the term "conditional use permit" shall be seen as having the exact same meaning as the term "specific use permit" as cited in 11 O.S. § 43-113 and both terms are to be used interchangeably. The uses designated under the various districts herein as "conditional uses" are so classified because they could more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district; however, the nature of such uses makes it desirable that they be permitted to locate therein under conditions. The following procedures are established to integrate properly the conditional uses with the other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedures: 
(1)  An application shall be filed with the director for review. Such application shall show the location and intended use of the site. The applicant shall provide a certified property ownership list of all property owners within 300 feet. The list shall be prepared by a bonded abstract company. Applicant shall provide the existing land uses adjacent to the site and any other material pertinent to the request which the director may require. An application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule to cover costs of notice and posting and administrative review. 
(2)  The planning commission shall hold one or more public hearings thereon. Such notice shall follow the same public hearing procedures of this article and state law. In the event any applicant files an application for an amendment concurrently with an application for a conditional use, the planning commission may, upon its option, consider both applications concurrently upon proper notice having been given. 
(3)  The planning commission shall within 45 days of the date of the application, transmit to the city commission its report as to the effect of such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic congestion, public utilities and other matters pertaining to the general health, safety and welfare of the public, and the recommendation of the planning commission concerning the use thereon. Thereupon, the city commission may authorize or deny the issuance of a building permit for the use of the land or buildings as requested. 
(4)  In conducting its review, the planning commission and city commission may set conditions on the approval any conditional use permit, including, but not limited to, conditions on: hours of operation, use restrictions, building design, parking, setbacks, lot sizes, density, landscaping, screening, site design elements, signage, lighting, noise and such other development standards and operational safeguards as are indicated to be important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property and the community as a whole. 
(5)  If approved, the applicant and all successors shall remain in compliance with any specified conditions of the conditional use permit. The city commission shall have the authority to revoke any conditional use permit that is in violation of established conditions, upon public hearing and notice to the permit holder. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-606. - Platting requirements. 
    For the purpose of providing a proper arrangement of streets and assuring the adequacy of open space for traffic, utilities, and access of emergency vehicles, commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily incident to a change of zoning, a platting requirement is established, as follows: 
For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private party, no building permit or zoning clearance permit shall be issued until that portion of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included within a subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be, submitted to and approved by the city commission and filed of record in the office of the county clerk. Provided, that the city commission upon the recommendation of the planning commission, may waive the platting requirements upon a determination that the above stated purposes have been achieved by previous platting or could not be achieved by a plat or replat. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-607. - Violation and penalties. 
    A violation of this code shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-608. - Site plan review. 
    Site plans, prepared and approved in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be required to assist city administrative officials in the review of certain applications for building permits, and to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of this code. All structures and their related accessory uses and structures shall trigger the need for a site plan. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.10; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-609. - Exceptions. 
    The director may waive any requirements of this section upon a finding that the waiver of said requirements will not adversely affect the adequacy of provisions set forth herein. The director shall also have the right to establish and carry out administrative provisions that are designed to provide for the efficient review and processing of building permit and land use applications. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.11; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-610. - Required information on site plans. 
(a)  At least four clearly legible blue or black line copies of all site plans shall be submitted to the director along with a receipt indicating that all required site plan fees for processing and approval have been paid. 
(b)  All site plans contain the following information: 
(1)  North arrow. 
(2)  Scale of the site plan is to be indicated with a preferred scale being one inch equals 20 feet. However, in no case shall the scale of any site plan be less than one inch equals 50 feet. 
(3)  The legal description of the property is to be written on the site plan. Identify the location of tract, with regards to corner of the section, block and street corners. For all unplatted property of five acres or less in area and for any property located within an approved subdivision which results from a change of the originally recorded plat, a copy of the first recorded deed to the property must accompany the permit application. 
(4)  All property lines shall be accurately drawn to scale on the site plan with the dimensions of each line numerically illustrated in feet. Each property line shall be distinguished with the symbol "PL". 
(5)  All adjacent street and alley rights-of-way are to be indicated, showing the centerline of each, the width and length of each and any street names. Property lines shall be included as a part of these rights-of-way by showing dimensions from the centerline. 
(6)  The exact location, dimensions, and type of all easements that abut and are situated on the property shall be shown. 
(7)  The location of driveway approaches, width and length, of every driveway shall be indicated. 
(8)  Show existing and proposed paving. Specify the width and type of paving and whether there is curb and gutter. 
(9)  Indicate the parking and maneuvering arrangement that is proposed. Each parking space and drive is to be indicated. All parking arrangements must comply with city parking standards. 
(10)  Indicate the locations of all existing and/or proposed utility services including: 
a.  Indicate location and size of sanitary sewer facilities, or other sewer disposal system. 
b.  Indicate location and capacity of all drainage structures and pipes (existing and proposed), showing direction of flow of stormwater, natural low areas existing on the property, and contour lines. If the location is within a floodprone area, the final elevation also shall be indicated. 
(11)  Show the location of every existing and proposed building on the property: 
a.  Identify the building location by indicating the distance from each building to all rights-of-way and property lines, and between buildings. 
b.  Specify the dimensions and the total square footage in each floor of every existing and proposed building. Specify the square footage in each floor that is contained in areas designed for storage, utilities and building services. 
c.  State the use in detail of every existing and proposed building. 
d.  Indicate the number of dwelling units in each building. 
(12)  Any additional information relating to the proposed improvements as requested by the director. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.12; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-611. - Procedure for processing. 
(a)  The director shall check the site plan for general compliance and completeness with the provisions of this section and shall so certify the application. 
(b)  The director shall see that all administration reviews are completed within 15 days. The director may extend the review by one 15-day period, and thereafter, the site plan shall be automatically approved if administrative review is not completed. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.13) 
Sec. 22-612. - Approval, extension and revision. 
(a)  Approval of a site plan submitted under the provisions of this section shall expire one year after the date of such approval unless a building permit has been obtained and the work commenced. 
(b)  Such approval may be extended by the director of community development for a single one-year period, upon his receipt of a written request for an extension not less than 30 days before the expiration of the approved site plan. 
(c)  The director shall not approve any site plan that is contrary to the provisions of this code and other current ordinances or statutes. Neither shall the director disapprove the site plan on grounds other than a documented deviation from this code or other current ordinances or statutes. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.14; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-613. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director may appeal the decision to the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article. 
(Code 2002, § 22-205.15; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-614-22-644. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - AMENDMENTS; PROCEDURES 

Sec. 22-645. - Planning commission recommendation required. 
    The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions and limitations imposed and the districts created may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the planning commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the city commission a report and recommendation on the proposed change. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-646. - Application for amendment. 
    An owner, or his duly authorized representative, may make application for the amendment of the zoning restrictions applicable to his property by filing with the planning commission a written application in such form and content as the planning commission may, by resolution, establish. An application for amendment shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule to cover costs of notice and posting and administrative review. The applicant shall also furnish a list of all property owners within 300 feet of the rezoning applicant's property and shall be prepared and certified by an abstract company. This certified ownership list shall contain the legal description and the mailing addresses of the property owners. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-647. - Notice of public hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a rezoning application, the secretary for the planning commission shall set dates of the public hearings before the planning commission and city commission. Parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard at both public hearings. At least 15 days' notice of the rezoning requested, date, time and place, each hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Said notice shall also include a map of the area to be affected which indicates street names or numbers, streams, or other significant landmarks in the said area. In addition to the notice required above, notice of a public hearing on any proposed zoning change shall be given 20 days prior to the hearing by mailing written notice by the secretary of the planning commission to all owners of real property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. The notice shall contain as follows: 
(1)  Legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location; 
(2)  Present zoning and classification of the property and the classification sought by the applicant; and 
(3)  Date, time and place of the public hearing. 
(b)  In addition to the notice provided above, notice of public hearing of any zoning change shall be given by a sign or signs as may be required, placed on the property affected by such proposed zoning reclassification. Said sign or signs shall be posted on the affected property at least 20 days before the date of the hearing. Such sign or signs and the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public street or streets which it faces. It shall contain as follows: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the public hearing; 
(2)  By whom the public hearing will be conducted; 
(3)  Existing and desired zoning classification; and 
(4)  Other information as deemed necessary to provide adequate and timely public notice. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-648. - Additional notice requirements for specific uses. 
(a)  In accordance with state law, if the zoning change requested permits the use of treatment facilities, multiple-family facilities, transitional living facilities, halfway houses and any housing or facility that may be used for medical or nonmedical detoxification as these terms are defined pursuant to 43A O.S. § 3-403. Written notice shall be provided at least 30 days before the hearing date to all property owners within one-quarter mile where the area to be affected is located. The applicant shall be responsible for costs associated with the notice and shall provide proof of compliance. The content of the notice shall meet the requirements of this article and state law. The city will be responsible for posting the property and providing publication in the newspaper in accordance with the other provisions of the chapter and state law. 
(b)  In accordance with state law (60 O.S. § 18-863), a group home, although a permitted use, shall only be established after notice is given to all affected real property owners within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property on which the group home is to be located. The notice shall contain a legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location of the group home. The applicant shall furnish to the city the mailing list prepared by a bonded abstractor. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-649. - Planning commission action. 
(a)  After notice and public hearing, the planning commission shall vote to: 
(1)  Recommend to the city commission that the application be approved as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to such modifications as the planning commission shall deem appropriate to carry out the comprehensive plan; or 
(2)  Recommend to the city commission that the application be denied. 
(b)  An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to modification, shall be transmitted to the city commission with the report and recommendation of the planning commission within 15 days from the date of planning commission action. 
(c)  In the event the applicant elects to withdraw his application from amendment to the zoning code after it has been acted upon by the planning commission, no refund shall be provided. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-650. - City commission action. 
(a)  At the time set for public hearing, the city commission shall proceed to conduct the public hearing wherein all interested parties and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard at such public hearing. At least 15 days' notice of the rezoning requested, date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Said notice shall also include a map of the area to be affected, which indicates street names or numbers, streams, or other significant landmarks in said area. In addition to the notice required above, notice of a public hearing on any proposed zoning change shall be given 20 days prior to the public hearing by mailing written notice by the city clerk to all owners of real property within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. The notice shall contain as follows: 
(1)  Legal description of the property and street address or approximate location in the city; 
(2)  Present zoning and classification of the property and the classification sought by the applicant; 
(3)  Date, time and place of public hearing; and 
(4)  Proposed use for the property. 
(b)  In addition to such written notice, notice shall also be given by posting a sign or signs on the property affected by such proposed zoning reclassification. Said sign or signs shall be posted on the affected property at least 20 days before the date of the hearing. Such sign (or signs) and the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public street or streets toward which it faces. It shall contain as follows: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the public hearing; 
(2)  By whom the public hearing will be conducted; 
(3)  The desired zoning classification and proposed use of property; and 
(4)  Other information as deemed necessary to provide adequate and timely public notice. 
(c)  After conducting such public hearing, the city commission may approve the application as submitted and recommended by the planning commission; or approve the application subject to modification; or deny the application; or return the application to the planning commission for further study; or approve the application modified to a classification more restrictive than that requested in such application, notwithstanding the fact that notice had been given of the public hearing to be held upon a requested classification which is less restrictive than that which is approved. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.6; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-651. - Protest to amendment. 
(a)  All written protests against proposed changes shall be filed at least three days before the date of the public hearing. If protests are filed by: 
(1)  The owner of 20 percent or more of the area of lots included in a proposed change; or 
(2)  The owners of 50 percent or more of the area of lots within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the territory included in a proposed change. 
(b)  Then the proposed change or amendment shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of three-fifths of all the members of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-652. - Municipally proposed zoning reclassifications. 
    Should the city propose a zoning reclassification in order to revise the comprehensive plan or the official zoning map of the city, or to identify areas which require specific land use development, due to topography, geography, or other distinguishing features, including, but not limited to, floodplain, drainage, historic preservation, and blighted areas, it shall establish guidelines for publication notices for public hearing. The governing body may require, in addition, the notice requirements to abutting property owners where applicable as provided for in this article, a sign to be posted on designated properties within the area affected by the proposed zoning reclassification. The sign and the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public street or streets toward which it faces. The notice shall state as follows: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the public hearing; 
(2)  Who will conduct the public hearing; 
(3)  The desired zoning classification; 
(4)  The proposed use of the property; and 
(5)  Other information as may be necessary to provide adequate and timely public notice. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-653. - Waiting period required. 
    Applications to amend the zoning code heard and decided by the city commission will not again be set down for public hearing within six months of the date of the decision by the city commission. Applications may not be refiled with the planning commission within six months after the date of such decision by the city commission. Applications for rezoning of the same property in a different zoning classification may, however, be filed without limitation. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-654. - Classification of new additions. 
    All new additions and annexations of land to the city shall be in an A-1 rural agricultural zoning district unless otherwise classified by the city commission for a period of time not to exceed one year from the effective date of the ordinance annexing the property. Within this one-year period of time, the city commission shall instruct the planning commission to study and make recommendations concerning the use of land within said annexation to promote the general welfare and in accordance with the comprehensive plan, and upon receipt of such recommendations, the city commission shall, after public hearing as required by law, establish the district classification of said annexation; provided, however, that this shall not be construed as preventing the city commission from holding public hearings prior to or at the same time as annexation and establishing the district classification at the time of annexation. 
(Code 2002, § 22-210.10; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-655-22-681. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - SHAWNEE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-682. - Short title. 
    These regulations shall be known and may be cited as Shawnee Regional Airport Zoning Regulations. These regulations are subject to any rulings or changes made by the state aeronautics commission, the Federal Aviation Administration and the Aircraft Pilot and Passenger Protection Act. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.1; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-683. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means Shawnee Municipal Airport. 
    Airport elevation means 1,073 feet above mean sea level. 
    Approach surface means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 22-685. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones. These zones are set forth in section 22-684. 
    Commission means the state aeronautics commission or a successor agency. 
    Conical surface means an imaginary surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
    Hazard to air navigation means an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    Height means, for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in these regulations and shown on the airport layout plan, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Horizontal surface means an imaginary horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
    Larger than utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. 
    Nonconforming use means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which in inconsistent with the provisions of these regulations or an amendment thereto. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
    Obstruction means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 22-685. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or government entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
    Precision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
    Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in section 22-684. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
    Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
    Transitional surface means surfaces that extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-degree angles to the extend runway centerline. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth. 
    Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for an intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
    Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.2; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-684. - Airport zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Shawnee Regional Airport Layout Plan consisting of one sheet, prepared by LBR, INC. dated May 2013, which is available upon request by the Shawnee Regional Airport staff. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Precision instrument runway approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Transition zones. Are hereby established adjacent to each instrument and noninstrument runway and approach zone as indicated on the airport layout plan. 
(5)  Horizontal zone for instrument and noninstrument runway. Is hereby established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii for all noninstrument runways and 10,000 feet for all instrument runways from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(6)  Conical zone for instrument and noninstrument runway. Is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the instrument and noninstrument approach zones and transition zones and horizontal zone. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.3; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-685. - Airport zone height limitations. 
    No structure shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by these regulations to a height in excess of the applicable height herein established for such zone unless permitted by the commission. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Precision instrument runway approach zone. Sloped 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward of 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Utility runway visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Transition zone. Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Further, where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects through and beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the edge of the instrument approach zone measured at right angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(5)  Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the established airport elevation. 
(6)  Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(7)  Excepted height limitation. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.4; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-686. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by these regulations in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.5; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-687. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed herein shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of these regulations, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of these regulations, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installations, operation and maintenance hereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the city airport authority to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.6) 
Sec. 22-688. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required. A person shall obtain a permit from the commission prior to the construction or installation of any of the following near the Shawnee Regional Airport: 
(1)  Any proposed structure for an incompatible purpose in the primary surface or the runway protection zone. 
(2)  Any structure, alteration or addition to a structure within three statute miles from the airport reference point of a public use airport, that would result in a total structure height in excess of 150 feet above the airport elevation. 
(3)  Any structure, alteration or addition to a structure that would result in a total structure height greater than the horizontal, conical or approach surfaces, as defined in section 25:30-1-2 of the Aircraft Pilot and Passenger Protection Act. 
(b)  Future use. Except as specifically provided in subsections (b)(1)-(6) of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established and no tree shall be planned in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of these regulations shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
(2)  For mobile or temporary equipment used to construct or install a new structure to perform routine maintenance, repairs, or replace parts of an existing structure. 
(3)  To repair, replace or alter an existing structure that would not result in a total structure height greater than the horizontal, conical or approach surfaces as defined in section 22-685, or change the location of an existing structure. 
(4)  Any object that would be shielded by existing structures of a permanent and substantial character or by natural terrain or topographic features of equal or greater height, and would be located in the congested area of a city, town, or settlement where it is evident beyond all reasonable doubt that the structure so shielded will not adversely affect safety in air navigation. 
(5)  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones but a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
(6)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such a transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alterations of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by these regulations except as set forth in section 22-685(7). 
(c)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of these regulations or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(d)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the airport authority determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(e)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in these regulations may apply to the commission for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of these regulations. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of these regulations may be considered by the commission unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport authority for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. 
(f)  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of these regulations and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the commission, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the city, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.7; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-689. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the city airport authority to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the authority and the commission upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by these regulations to be submitted to the authority and commission shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Appeal of any decision by the city airport authority or its designee shall be made in accordance with section 22-690. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.8; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-690. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the authority made in the administration of these regulations may appeal to the city airport authority and the commission. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time, but no later than 30 days after the decision of the commission or authority by filing with the authority or its designee a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The authority or its designee shall forthwith transmit to the commission the notice of appeal and all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  The authority shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney and may present evidence and testimony and cross-examine adverse witnesses. 
(d)  The authority may, in conforming with the provisions of these regulations and the commission may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.9; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-691. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the authority and the commission, may appeal to the district court within 30 days after such decision as provided by the rules of the authority. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.10; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-692. - Penalties. 
    Each violation of these regulations, the Aircraft Pilot and Passenger Protection Act, commission rulings, or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder, shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, or imprisonment not more than 30 days, or both; and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2002, § 22-215.11; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-693-22-712. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - LAKE PROTECTION ZONE (LPZ) 

Sec. 22-713. - Lake Protection Zone Overlay District. 
    The regulations governing the lake protection zone overlay district are codified in , article V of this chapter. 
(Code 2002, § 22-220; Ord. No. 2545NS, § 1(Exh. 1), 6-2-2014) 
Chapter 23 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act, 27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq.; municipal solid waste management, 27A O.S. § 2-10-901; regional solid waste planning, 27A O.S. § 2-10-1101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means vegetable or animal refuse accumulating from kitchens, pantries, dining rooms, hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses, dwellings, markets, stores and other establishments. 
    Refuse or rubbish means ashes, cinders, paper, broken ware, discarded shoes, plastic, tin cans and such other refuse as may be termed the natural accumulation of resident families and places of business. 
    Solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible refuse in solid or semisolid form, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes or incinerator residue, street refuse, dead animals, demolition wastes, construction wastes, solid or semisolid commercial and industrial wastes including explosives, biomedical wastes, chemical wastes and herbicide and pesticide wastes. The term "solid waste" does not include the following: 
(1)  Scrap materials which are source separated for collection and processing as industrial raw materials, except when contained in the waste collected by or in behalf of a solid waste management system; or 
(2)  Used motor oil, which shall not be considered to be a solid waste, but shall be considered a deleterious substance, if the used motor oil is recycled for energy reclamation and is ultimately destroyed when recycled. 
    Yard waste means rubbish or trash consisting of leaves, grass clippings, brush and tree limbs not larger than one inch in diameter and cut into lengths not more than four feet long which are accumulated from property within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 22-1; Code 2002, § 23-1; Ord. No. 2312NS, § 1, 6-4-2007) 
State Law reference- Waste tires generally, 27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq. 
Sec. 23-2. - Reservation of authority of city. 
    The city reserves to itself the exclusive right and privilege to collect, remove and dispose of and to provide for the collection, removal and disposal of all garbage, rubbish, refuse, waste, trash and unwholesome and unsanitary matter within the city, either by contracting with some suitable person for the removal of such or by removing the garbage, rubbish, refuse, waste, trash and unwholesome and unsanitary matter by city employees, at its discretion. 
(Code 1986, § 22-2; Code 2002, § 23-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 27A O.S. § 2-10-102. 
Sec. 23-3. - Superintendent of sanitation department. 
    If the city does not elect to enter into a contract for the collection and removal of garbage, refuse and rubbish as contemplated in this chapter, the city manager shall designate an appropriate department to enforce this chapter and all other sections of this Code and city ordinances relating to sanitation. The person in charge thereof shall inspect the work of garbage and rubbish collection and observe premises in general, to see that all regulations which relate to the placing, keeping and removing of garbage and rubbish are strictly enforced. This section shall not take away any of the authority or lessen the duty of any other city officer to enforce this chapter or any other section of this Code or city ordinance relating to sanitation. 
(Code 1986, § 22-3; Code 2002, § 23-3) 
Sec. 23-4. - Standards for receptacles; placement of receptacles for collection. 
(a)  All owners, occupants or other persons in charge of any residence, apartment or any multifamily dwelling within the city shall place all garbage in either a 95-gallon or 65-gallon polycart to be supplied by the contractor for the city's waste pickup service. Each owner, occupant or person in charge shall clear between a 95-gallon or 65-gallon polycart for their residence. Each owner, occupant or person in charge of a residence shall have the option of requesting additional 95-gallon polycarts for a fee as set forth in section 23-38. Fifty-five-gallon drums and similar receptacles are specifically prohibited. 
(b)  Polycarts shall be placed curbside at least three feet from any mailbox, gas meter, fire hydrant or any other utility equipment or structure located above ground, and within two feet of the curb or road. Placement of the polycarts in alleys is specifically prohibited. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. along a road where garbage is to be picked up that day. 
(Code 1986, § 22-4; Code 2002, § 23-4; Ord. No. 2312NS, § 2, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 2436NS, § 1, 6-21-2010) 
Sec. 23-5. - Turning over, misplacing or damaging receptacles. 
    No person shall turn over, misplace or damage any polycart or move the polycart from its position so as to permit the contents of the polycart to spill or fall out on any property within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 22-5; Code 2002, § 23-5; Ord. No. 2312NS, § 3, 6-4-2007) 
Sec. 23-6. - Dumping refuse. 
    No person shall dump any manure, garbage, offal, refuse or other waste matter on any public or private grounds within the city or within one-half mile of the city for the purpose of filling up any lot or piece of ground or disposing of the manure, garbage, offal, refuse or other waste matter without first getting permission from the county health department. 
(Code 1986, § 22-6; Code 2002, § 23-6) 
Secs. 23-7-23-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 23-36. - Contract for removal; bond and insurance. 
    The city commission may contract with some suitable person for the removal of any garbage, waste, refuse or rubbish on such terms and conditions as it shall deem to the best interests of the city, including the requirement of a bond, the terms, conditions and limits of which are approved by the city commission and conditioned on the faithful performance of the contract entered into, and liability insurance in a sum fixed by the city commission and conditioned that the city will be saved harmless against any liability imposed by law against the city as the result of any negligence causing damage to any person or property on the part of the principal obligor. 
(Code 1986, § 22-21; Code 2002, § 23-36) 
Sec. 23-37. - Vehicles. 
(a)  All vehicles used in the removal, collection or transportation of garbage and refuse shall be constructed in such a manner that will prevent any portion of such garbage, waste, refuse and rubbish from leaking, spilling, falling or blowing out of such vehicle or onto any highways, streets, avenues, alleys or public or private places. 
(b)  All such vehicles, except when being loaded or unloaded, shall be kept completely and securely covered so that no part of the contents thereof shall at any time be exposed to view. 
(c)  Such vehicles shall not be loaded above a point that will not permit its being drawn or driven over the highways, alleys or streets without any portion of the contents being spilled or falling therefrom. 
(d)  All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall have upon them, in figures and letters at least three inches in height, the name of the owner or operator and the number given the vehicles. 
(e)  All such vehicles shall at all times be subject to inspection by the department in charge of sanitation. If any vehicle is defective or unfit for use, the department may prevent the use of the vehicle until put in proper condition to comply with this section. Any person aggrieved shall have a right to appeal to the city commission, which shall hear the appeal at its next regular meeting or at other times as ordered by it, and its decision thereon shall be final. 
(f)  No person shall transport or haul over the city streets any manure, sand, mud, dirt, clay or ashes, except in a vehicle so constructed as to prevent spilling or scattering of any of the substances therein contained upon the streets and in accordance with any regulations relating thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 22-23; Code 2002, § 23-37) 
Sec. 23-38. - Charges. 
(a)  Monthly charges shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, adopted and updated by the city commission from time to time. 
(b)  The rates in subsection (a) of this section are based on a combined once a week collection of solid waste and yard waste. 
(c)  For multifamily dwellings and manufactured home parks where garbage is collected in central locations for family units therein and placed in commercial solid waste containers, monthly rates shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per unit or manufactured home pad in a manufactured home park, notwithstanding the fact that some units or pads may not be occupied. 
(d)  Charges for garbage service shall be included on the water bills issued by the city, and it shall be the duty of all persons so billed to pay the charges on or before the due date of such water bills. If such sanitation bills are not paid as provided in this section, the service shall be discontinued along with the water service. 
(e)  If a charge is made for the collection and removal of garbage or rubbish from the owner or occupant of any premises in the city that does not have water service, a special bill for such removal shall be sent to such person and shall be paid as provided in this section on or before the due date shown on the bill. Failure to pay the charges shall be deemed a violation of this section, and such service shall be discontinued. 
(f)  The minimum deposit for garbage service from the city shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, which shall be made at the time application is made for such service. The deposit shall remain with the city to the credit of the person paying the deposit and shall be subject to any charge for garbage service that is unpaid. 
(Code 1986, § 22-24; Code 2002, § 23-38; Ord. No. 2145NS, § 1, 3-15-2004; Ord. No. 2272NS, § 1, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 2312NS, § 4, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 2436NS, § 2, 6-21-2010) 
State Law reference- Fees and charges for collection of solid wastes, 27A O.S. § 2-10-901(B). 
Sec. 23-39. - Types of refuse collected by city; cleanup campaigns. 
    The city will pick up yard waste once a week, provided such items are placed in disposable bags, and further provided, that tree limbs are not larger than one inch in diameter and are cut into lengths not more than four feet long. A person desiring the city to pick up such items shall place them on the curb or roadside to be picked up on the same day of their solid waste pickup. No abandoned or discarded furniture, appliances, building materials, dirt, rocks and similar materials shall be picked up by the city except on the dates specified for bulk waste pickup. Such items shall be placed in the manner and location designated by the city. At no time will any person leave hazardous waste to be picked up by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 22-22; Code 2002, § 23-39; Ord. No. 2312NS, § 5, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 2436NS, § 3, 6-21-2010) 
Sec. 23-40. - Disposal of household hazardous waste; rates. 
    Household hazardous waste (HHW) may be delivered by residents of the city (customers) to the Oklahoma City HHW Collection Facility at Southwest 15th and Portland. Customers must provide proof of Shawnee residency in the form of a valid drivers license and current city water bill. Charges for the disposal of HHW are as follows and will be billed by Oklahoma City to the city which will bill the customer through the standard utility billing process. All nonliquid HHW products will be converted through use of an equivalent rate unit (ERU) measurement scale: 
< = 7.5 gallons 0.5 ERU $39.50 > 7.5 gallons to 15 gallons 1.0 ERU $79.00 > 15 gallons to 22.5 gallons 1.5 ERU $118.50 > 22.5 gallons 2.0 ERU $158.00 Note: 
Minimum charge per vehicle per arrival = 0.5 ERU. 
Maximum charge per vehicle per arrival = 2.0 ERU.  
(Code 2002, § 23-40; Ord. No. 2333NS, § 1, 11-19-2007) 
Secs. 23-41-23-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY DUMP; SANITARY LANDFILL 

Sec. 23-66. - Use permitted; materials restricted. 
    All persons and their agents, whose residences or places of doing business are within the corporate limits of the city, shall be privileged to use the facilities of the area established by the city as a sanitary landfill for the depositing or dumping of empty cans or bottles, glass, wooden or paper boxes, crates, old metals or alloys, stone, ashes, brick, tires and the like originating in the city. Except as provided in this article, no person other than those designated in this section shall enter into or upon a sanitary landfill or use a sanitary landfill for any purpose whatsoever, and no refuse except refuse originating in the city shall be placed in a sanitary landfill. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any garbage, vegetable matter subject to decay, bodies of animals, grease, fats, oil or any similar material in a dump, but such items may be deposited in sanitary landfills. 
(Code 1986, § 22-41; Code 2002, § 23-66) 
Sec. 23-67. - Charges. 
(a)  No charge shall be made for the privilege of depositing or dumping materials in a city sanitary landfill, except for the following: 
(1)  Building or construction contractors; 
(2)  Commercial firms located outside the corporate limits that shall be permitted to use such facilities upon payment of fees as provided in this article; and 
(3)  Commercial firms located inside the corporate limits that deposit or dump more than one load of material per week. 
(b)  The fee to be collected from persons included in subsection (a) of this section using the city dump or sanitary landfill shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per cubic yard of material disposed therein. 
(Code 1986, §§ 22-42, 22-43; Code 2002, § 23-67) 
Sec. 23-68. - Records; monthly billing. 
    The caretaker at a city sanitary landfill shall keep complete records of all persons subject to the charges provided in this article who deposit or dump material in city dumps or sanitary landfills and shall regularly transmit to the city clerk information for billing as directed by the city manager. Billing for such depositing or dumping shall be done by the utility department on a monthly basis, unless special billing or collection is arranged with the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 22-44; Code 2002, § 23-68) 
Chapter 24 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Roads and streets, 11 O.S. § 36-101 et seq.; improvement districts, 11 O.S. § 39-101 et seq.; cooperation by state highway commission, 69 O.S. § 303; cooperation by department of highways, 69 O.S. § 317; bridges, 69 O.S. §§ 611, 612; appropriation of highway, 69 O.S. § 648. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Violations. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate any section of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 23-1; Code 2002, § 24-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Street paving or improvement work. 
(a)  Bond. Before any person shall engage in work of any kind within the city, which constitutes the paving, by cement, blacktop or gravel, or otherwise improving of any street, he shall execute and deliver to the city a bond in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, that he shall save the city harmless from any liabilities that may arise in the use of any of the streets or alleys where such work is performed and that he shall in all respects comply with all city ordinances, rules and regulations relating to the use of streets. 
(b)  Liability insurance. Before any person shall engage in work of any kind in the city constituting the paving, by cement, blacktop or gravel, or otherwise improving of any street, the person doing such work shall file with the city clerk an insurance policy for an indemnity fund as follows: 
(1)  The insurance policy shall be issued by a company licensed and authorized to do business in the state and shall provide public liability insurance coverage for each operation required in the conduct of such work. The insurance policy coverage, for injury or death of any one person, for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident and for property damage in any one accident growing out of the work, shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(2)  The policy cannot be cancelled until ten days' notice of cancellation is given to the city clerk, and the policy shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city of any changes therein. 
(3)  The insurance policy shall be approved by the city manager or designee and endorsed thereon. The insurance policy shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(4)  The insurance policy shall be made for the use and benefit and protection of the city and for the use and benefit and protection of any person who may suffer injury either to his person or property because of an accident or omission or negligence of any person, his agents or servants engaged in such work. If the policy is approved by the city manager or designee, it shall remain in force and effect during the life of the policy. 
(c)  Manner of doing work. Any work of any kind in the city constituting the paving, by cement, blacktop or gravel, or any other improving of streets shall be done under the supervision and according to specifications of the city engineer and shall be inspected and approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1986, §§ 23-2-23-4; Code 2002, § 24-2) 
Sec. 24-3. - Playing games. 
    No person shall engage in any game of marbles, ball playing or other game upon any of the city streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks. 
(Code 1986, § 23-5; Code 2002, § 24-3) 
State Law reference- Power of city to prohibit games on streets, sidewalks, etc., 11 O.S. § 22-117. 
Sec. 24-4. - Open doors or gratings in sidewalks. 
    No person shall keep open or leave open any cellar door or grating of any kind in or upon any sidewalk in the city or suffer or permit the door or grating to be left open, except when necessarily open during the use thereof, and during such time the door or grating shall be properly guarded and protected. 
(Code 1986, § 23-6; Code 2002, § 24-4) 
Sec. 24-5. - Damaging fresh concrete. 
    No person shall walk upon any fresh concrete that has been set in any sidewalk, pavement or curb or step upon, score, mark, deface, injure or throw any article of any kind whatever thereupon. 
(Code 1986, § 23-8; Code 2002, § 24-5) 
Sec. 24-6. - Driving over curbs. 
    No person shall recklessly or negligently drive any heavily loaded truck, tractor or wagon loaded in excess of one ton into, over or on the curbing or concrete guttering of any paved street. 
(Code 1986, § 23-9; Code 2002, § 24-6) 
Sec. 24-7. - Defacing or marking. 
    No person shall cut, carve, mark, write or advertise, engrave or inscribe upon any sidewalk, curbing, pavement or other public part of any street any sign, mark, advertisement or effigy, other than to show the sidewalk contractor's nameplate. 
(Code 1986, § 23-10; Code 2002, § 24-7) 
Sec. 24-8. - Responsibility for cleanliness. 
(a)  No property owner, occupant or agent of any property that abuts or adjoins any street or avenue in the city shall allow or permit any animal or vegetable substance; any tin, glass or piece of iron; or any trash, mud, snow, ice, dirt, slop, refuse matter or filth of any kind or description whatever to accumulate or remain on any part of the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the premises owned or occupied by such person. 
(b)  No property owner, occupant or agent of such property shall fail or refuse to clean off the sidewalk abutting or adjacent to the property owned or occupied by him, as provided in this section, within 24 hours after notice is served on him by any police officer, the public works director or other city officer. 
(c)  No person shall sweep out or deposit on any of the city sidewalks or streets any dirt or trash of any kind or sweep from the sidewalk into the street any dirt or trash of any kind whatsoever. 
(d)  No property owner, occupant or agent of such property shall allow grass to grow over the edge of the curb and into the street or gutter of the street abutting or adjacent to the property owned or occupied by that person. 
(Code 1986, § 23-11; Code 2002, § 24-8; Ord. No. 2237NS, § 1, 2-6-2006) 
Sec. 24-9. - Throwing or depositing harmful materials. 
(a)  No person shall throw any stone, trash, tack, nail, rubbish, brick or other missile in, on or onto or across any street or alley or in any public or other place. 
(b)  No person shall throw, drop or cast any bottle, jug, jar or other container which is breakable and suited to holding any liquids upon the city streets, alleys or sidewalks. No person shall commit such act in the presence of any peace officer who has apprehended or is about to apprehend and arrest the person doing the act for violation of this Code or any other city ordinances or the laws of the state or the United States. 
(c)  No person shall throw, place, leave, scatter or otherwise deposit any papers, boxes, cartons or rubbish of any kind, including, but not limited to, glass, plastic or metal containers or parts thereof, or any other object that might cause injury to persons or damage to property upon any street, alley, avenue or other public place within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 23-12; Code 2002, § 24-9) 
Sec. 24-10. - Refuse left on premises. 
    No person shall allow to remain in any alley or on any parking area or street adjoining, in front of, to the rear of or alongside of his premises any rubbish, waste, trash or other accumulations of discarded matter, except in a manner provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 23-13; Code 2002, § 24-10) 
Sec. 24-11. - Escape of water or steam. 
    No person shall allow or permit water or steam to escape from any water main or service steam pipe or exhaust pipe into or upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 23-14; Code 2002, § 24-11) 
Sec. 24-12. - Draining of oil, grease or slop. 
    No person shall permit any oil, grease or slop to run onto or drain into any city street or alley. 
(Code 1986, § 23-15; Code 2002, § 24-12) 
Secs. 24-13-24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to construct, repair and alter sidewalks, 11 O.S. § 36-101. 

Sec. 24-41. - Applicability of article. 
    All sidewalk construction and repair on any street, avenue or alley in the city shall be done subject to and shall strictly conform in all respects to all sections in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 23-31; Code 2002, § 24-41) 
Sec. 24-42. - Responsibility for damaged or unsafe sidewalks. 
    No person shall permit the sidewalk in front or on the side of his premises to be or continue in a broken or unsafe condition so as to endanger life and limb of any person traveling thereon. 
(Code 1986, § 23-32; Code 2002, § 24-42) 
Sec. 24-43. - Report of hazardous conditions. 
    Any city officer who discovers or receives a report from any citizen of any defect, hole, obstruction or any other condition in or upon or under any sidewalk in the city which constitutes a hazard to pedestrians or to public safety shall, at once, report such condition to the office of the community development director. 
(Code 1986, § 23-33; Code 2002, § 24-43; Ord. No. 2238NS, § 1, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 24-44. - Notice to repair. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report prescribed by section 24-43 or upon receipt of equivalent information from any reliable source, the city community development director shall begin the process of causing the defective sidewalk to be repaired either by the owner of the property or by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 7-582. 
(b)  If, on the date specified for the unsafe condition hearing, the community development director determines the sidewalk to be in such a condition as to be a hazard to pedestrians or public safety the community development director shall order the property owner to repair the sidewalk at the owner's expense within 30 days of the hearing. 
(c)  The service of all notices prescribed by this section shall be evidenced by the return of the officer making such service, certified in his official capacity, and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 23-34; Code 2002, § 24-44; Ord. No. 2238NS, §§ 2, 3, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 24-45. - Failure to repair. 
(a)  If the provisions of an order given by the community development director are not complied with, the city may proceed to construct or repair the sidewalk or let a contract therefor, without advertisement, and the cost of making such repairs shall be assessed against the abutting property as provided by state law. All such assessments which amount to $10.00 or less shall be paid in one installment at the next taxpaying period after the assessment is certified by the county treasurer, as provided by law. 
(b)  If the costs of the work performed under this section are not paid within 90 days from the date of the service of the notice prescribed by section 24-44, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of such costs to the county treasurer to be levied upon the property and to be collected by the county treasurer in the manner prescribed by law. 
(c)  The property owner shall have the right of appeal to the city commission from any order of the community development director. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal, clearly stating all grounds upon which the appeal is based, with the city clerk within ten days after the administrative order is rendered. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from abating a defective sidewalk constituting a hazard to pedestrians or public safety as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police power to protect the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
(e)  The city officers, employees or agents shall not be liable for any damages or loss of property due to the repair of any defective sidewalk performed pursuant to this section, or any previous section, or as otherwise prescribed by law. 
(Code 1986, § 23-35; Code 2002, § 24-45; Ord. No. 2238NS, §§ 4, 5, 2-21-2006) 
Sec. 24-46. - Permit to construct or repair. 
(a)  Required. No person shall build, construct or repair any sidewalk on any street, avenue or alley in the city without first obtaining a written permit approved by the building inspector. The permit fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(b)  Contents. All permits issued pursuant to this section shall show the name of the property owner, the contractor or person who is to do the work, the lot and block numbers on which the work is to be done and the addition or part of the city in which it is to be located. 
(c)  Terms and conditions. All permits issued for sidewalk construction or repair shall be issued on the condition that the work will be done strictly in accordance with the city regulations relating to the construction or repair, and all persons having any part or interest in any sidewalk construction or repair are charged with and bound by this article, notwithstanding that the provisions may not be specially set forth in the permit. 
(Code 1986, §§ 23-36-23-38; Code 2002, § 24-46) 
Sec. 24-47. - Work to conform to established levels and grades. 
    All sidewalk construction and repair work shall be conformable to the levels and grades established for that purpose by the city and on file with the city engineer. It shall be the duty of the engineer to establish all grades and levels for all sidewalks constructed. 
(Code 1986, § 23-39; Code 2002, § 24-47) 
Sec. 24-48. - Requirements and specifications. 
(a)  Materials. Sidewalks constructed in any street, avenue, alley or public ground in the city shall be constructed either of concrete or other material, subject to the approval of the city engineer. Concrete shall invariably be used except in new construction where there is no concrete construction within the block. 
(b)  Specifications. All sidewalks shall be built according to the following specifications: 
(1)  Width. The width in residential sections shall be five feet or wider where required by the city engineer, provided that in residential sections where an adjoining concrete walk is less than five feet wide a lesser width may be allowed by the city engineer. In exercising his discretion in such cases, the city engineer shall be governed by the density of population in the immediate vicinity and the future demands to be made by the public on such walk. 
(2)  Base. All bases shall be four inches, except where the city engineer requires additional depths for driveways. 
(3)  Mixtures. All concrete mixtures shall be 1-2-4 proportion, well mixed. 
(4)  Concrete. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all walks shall be of concrete and nothing else, made in one course, properly troweled and tamped to bring a smooth mortar surface. 
(5)  Subbase. Places that are low and continuously damp or soaked shall have a five-inch subbase of gravel or cinders, with tiling added for drainage as specified by the city engineer. 
(6)  Blocking. All walks shall be cut into blocks not greater than five feet in the greatest dimension. Shallow marked grooves are not permissible. All cuts shall be made with one-eighth-inch to 3/16 -inch separation plates and cut to the cross section of the walk and shall be provided with a square lug on each end which fits into a notch in the forms. 
(7)  Expansion joints. Expansion joints one-half inch wide and filled with bituminous material shall be placed in all walks, and joints shall not be more than 50 feet apart. Expansion joints shall be placed on all sides of driveway crossing blocks. At all junctions of walks with the curbs, there shall be one-inch expansion joints filled with bituminous material. 
(8)  Slopes. All walks shall slope one way toward the curb with a fall of one-fourth inch to each foot. 
(9)  Grades and levels. The city engineer shall supply all grades and levels, and none other shall be used. 
(10)  Finish. Sidewalks shall have a wooden float finish, true to line and grade, and shall bear thereon the imprint of the person constructing the sidewalk. Such wooden float finish may be waived by the city engineer in the exercise of his discretion. 
(Code 1986, § 23-40; Code 2002, § 24-48) 
Sec. 24-49. - Certificates of approval. 
    All sidewalk construction and repair work shall be done under the direct supervision of the city engineer. It shall be the duty of the city engineer, when any construction or repair work has been completely finished in accordance with this article, to issue a certificate of approval. No right of action for work done or labor or materials supplied on any contract for sidewalk construction or repair shall arise, nor shall any materialman's or laborer's lien be held to be established until the city engineer has approved the work and issued and delivered his certificate of approval to the proper person. The certificate shall be issued only after the completion of the work and shall certify that the work and materials in all respects comply with the city regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 23-41; Code 2002, § 24-49) 
Sec. 24-50. - Repairs. 
    All sidewalks out of repair shall be repaired with good material of the same kind and dimensions and of a quality equal to that originally used in the construction of sidewalks and well laid so as to correspond with the rest of the sidewalk. Such of the sidewalk or part that has settled so as to make depressions or that has become raised above the grade of the sidewalk shall be replaced on the same grade as the rest of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1986, § 23-42; Code 2002, § 24-50) 
Sec. 24-51. - Covenant of indemnity. 
    Any person issued a permit for sidewalk construction or repair shall execute a covenant indemnifying the city against any and all claims for damages of any kind or nature and against any and all judgments predicated upon such claims which may arise by virtue of the construction or repairs of the sidewalk; the storage or emplacement of any equipment, tools or materials incident thereto; and the performance of any and all work incident to such construction or repairs. 
(Code 1986, § 23-43; Code 2002, § 24-51) 
Secs. 24-52-24-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAY APPROACHES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Corner means the point of intersection of the outside lines of the traveled way of any public right-of-way. 
    Curb parking space means a length of curbing, equal to 22 feet, along the edge of any traveled way where any motor vehicle is authorized or permitted to park. 
    Curb return means that portion of the curbing along the edge or side of any driveway approach which connects the driveway approach with the curbing along the edge of any traveled way, including the radius of curvature. 
    Driveway approach means any area, between the right-of-way line of any public street and traveled portion of such street, used for the purpose of providing access for motor vehicles from the traveled way of the public street to any private property adjacent to such street. 
    Outside sidewalk line means a line contiguous with that edge of any public sidewalk which is next to the traveled way of any public street or, if there is no public sidewalk, a line in the street right-of-way which is parallel to and four feet from the street right-of-way line. 
    Parcel of land means any private tract of land in the city to which a proposed driveway approach is to be constructed or emplaced. 
    Specifications means the specifications prepared by the public works department and approved by the city commission. 
    Traveled way or street means that portion of any public right-of-way which has been improved for or which is designed or used by or for the travel or operation of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 23-56; Code 2002, § 24-81) 
Sec. 24-82. - Compliance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or emplace any driveway approach without first complying with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 23-57; Code 2002, § 24-82) 
Sec. 24-83. - Plans and specifications. 
    All driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications for such work on file in the office of the building inspector. A copy of such typical plans and specifications is attached to Ordinance No. 531NS, on file in the city clerk's office, and the plans and specifications are by reference incorporated in this article and made a part of this article with the same force and effect as though completely set forth in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 23-58; Code 2002, § 24-83) 
Sec. 24-84. - Commencement and completion of work. 
    Upon commencement of the construction of any driveway approach, notice thereof shall be given to the building inspector, and such construction shall be completed within 30 days after its commencement, unless weather conditions or other forces of nature make such completion impossible. Failure to complete the construction within 30 days from its commencement shall be deemed an unlawful act. 
(Code 1986, § 23-59; Code 2002, § 24-84) 
Secs. 24-85-24-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 24-111. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway approach or to cut into, remove or destroy any part of any curb along the edge of any traveled way without first securing a permit. 
(Code 1986, § 23-71; Code 2002, § 24-111) 
Sec. 24-112. - Application. 
    Prior to the construction or emplacement of any driveway approach, any person having a vested interest in the parcel of land to which such approach will run or the person who is to perform the work incident to the construction or emplacement of such driveway approach shall file an application in the office of the building inspector, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name or legal description of every person having any vested interest in the parcel of land to which the proposed approach will run; 
(2)  The street address of the parcel of land or, if such parcel has no street address, the name of the street upon whose right-of-way such parcel abuts and the location of the parcel upon the street with reference to the nearest intersecting street; 
(3)  The legal description of the parcel of land; 
(4)  The width of the proposed driveway approach and, if such width is not uniform along the entire length of such approach, the location on the approach of each variance in width; 
(5)  The design of the approach and the type of materials to be used in the construction or emplacement thereof; 
(6)  The total estimated cost of the approach; 
(7)  The scheduled date for the commencement of the work on the approach; 
(8)  The name and address of the contractor or other person who is to undertake the work incident to the construction or emplacement of the approach; 
(9)  Attached to the application, a plat showing the dimensions of the parcel of land, the location and the nature of all improvements upon the land and the proposed location of the driveway approach, showing its proposed dimensions in the same scale as that of the parcel of land and its improvements; and 
(10)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the building inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 23-72; Code 2002, § 24-112) 
Sec. 24-113. - Preliminary inspection. 
    Within seven days from the filing of an application under this division, the building inspector or authorized representative shall conduct a preliminary inspection of the site of the proposed driveway approach and shall determine if the approach upon its completion will conform to and be in accordance with all specifications adopted under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 23-73; Code 2002, § 24-113) 
Sec. 24-114. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon completion of the preliminary inspection, if it is determined that the proposed driveway approach will conform to and be in accordance with all specifications adopted under this article and otherwise will meet the requirements of all other laws and regulations, the building inspector shall issue a permit for such construction. The permit shall be issued in the name of the applicant. 
(b)  If it is determined that the proposed construction or emplacement will not be in conformity with this article or the provisions of any other law or regulation, the building inspector shall advise the applicant of any and all changes which will be necessary, and the applicant shall file with the building inspector such amendments to his application as may be necessary to incorporate such changes. 
(c)  If such amendments are sufficient to show the necessary changes, the building inspector shall issue such permit as provided in this section. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued if the proposed construction will be in violation of this article or of any other law or regulation. 
(e)  In order to defray the cost of administering this article, a fee of in an amount as described in the city fee schedule shall be charged for each permit issued. If a curb is cut into, a fee for cutting or removing a curbing exceeding 20 feet shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per foot for each additional foot in excess of 20 feet. Such distances measured in linear feet shall be measured at the outside sidewalk or property line as defined in this article. The fee shall be paid at the office of the building inspector, and no permit shall be issued until such charge has been paid. 
(Code 1986, § 23-74; Code 2002, § 24-114) 
Sec. 24-115. - Duration; renewal. 
    Each permit issued under this division shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of issuance, and the construction of any approach may be commenced under such permit within the six-month period from and after the date of the issuance of the permit. Any such permit may be renewed for an additional six-month period by the payment of an additional fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, to be paid to the building inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 23-81; Code 2002, § 24-115) 
Sec. 24-116. - Covenant of indemnity. 
    The person issued a permit under this division shall execute a covenant indemnifying the city against any and all claims for damages of any kind or nature and against any and all judgments predicated upon such claims which may arise by virtue of the construction of the driveway approach; the storage or emplacement of any equipment, tools or materials incident thereto; and the performance of any and all work incident to such construction. 
(Code 1986, § 23-75; Code 2002, § 24-116) 
Sec. 24-117. - Notice of completion. 
    Upon completion of the driveway approach construction, the permittee shall within seven days deliver to the building inspector written notice of such completion. 
(Code 1986, § 23-76; Code 2002, § 24-117) 
Sec. 24-118. - Certificate of approval. 
(a)  Final inspection. Upon receipt of the notice of completion as provided in section 24-117, the building inspector shall inspect the driveway approach and, if the work conforms to the application and any amendments thereto and to the plans and specifications adopted in this article and to all other laws and regulations, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of approval of the driveway approach. 
(b)  Notice of noncompliance. If the building inspector finds that a driveway approach, when completed, does not conform to the application, any amendments thereto, the plans and specifications adopted in this article or any other provisions of law, he shall give a written notice to the permittee, setting out each item or error of noncompliance, and the permittee shall within ten days remedy all such items or errors. No certificate of approval shall be issued until all items or errors set forth in the notice have been corrected. 
(Code 1986, §§ 23-77, 23-78; Code 2002, § 24-118) 
Sec. 24-119. - Unlawful construction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any permittee, his agent, servant, contractor or employee to construct any driveway approach in any manner not in conformity with the application for the permit, the plans and specifications in this article and the general provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 23-79; Code 2002, § 24-119) 
Sec. 24-120. - Removal of approach. 
    The granting of a permit for the construction of a driveway approach and the issuance of a certificate of approval upon completion thereof shall in no way vest any right in the permittee or in any person having any vested interest in the land to which such approach may run or in any person who may subsequently acquire any interest in such land to permanently retain such approach. The city specifically reserves the right and power to remove such approach or any part thereof if such removal: 
(1)  Is deemed necessary as a matter of public convenience, necessity or safety; 
(2)  Becomes necessary in order to facilitate drainage upon or along any street right-of-way or traveled way; or 
(3)  Becomes necessary in order to widen, change or otherwise improve the traveled way or the right-of-way of any street, alley or other public thoroughfare. 
(Code 1986, § 23-80; Code 2002, § 24-120) 
Secs. 24-121-24-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-146. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. The election by the city to file such charges shall not constitute a waiver on its part to proceed against a bond as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 23-96; Code 2002, § 24-146) 
Sec. 24-147. - Bond. 
    Any person performing any work under this article shall execute to the city a bond or cash in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for each cut, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties; to save the city harmless from any liabilities that may arise in the use of any of the city streets, avenues or alleys; and that he will in all respects comply with the provisions of any permit granted therefor and any regulations of the city relating thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 23-97; Code 2002, § 24-147) 
Sec. 24-148. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Before any permit shall be issued under this article to cut any street, curb, alley or thoroughfare, any person obtaining such permit shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance certifying the issuance of a policy of insurance as provided in this section. 
(b)  The insurance policy shall be issued by an insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in the state and shall provide public liability insurance coverage for each operation required in the cutting of such curb, street, alley or thoroughfare, for the injury or death of any one person, for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident and for property damage in any one accident arising out of such work. Such liability insurance coverage shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The policy shall provide that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of cancellation has been given to the city clerk, and it shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city of any changes therein. 
(d)  The certificate shall be approved by the city manager or designee and endorsed thereon. It shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(e)  The policy shall be made for the use, benefit and protection of the city and for the use, benefit and protection of any person who may suffer injury either to his person or property because of any accident or omission or negligence of any person cutting any street, curb, alley or thoroughfare. If such certificate is approved by the city manager or designee, it shall remain in full force and effect during the life of any permit issued for such work. If, after the approval of the certificate and after the issuance of the permit, the policy is allowed to lapse or is not renewed by the payment of premiums, the city manager may suspend the permit, and the city commission may cancel any permit issued under this article after notice to the permittee and after an opportunity to be heard. The cancellation of any policy shall in no way affect or terminate any liability arising prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(Code 1986, § 23-98; Code 2002, § 24-148) 
Sec. 24-149. - Protection. 
    Every excavation upon the front or side of any lot adjoining any street, avenue or alley or under any sidewalk in the city shall be securely and properly guarded and protected by the person having charge of the excavation so as to prevent the excavation being or becoming dangerous to life or limb. An accident or injury to person or property resulting from any excavation shall be prima facie evidence of neglect to properly and effectively guard such excavation as provided in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 23-7; Code 2002, § 24-149) 
Secs. 24-150-24-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 

Sec. 24-176. - Applicability of division. 
    No person shall cut any of the streets, avenues or alleys in the city for the purpose of laying pipes for water, gas or other connection or cut or otherwise injure the surface of any streets, avenues or alleys for any purpose whatever, except in strict compliance with the conditions of this division authorizing such cutting. 
(Code 1986, § 23-111; Code 2002, § 24-176) 
Sec. 24-177. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall cut or cause to be cut any street, avenue or alley within the city without first obtaining from the building inspector a permit authorizing such cut. The term "cut" shall include any type of cutting, digging or excavating which disturbs the surface of any street, avenue or alley within the city, whether such operations are for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits, wires or cables under such streets, avenues or alleys or for any other purpose. 
(b)  Fees. Any person desiring to make a cut, as defined in this section, shall make application to the building inspector for a permit. Before any such permit is issued, the applicant shall post with the city clerk a bond as provided in section 24-147 and shall also submit to the city clerk a certificate of insurance as required in section 24-148. The applicant shall pay to the building inspector a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for the permit before it is issued. 
(Code 1986, §§ 23-112, 23-113; Code 2002, § 24-177) 
Sec. 24-178. - Specifications for cuts. 
    Every person who makes a cut in any street, avenue or alley, as provided in this article, shall make such cuts and permanently repair the cuts according to that certain specification entitled "Paving Cuts and Permanent Repairs" prepared by the city department of planning and engineering, dated October 12, 1982, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. 1133NS, on file in the city clerk's office, and made a part of this article by reference. The building inspector shall make periodic inspections of such cuts and repairs. All such cuts shall be permanently repaired according to the specifications with due diligence. When such permanent repairs have been made according to the specifications, the person holding the permit shall notify the building inspector, who shall make a final inspection. Upon his certification that such repairs have been made according to the specifications, the bond shall be released. 
(Code 1986, § 23-114; Code 2002, § 24-178) 
Sec. 24-179. - Delay; interruption. 
    All work in any excavation under this division shall be done without delay or interruption, save by an act of God or for cause satisfactory to the building inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 23-115; Code 2002, § 24-179) 
Secs. 24-180-24-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 24-206. - Enforcement. 
    The city manager shall designate such city official as in the exercise of his discretion he shall approve to assign all house and lot numbers. It shall be the duty of such officer to assign numbers to every lot, house or premises as provided in this article and to require the numbers to be established and maintained in a conspicuous place on the front of the lot, house or premises in a substantial and approved manner. 
(Code 1986, § 23-131; Code 2002, § 24-206) 
Sec. 24-207. - Required. 
    Every owner of a building fronting on any street, avenue or public way in the city, when notified by the duly authorized official of the proper number assigned to such building, shall cause such number to be placed in a conspicuous place in the front of such building in a desirable and substantial way. The number shall be not less than two inches high and shall be approved by the duly authorized city official in all respects. 
(Code 1986, § 23-133; Code 2002, § 24-207) 
Sec. 24-208. - Baseline streets. 
    For the purpose of this article, Main Street shall be considered a baseline street for the purpose of numbering all lots fronting on streets running north and south, and Broadway Avenue shall be considered a baseline street for the purpose of numbering all lots fronting on streets running east and west. 
(Code 1986, § 23-134; Code 2002, § 24-208) 
Sec. 24-209. - Block numbers. 
    All blocks shall be numbered by the hundred in consecutive order beginning from the baseline street, respectively, and shall also have the proper word attached to indicate the direction from the baseline street. All lots fronting south shall have even numbers, and all lots fronting north shall have odd numbers; all lots fronting east shall have even numbers, and all lots fronting west shall have odd numbers. 
(Code 1986, § 23-135; Code 2002, § 24-209) 
Sec. 24-210. - Lot numbers. 
(a)  For the greater convenience in locating residences, business houses and other real property and the occupants therein, all lots in the city containing 25-foot fronts and all lots containing more than 25-foot fronts shall be reckoned on a basis of 25 feet for the purpose of numbering. However, in each addition to the city where the front footage of the lots in such addition are in excess of 25 feet, with restrictions that only one house can be built on a lot, each house shall be numbered in consecutive order, regardless of the width of the lot. 
(b)  The numbering of buildings in each block shall be determined by beginning at the corner of the block nearest its baseline street and assigning to such corner lot the block number for the even-numbered lot and the block number increased by one for the odd-numbered lot. Each succeeding number in each respective block shall be the next highest successive number beginning from the corner nearest the baseline street, provided that all numbers in any block shall be either even or odd numbers according to the direction of frontage of the block. In this manner a system of alternating numbers, either even or odd as the case may be, shall be established for any respective block. For fractional lots or lots less than 25 feet, fractional numbers shall be employed on the number assigned for the entire 25 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 23-136; Code 2002, § 24-210) 
Sec. 24-211. - Removing or damaging numbers. 
    No person shall remove, injure, damage or in any manner commit any act to impair the usefulness of any duly established house, lot or premises number without the express direction and authority of the duly authorized city official. 
(Code 1986, § 23-132; Code 2002, § 24-211) 
Secs. 24-212-24-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OBSTRUCTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Encroachments and obstructions in streets, 11 O.S. § 36-107; obstructing roads generally, 69 O.S. § 1208 et seq. 

Sec. 24-241. - Prohibited generally. 
(a)  No person shall obstruct or encumber, by any fence, building, box, stand, structure or in any other manner, any of the highways, streets, alleys, roads or crosswalks within the city. 
(b)  No person shall deposit within the city any obstacle upon any sidewalk which will in any way obstruct the free passage of pedestrians and which will in any way interfere with the use of such sidewalk. 
(Code 1986, § 23-151; Code 2002, § 24-241) 
Sec. 24-242. - Drains, gutters and driveway crossings. 
    No person shall in any manner obstruct any drainage of any of the city streets or alleys. All gutters, curbs and driveway crossings shall be kept open in such a way that the watercourse shall in no way be obstructed. All driveways across drains or curblines shall be level and in line with the drainage. 
(Code 1986, § 23-152; Code 2002, § 24-242) 
Sec. 24-243. - Parades, demonstrations, concerts, exhibitions or assemblies. 
(a)  No person shall maintain or exhibit any parade, demonstration, circus, show or animal show or give any concert or show for profit or for advertising upon any city street, alley or avenue, unless permission is granted by the city manager and expressly authorizes such use of the streets, alleys or avenues or unless approved by the city commission. 
(b)  No person shall obstruct any sidewalk, passage, street, alley, walk or any public grounds in the city by congregating or in any way assembling therein or thereon. 
(Code 1986, § 23-153; Code 2002, § 24-243) 
Sec. 24-244. - Sale, advertisement or placement of merchandise. 
(a)  No person shall permit any merchandise, boxes or any other obstructions to remain in or on any of the city sidewalks for any length of time whatsoever or use any portion of the sidewalk for the sale and advertising of any merchandise of any character whatsoever; provided, however, this shall not apply during special events and celebrations in which a substantial number of businesses participate. This subsection does not apply to merchants receiving goods for the purpose of immediately unpacking the goods and placing such goods in buildings, and this subsection does not apply to the placing of objects on the sidewalks that are for the purpose of beautifying the downtown area, which placement of objects has been approved by the city commission. 
(b)  No person shall use any portion of the street for the sale or advertising of any merchandise of any kind or character whatsoever, except as provided by this Code or any other city ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 23-154; Code 2002, § 24-244) 
Chapter 25 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Constitution reference- State constitution references: Revenue and taxation, OK Const. Art. 10. 
State Law reference- Tax exemption for new manufacturing establishments and public utilities, 11 O.S. § 17-112; municipal taxation generally, 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1-25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-26. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Shawnee Sales Tax Ordinance." 
(Code 1986, § 24-16; Code 2002, § 25-26) 
Sec. 25-27. - Definitions. 
(a)  The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the state Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1352, as amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and made part of this article. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tax collector means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state duly designated, according to law or according to contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax levied by this article. 
(Code 1986, §§ 24-18, 24-19; Code 2002, § 25-27) 
Sec. 25-28. - Purpose. 
    It is declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the city government. 
(Code 1986, § 24-17; Code 2002, § 25-28) 
Sec. 25-29. - Article cumulative. 
    The sections of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 24-21; Code 2002, § 25-29) 
Sec. 25-30. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-83(b); Code 2002, § 25-30) 
Sec. 25-31. - Amendments. 
    The people of the city, by their approval of this article at the election described in the ordinance from which this section is derived, authorize the city commission, by ordinances duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes in or additions to the method and manner of the administration and enforcement of this article as may be necessary or proper to ensure efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax provided in this article shall not be changed without the approval of the qualified city electors, as provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 24-22; Code 2002, § 25-31) 
Sec. 25-32. - Ratification of state permits. 
    All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the state Sales Tax Code are, for the purposes of this article, ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 24-23; Code 2002, § 25-32) 
Sec. 25-33. - Priority of tax; collection by suit. 
    The taxes, penalties and interest due under this article shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as is any other debt. 
(Code 1986, § 24-24; Code 2002, § 25-33) 
Sec. 25-34. - Classification of taxpayers. 
    For the purposes of this article, the classification of taxpayers shall be as prescribed by state law for the purposes of the state Sales Tax Code. 
(Code 1986, § 24-25; Code 2002, § 25-34) 
Sec. 25-35. - Failure or refusal to pay; fraudulent returns. 
    The willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make the reports and remittances required by this article or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be an offense, and, upon conviction, the offending taxpayer shall be subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs, in addition to all civil penalties provided by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-26; Code 2002, § 25-35) 
Sec. 25-36. - Confidentiality of records. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared and, to protect such confidentiality, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 and each subsection thereof is adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of the city sales tax, as if set forth in full in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-27; Code 2002, § 25-36) 
Secs. 25-37-25-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES; PROCEDURES 

Sec. 25-66. - Levied; enumeration of sales subject to tax. 
(a)  There is levied an excise tax of three percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the sales tax law of the state, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Tangible personal property; 
(2)  Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam or any other utility or public service, except water; 
(3)  Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab companies, Pullman car companies, airlines and all other means of transportation for hire; 
(4)  Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users, including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This shall include all services and rental charges having any relation to the transmission of any message; 
(5)  Printing or printed matter of all kinds and the service of printing or overprinting; 
(6)  Service of furnishing rooms by hotels, apartment hotels, public roominghouses and public lodginghouses and tourist camps; 
(7)  Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and parking lots; 
(8)  Foods, confections and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels, restaurants or other dispensers for immediate consumption upon the premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption elsewhere; 
(9)  Advertising of all kinds, including any device used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising device used for advertising purposes and the servicing device, except as provided by section 25-96(15); and 
(10)  Dues or fees to clubs and the sale of tickets or admission to places of amusement and to athletic, entertainment and recreational events or dues or fees for the privilege of having access to or the use of amusement, entertainment, athletic or recreational facilities, including free or complimentary passes, tickets, dues or fees, which are declared to have a value equivalent to the sale price of tickets, passes, admissions, fees or dues of similar character. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, sales of service and tangible personal property made for the purpose of developing real estate, even when such real estate is intended for resale as real property, are declared to be sales to consumers or users. Sales of service and tangible personal property, including materials, supplies and equipment made to contractors who use such materials in the performance of any contract, are declared to be sales to consumers or users and not sales for resale. Sales of tangible personal property to persons who are primarily engaged in selling their services shall be deemed sales to consumers or users and, therefore, taxable. Sales of tangible personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salespersons who do not have established places of business shall also be deemed to be sales to consumers or users and, therefore, taxable. 
(c)  A sale shall include the sale, preparation or service of ice or nonalcoholic beverages that are sold, prepared or served for the purpose of being mixed with alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where such sale, preparation or service occurs. 
(Code 1986, § 24-41; Code 2002, § 25-66) 
Sec. 25-67. - Time and manner of payment. 
    The tax levied under this article shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state sales tax law. 
(Code 1986, § 24-42; Code 2002, § 25-67) 
Sec. 25-68. - Payment to tax collector. 
    The tax levied by this article shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form and manner provided for payment of the state sales tax under the state sales tax law. 
(Code 1986, § 24-43; Code 2002, § 25-68) 
Sec. 25-69. - Collection by vendor. 
(a)  Duty generally. The tax levied under this article shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor, and it shall be the duty of every vendor in the city to collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this article or an amount equal, as nearly as possible or practicable, to the average equivalent thereof. 
(b)  Computation and recoverability of debt. Vendors shall add the tax imposed under this article or the average equivalent thereof to the sales price or charge, and, when added, such tax shall constitute part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the vendor until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(c)  Violations. A vendor who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this article or who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with this article or who remits or rebates to a consumer or user, directly or indirectly, by whatever means, all or any part of the tax levied by this article or who makes, in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which implies that he is absorbing the tax or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax or in any manner whatever shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 24-44; Code 2002, § 25-69) 
State Law reference- Payment by consumer, 68 O.S. § 1361. 
Sec. 25-70. - Returns and remittances; discount. 
    Returns and remittances of the tax levied by this article and collected shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as are prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state Sales Tax Code, and remittances of tax collected under this article shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by such code for the collection of state sales taxes. 
(Code 1986, § 24-45; Code 2002, § 25-70) 
State Law reference- Remittance of tax, 68 O.S. § 1362. 
Sec. 25-71. - Erroneous payments. 
    Refunds of erroneous payments of the city sales tax levied by this article may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment, in the same manner and procedure and under the same limitations of time as are provided for the administration of the state sales tax, as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227 and, to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-46; Code 2002, § 25-71) 
Secs. 25-72-25-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Exemptions, 68 O.S. § 1355 et seq. 

Sec. 25-96. - Enumeration. 
    There are specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the state sales tax law, derived from but not restricted to the following sources: 
(1)  Sales of such nonintoxicating beverages as are taxed by state law; 
(2)  Sales of cigarettes and such tobacco products as are taxed by state law; 
(3)  Sales of raw products from farms, orchards or gardens, where such sales are made by the producers of such raw products directly to the consumers or users; gross receipts or gross proceeds derived from the sale of livestock, poultry, poultry products and dairy products by the producers. Exemptions granted by this subsection shall not apply when such articles are sold, even by the producer thereof, at or from an established business place, not on a farm, neither shall this exemption apply unless such articles are produced or grown within the state. This subsection is intended to exempt the sale by livestock producers of livestock sold at special livestock sales. This subsection is further intended to exempt the sale of dairy products when sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all of the cows from which the dairy products he sells are produced. This subsection shall not be construed to exempt sales of dairy products by any other business, neither shall this subsection be construed to exempt sales by florists, nurserymen and chicken hatcheries; 
(4)  Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided that such societies or organizations operate under what is commonly termed "the lodge plan or system" and provided that such societies or organizations do not operate for a profit which inures to the benefit of any member thereof, to the exclusion of other members; 
(5)  Sales of tangible personal property or services to or by churches, except where such organizations may be engaged in business for profit or savings competing with other persons engaged in the same or a similar business; 
(6)  Gross receipts and gross proceeds derived from the transportation of school children to and from schools in motor and other vehicles; 
(7)  Transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not exceed $0.15 or local transportation of persons within the corporate limits of cities and towns, except by taxicabs; 
(8)  Sales of food in public, common, high school or college cafeterias and lunchrooms, operated primarily for teachers and pupils, not for the public, and not operated for profit; 
(9)  Carrier sales made directly to consumers or users of newspapers or any other periodicals where any individual transaction does not exceed $0.25; 
(10)  Sales to the federal government, the state or any of its political subdivisions; 
(11)  Sales of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline excise tax or special fuels tax has been paid to the state; 
(12)  Sales of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other products subject to gross production tax under the provisions of state laws. This exemption shall not apply when such products are sold to a consumer or user for consumption or use, except when used for injection into the earth for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the production of oil or gas. This subsection shall not be construed as increasing or repealing the gross production tax levied by state laws; 
(13)  Sales of motor vehicles and attached optional equipment and accessories, on which sales the state motor vehicle excise tax has been paid; 
(14)  Sales by county, district or state fairs; 
(15)  Sales of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and billboard advertising service; 
(16)  Sales for resale to persons regularly engaged in the business of reselling the articles purchased, within or without the state, provided that such sales to residents of the state are made to persons to whom sales tax permits have been issued as provided by this article. This exemption shall not apply to the sales of articles made to persons holding permits when such persons purchase items for their use, which they are not regularly engaged in the business of reselling, neither shall this exemption apply to sales of tangible personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other salespersons who do not have sales tax permits or established places of business; 
(17)  Goods, wares, merchandise and property sold for use in manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing for sale shall be classified as having been sold for the purposes of resale or the subject matter of resale only if: 
a.  Such goods, wares, merchandise or property is purchased for the purpose of being manufactured into a finished article and it becomes a recognizable, integral part of the manufactured, compounded, processed, assembled or prepared product; or 
b.  Such merchandise is consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling or preparing products for resale; 
(18)  Sales of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the state and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the state, provided that this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into and is directly used in the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under this article. The term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations and generally recognized as such; 
(19)  Sales of tangible personal property manufactured in the state, when sold by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for immediate and exclusive use in another state; 
(20)  Sale of interest in tangible personal property to a partner or other person who, after such sale, owns a joint interest in such tangible personal property, where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on such tangible personal property; 
(21)  Sales of containers when sold to a person regularly engaged in the business of reselling empty or filled containers or when a person purchases such containers for the purpose of packaging raw products of farms, gardens or orchards for resale to the consumer or processor, provided that this exemption shall not apply to the sale of containers used more than once and which are ordinarily known as returnable containers, unless a tax under this article is collected and paid to the tax commission with respect to every transfer of title or possession of such returnable container if made to any consumer or user within the state, nor shall it apply to the sale of labels or other materials delivered along with items sold, but which are not absolutely essential to the sale of the sold merchandise; 
(22)  Sales of tangible personal property or services to the council organization or similar state supervisory organization of the Boy Scouts of America, Girls Scouts of U.S.A. and the Campfire Girls; 
(23)  The gross proceeds from the sale of baby chickens, turkey poults and starter pullets used in the commercial production of chickens, turkeys and eggs, provided that the purchaser certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the seller, that the pullets will be used primarily for egg production; and 
(24)  Exemptions of poultry and livestock feed, agricultural fertilizers and farm machinery, as prescribed by the state sales tax code shall be equally applicable as exemptions from the tax levied in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-61; Code 2002, § 25-96) 
Sec. 25-97. - Corporate transfers. 
(a)  There is specifically exempted from the tax levied by this article the transfer of tangible personal property exempted from the state sales tax law, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  From one corporation to another, pursuant to a reorganization. As used in this subsection, the term "reorganization" means: 
a.  A statutory merger or consolidation; or 
b.  The acquisition, by a corporation, of substantially all the properties of another corporation when the consideration is solely all or part of the voting stock of the acquiring corporation or of its parent or a subsidiary corporation; 
(2)  In relation to the cessation, dissolution or liquidation of a corporation, only when there is a distribution in kind to the shareholders of the property of such corporation; 
(3)  To a corporation for the purpose of the organization of such corporation, where the former owners of the property transferred are, immediately after the transfer, in control of the corporation and the stock or securities received by each such former owner is substantially in proportion to this interest in the property prior to the transfer; 
(4)  To a partnership, in the organization of such partnership, if the former owners of the property transferred are, immediately after the transfer, members of such partnership and the interest in the property prior to the transfer; and 
(5)  From a partnership to the members thereof, when made in kind in the dissolution of such partnership. 
(b)  Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible personal property where the state sales or use tax has previously been paid on such tangible personal property. 
(Code 1986, § 24-62; Code 2002, § 25-97) 
State Law reference- Corporations, partnerships, 68 O.S. § 1360. 
Sec. 25-98. - Fertilizer. 
    In addition to all other exemptions allowed by this article, the sales of agricultural fertilizer to persons regularly engaged, for profit, in the business of farming and/or ranching, which such sales are exempt from state sales taxes under 68 O.S. § 1358(A), shall be exempt from the city sales tax levied by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-63; Code 2002, § 25-98) 
Sec. 25-99. - Farm machinery. 
    In addition to other transactions exempt from the sales tax levied under this article, there shall also be exempt from such tax the gross proceeds from the sale of farm machinery to be used directly on a farm or ranch in the production, cultivation, planting, sowing, harvesting, processing, spraying, preservation or irrigation of any livestock, poultry or agricultural or dairy products produced from such lands. Each purchaser of farm machinery must certify, in writing, on the copy of the invoice or sales ticket to be retained by the seller, that he is engaged in farming or ranching and that the farm machinery will be used only in farming or ranching. 
(Code 1986, § 24-64; Code 2002, § 25-99) 
State Law reference- Sale of farm machinery, etc., 68 O.S. § 1358(A)(6). 
Secs. 25-100-25-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DELINQUENCY 

Sec. 25-126. - Interest and penalties levied. 
    68 O.S. § 217 is adopted and made part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rate and in the amounts therein specified are levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax at the time and in the manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for five days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-76; Code 2002, § 25-126) 
Sec. 25-127. - Waiver of interest and penalties. 
    The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing because of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city sales tax levied in this article may be waived or remitted in the manner provided for such waiver or remittance in the administration of the state sales tax in 68 O.S. § 220, and, to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are adopted by reference and made part of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-77; Code 2002, § 25-127) 
State Law reference- Collection of delinquent taxes, 68 O.S. § 1369. 
Sec. 25-128. - Failure to file; fraudulent returns; penalties. 
    In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be subject to punishment in an amount as described in the city fee schedule 
(Code 2002, § 25-128; Ord. No. 2525NS, § 1, 12-2-2013) 
Secs. 25-129-25-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SALES TAX ORDINANCE OF 2018 

Sec. 25-136. - Citations and codification. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the City of Shawnee Sales Tax Ordinance of 2018. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 1, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-137. - Tax imposed. 
    There is hereby imposed an excise tax of 0.5 percent (in addition to any and all other excise taxes now in force) to be levied upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 2, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-138. - Purpose of revenues. 
    It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this division to provide revenues to be used for the funding of capital expenditures, all for the use and benefit of the city and any public trust having the city as beneficiary thereof and/or for the payment of debt service in connection with obligations heretofore issued or to be issued to finance or refinance said capital expenditures and related costs. Said 0.5 percent excise tax shall be allocated for capital expenditures in the following manner: 
(a)  0.125 percent excise tax shall be expended for police, fire, and emergency management capital expenditures; 
(b)  0.125 percent excise tax shall be expended for street and road project capital expenditures; and 
(c)  0.25 percent excise tax shall be expended for public parks and public facilities capital expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 3, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-139. - Effective date and termination date. 
    The provisions of this division and the collection of the excise tax referenced herein shall become effective on and after October 1, 2018, subject to approval by a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law. The provisions of this division and the collection of the excise tax referenced herein shall terminate and shall cease to be levied after September 30, 2028. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 4, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-140. - No repeal of tax. 
    This division and the excise tax levied pursuant hereto shall not be repealed by the city commission of the city or by referendum of the registered qualified voters of the city in the event the proceeds of the referenced excise tax are being used or have been pledged by the city or any public trust having the city as beneficiary for the purpose of paying debt service on obligations issued by the city or any public trust having the city as beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 5, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-141. - Subsisting state permits. 
    All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purposes of this division, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 6, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-142. - Payment of tax. 
    The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state tax law of the State of Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 7, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-143. - This tax in addition to taxes currently levied; administrative procedures. 
    The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise taxes levied or assessed by the city pursuant to existing ordinances (the "prior ordinances"); provided, however, that those provisions of said prior ordinances relating to definitions; tax collector defined; classification of taxpayers; subsisting state permits; the portion of tax rate-sales subject to tax, pertaining to sales subject to tax (not rate of tax); the provisions of said prior ordinances regarding exemptions and other exempt transfers; the provisions of said prior ordinances regarding tax due when-returns-records; the portion of said prior ordinances regarding tax constituting debt; vendor's duty to collect tax; returns and remittances-discounts; interest and penalties-delinquency; waiver of interest and penalties; erroneous payments-claim for refund; fraudulent returns; and records confidential shall apply to the excise tax levied and assessed by this division. For purposes of this division, references in prior ordinances, to specific provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes shall be deemed to be references to said statutory provisions, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 8, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-144. - Amendments. 
    The people of the City of Shawnee, Oklahoma, by their approval of the ordinance from which this division is derived, at the election hereinabove provided for, hereby authorize the city by ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this division as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness or in order to make the same consistent with the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, as amended, except that the rate of the tax herein provided for shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 9, 4-2-2018) 
Sec. 25-145. - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2633NS, § 10, 4-2-2018) 
Secs. 25-146-25-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE TAX[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Use tax, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-156. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Shawnee Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Code 1986, § 24-81; Code 2002, § 25-156) 
Sec. 25-157. - Definitions. 
    The definitions of words, terms and phrases ordained in the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq., are adopted by reference and made a part of this article. In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tax collector means the department of the city or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied in this article. 
    Transaction means sale. 
(Code 1986, § 24-84; Code 2002, § 25-157) 
Sec. 25-158. - Purpose. 
    It is declared to be the purpose of this article to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the city government, and any and all revenues derived under this article may be expended by the city commission for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. 
(Code 1986, § 24-82; Code 2002, § 25-158) 
Sec. 25-159. - Article cumulative; severability. 
(a)  The sections of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the city ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-83; Code 2002, § 25-159) 
Sec. 25-160. - Classification of taxpayers. 
    For the purpose of this article, the classification of taxpayers under this article shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state use tax code. 
(Code 1986, § 24-85; Code 2002, § 25-160) 
Sec. 25-161. - Ratification of state permits. 
    All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission pursuant to the state use tax code are for the purpose of this article ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 24-86; Code 2002, § 25-161) 
Sec. 25-162. - Failure or refusal to pay; fraudulent returns. 
    In addition to all civil penalties provided by this article, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances required in this article or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be an offense, and, upon conviction, the offending taxpayer shall be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule and costs. Each day of noncompliance with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 24-87; Code 2002, § 25-162) 
Sec. 25-163. - Confidentiality of records. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the confidentiality of records and files the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 of the state use tax code and each subsection thereof are adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city use tax as if set forth in full in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 24-88; Code 2002, § 25-163) 
Secs. 25-164-25-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES; PROCEDURES 

Sec. 25-191. - Levied; persons subject to tax. 
    There is levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible personal property purchased or brought into this city an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming within the city of such property at the rate of three percent of the purchase price of such property. The tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the city, tangible personal property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied under this article shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside this state, provided that the tax levied shall not be levied against tangible personal property intended solely for use outside the city but which is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city or which is temporarily retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized in this article may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services, provided that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. 
(Code 1986, § 24-91; Code 2002, § 25-191) 
Sec. 25-192. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The use of an article of tangible personal property brought into the city by a nonresident individual visiting in this city for such individual's personal use or enjoyment while within the city. 
(2)  The use of tangible personal property purchased for resale before being used. 
(3)  The use of any article of tangible personal property on which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the state use tax code and this article, has been paid by the person using such tangible personal property in any other state or municipality of the United States. If any article of tangible personal property has already been subjected to a tax by this state or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the state use tax code and this article, this article shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the state use tax code and this article and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. However, no credit shall be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality if that state or municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in this state and the city. 
(4)  The use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons for the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the city. This exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into and is directly used in the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the city sales tax code in article II of this chapter. The term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations and generally recognized as such. 
(5)  The use of tangible personal property not specifically exempted from taxation under the city sales tax code in article II of this chapter. 
(6)  The use of any article of tangible personal property brought into the city by an individual with intent to become a resident of this city where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or enjoyment. 
(7)  The use of any article of tangible personal property used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads. 
(8)  Livestock purchased outside this state and brought into this city for feeding or breeding purposes and which is later resold. 
(Code 1986, § 24-92; Code 2002, § 25-192) 
Sec. 25-193. - Time and manner of payment. 
    The tax levied by this article is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the state use tax code. 
(Code 1986, § 24-93; Code 2002, § 25-193) 
Sec. 25-194. - Collection of tax by retailer or vendor. 
    Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without this state and making sales of tangible personal property from a place of business outside this state for use in this city shall, at the time of making such sales, collect the use tax levied by this article from the purchaser and shall give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the names and addresses of all his agents operating in this city and the location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in this city. 
(Code 1986, § 24-95; Code 2002, § 25-194) 
Sec. 25-195. - Priority of tax; collection by suit. 
    Such taxes, penalty and interest due under this article shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1986, § 24-94; Code 2002, § 25-195) 
Sec. 25-196. - Retailer or vendor not maintaining place of business within state or both within and without state. 
(a)  Issuance of permit to collect tax. The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax levied in this article by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible personal property for use in this city and by the out-of-state place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without this state and making sales of tangible personal property at such out-of-state place of business for use in this city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the tax commission, in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible personal property sold to his knowledge for use within this city. Such authority and permit may be cancelled when at any time the tax commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in this city. However, when such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within this city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable city sales tax at the point of delivery, and the tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. 
(b)  Revocation of permit. Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state or both within and without this state and authorized to collect the tax levied in this article fails to comply with any of the sections of this article or the state use tax code or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in 68 O.S. § 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after notice and hearing, cancel such corporation's license to do business in this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the obligations under this article, the state use tax code or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission. 
(Code 1986, §§ 24-96, 24-97; Code 2002, § 25-196) 
Sec. 25-197. - Returns and remittances; discount. 
    Returns and remittances of the tax levied and collected under this article shall be made to the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state use tax code, and remittances of such tax collected shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by such code for the collection of state use taxes. 
(Code 1986, § 24-98; Code 2002, § 25-197) 
Sec. 25-198. - Interest and penalties for delinquency. 
    The provisions of 68 O.S. § 217 are adopted and made a part of this article, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this article. The failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this article shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-99; Code 2002, § 25-198) 
Sec. 25-199. - Waiver of interest and penalties. 
    The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing because of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the city use tax levied in this article may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for such waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 220 are adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-100; Code 2002, § 25-199) 
Sec. 25-200. - Erroneous payments. 
    Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax levied in this article may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure and under the same limitations of time as provided for administration of the state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purpose of this section the applicable provisions of 68 O.S. § 227 are adopted by reference and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-101; Code 2002, § 25-200) 
Secs. 25-201-25-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPANCY SURCHARGE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority, 68 O.S. § 2701. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-226. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Shawnee Occupancy Surcharge Ordinance of 2004," and is referred to herein as "this article." 
(Code 1986, § 24-120; Ord. No. 2156NS, § 1, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 25-227. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hotel or motel means any building, structure, trailer or other facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which three or more rooms are used for the accommodation of transient guests, whether such rooms are in one or several structures, and recreational vehicle spaces. The term includes hotels; apartment hotels; motels; tourist homes, houses or courts; lodginghouses; bed and breakfast inns; inns; roominghouses; trailer houses; trailer motels; apartments and sleeping rooms not occupied by permanent residents; recreational vehicle spaces; and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping accommodations or space are furnished for a consideration. The term does not include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, university dormitories or other educational or charitable institutions. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession of or the right to use or possess any room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
    Occupant means a person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement. 
    Operator means any person operating a hotel in this city, including, but not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
    Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
    Room means any room of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out for use or possessed for any purpose other than a place of assembly. As used in this definition, the term "place of assembly" means a room or space which is not capable of being occupied for lodging purposes and which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and includes dancehalls; cabarets; nightclubs; restaurants; any room or space for public or private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings; lodge and meeting halls or rooms; skating rinks; gymnasiums; swimming pools; billiards, bowling and table tennis rooms; halls or rooms used for public or private catering purposes; funeral parlors; markets; recreational rooms; concert halls; broadcasting studios; and all other places of similar type of occupancy. 
    Surcharge means the surcharge levied pursuant to this article. 
    Treasurer means the city treasurer-finance director. 
(Code 1986, § 24-123; Code 2002, § 25-227) 
Sec. 25-228. - Effective date; termination. 
    This article shall become and be effective on or after September 1, 2004, subject to the approval of the registered voters of the city voting on this article in the manner prescribed by law. Upon approval by the voters as required in this section, this article shall remain in effect and not be replaced unless repealed by a majority of registered voters of the city voting to repeal this article in the manner as required by its approval. 
(Code 1986, § 24-122; Ord. No. 2156NS, § 2, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 25-229. - Amendments. 
    The people of the city, by their approval of this article (Ordinance No. 2156NS and Ordinance No. 1681NS, as amended) at the election provided in section 25-228, authorize the city commission, by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administering and enforcing this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the surcharge provided in this article shall not be changed without approval by the qualified city voters, as provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 24-145; Ord. No. 2156NS, § 3, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 25-230. - Article cumulative. 
    The sections of this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 24-146; Code 2002, § 25-230) 
Sec. 25-231. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-147; Code 2002, § 25-231) 
Sec. 25-232. - Ratification of state permits. 
    All valid and subsisting permits to do business by the state tax commission pursuant to the state Sales Tax Code are, for the purposes of this article, ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 24-121; Code 2002, § 25-232) 
Sec. 25-233. - Powers of treasurer. 
    In addition to all other powers granted to the treasurer, under this article the treasurer is authorized and empowered to: 
(1)  Make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the collection of surcharges pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Extend for cause shown the time for filing any return for a period not exceeding 60 days and, for cause shown, to waive, remit or reduce penalties or interest. 
(3)  Delegate his functions under this article to an assistant or other city employee. 
(4)  Assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the surcharges imposed by this article. 
(5)  Prescribe methods for determining the surchargeable and nonsurchargeable rents. 
(Code 1986, § 24-139; Code 2002, § 25-233) 
Sec. 25-234. - Administration of oaths and compelling testimony. 
    The treasurer, or his designated representative, shall have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of their powers and duties under this article. The treasurer shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of his duties hereunder and all the enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto. 
(Code 2002, § 25-233.1; Ord. No. 2207NS, § 1, 6-20-2005) 
Sec. 25-235. - Use of funds. 
    Funds collected pursuant to this article shall be set aside and used exclusively for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  Encouraging, promoting and fostering visitor and tourism conventions, conferences and tourism development in the city. 
(2)  Solicitation of visitor attractions, events, tourism, conferences, conventions and meetings in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 24-124; Code 2002, § 25-234) 
Sec. 25-236. - Notice. 
    Any notice provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States mail addressed to the last known address of the operator. 
(Code 1986, § 24-137; Code 2002, § 25-235) 
Sec. 25-237. - Retention of money for administration. 
    One percent of the gross receipts derived from surcharges collected pursuant to this article shall be retained by the office of the treasurer for the purpose of administering and collecting the surcharge. 
(Code 1986, § 24-141; Code 2002, § 25-236) 
Sec. 25-238. - Remedies exclusive. 
    The remedies provided in this article shall be exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of surcharge liability imposed by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-138; Code 2002, § 25-237) 
Sec. 25-239. - Payment of legal fees. 
    If a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction is caused to be filed, either on behalf of or against the city, and such cause is the direct result of the conditions, stipulations or requirements set forth in this article, an amount necessary to pay all legal fees incurred by the city, as well as fines or penalties imposed against it, shall be set aside from the monies authorized to be collected in payment thereof, regardless of whether such cause was for the purpose of enforcing or defending this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-148; Code 2002, § 25-238) 
Sec. 25-240. - Confidentiality of records. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the surcharge under this article is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the confidentiality of records and files the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 of the state Sales Tax Code and each subsection thereof are adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of this article as if set forth in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-143; Code 2002, § 25-239) 
Secs. 25-241-25-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PAYMENT AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 25-266. - Levied. 
    There is levied an occupancy surcharge of five percent upon the gross receipts from all occupancy of hotel and motel rooms, or $1.00 per occupied room per night for said occupancy, whichever is greater, within the city, except that the surcharge shall not be assessed where an occupant rents the room for a period in excess of 30 days. This surcharge shall be in addition to any existing sales taxes imposed by the city or the state. 
(Code 1986, § 24-125; Ord. No. 2156NS, § 4, 5-17-2004) 
Sec. 25-267. - Assessment and determination. 
    If a return required by this article is not filed or if a return when filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of surcharge due shall be assessed by the treasurer from 
such information as may be obtainable, and, if necessary, the surcharge may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number of employees or other factors. Written notice of such assessment shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the surcharge. The assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine the surcharge unless the person against whom it is assessed, within 90 days after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing to the city commission for a hearing or unless the treasurer, upon his own initiative, shall reassess the surcharge. After the hearing, the city commission shall give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the surcharge is assessed, and such determination shall be final. 
(Code 1986, § 24-135; Code 2002, § 25-267) 
Sec. 25-268. - Registration certificates; certificates of authority. 
    For the purposes of this article, every operator shall file with the treasurer a registration certificate in a form prescribed by the treasurer. For an operator commencing business or opening a new hotel, the registration certificate shall be filed within three days after such commencement or opening. The treasurer shall, within five days after the filing of such certificate, issue without charge to each operator a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the surcharge from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the treasurer upon the cessation of business at the hotel or upon its sale or transfer. 
(Code 1986, § 24-140; Code 2002, § 25-268) 
Sec. 25-269. - Exemptions. 
    Officers, agents, representatives or employees of any government, corporation, organization or association that is legally exempted from state sales taxation or city sales taxation and whose occupancy of the room is required in connection with the official business or affairs of such government, corporation, organization or association shall be exempt from the surcharge levied by this article. Any persons or groups renting rooms directly related to an organized religious function shall also be exempt. 
(Code 1986, § 24-126; Code 2002, § 25-269) 
Sec. 25-270. - Proof of exemption required. 
    Any person claiming to be exempt from the surcharge pursuant to section 25-269 shall display proof of exemption and a tax identification number certifying that the corporation, organization or association with which he is affiliated is exempt from the surcharge. 
(Code 1986, § 24-127; Code 2002, § 25-270) 
Sec. 25-271. - Designation on statements or receipts. 
    The operator shall separately designate, charge, and show all surcharges levied under this article on all bills, statements, receipts or any other evidence of charges or payment of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. 
(Code 1986, § 24-128; Code 2002, § 25-271) 
Sec. 25-272. - Operator's responsibility for collection. 
    The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the surcharge levied under this article from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the surcharge. 
(Code 1986, § 24-129; Code 2002, § 25-272) 
Sec. 25-273. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every operator required to make a return and pay any surcharge under this article to keep and preserve suitable records of the gross daily rentals together with other pertinent records and documents which may be necessary to determine the amount of surcharge due and such other records as will substantiate and prove the accuracy of such returns. All records shall remain in the city and shall be preserved for a period of three years, unless the treasurer, in writing, has authorized their destruction or disposal at an earlier date, and the records shall be open to examination at any time by the treasurer or by any of his duly authorized agents. The burden of proving that a sale was not a surchargeable sale shall be upon the operator who makes the sale. 
(Code 1986, § 24-131; Code 2002, § 25-274) 
Sec. 25-274. - Returns. 
(a)  The surcharge levied under this article shall be due and payable to the treasurer on the first day of each month, except as provided in this article, by any person liable for the payment of any surcharge due under this article. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of the surcharge payable under this article, it shall be the duty of all operators, on or before the 20th day of each month, to deliver to the treasurer, upon forms prescribed and furnished by him, returns, under oath, showing the total number of rooms occupied per night during the preceding calendar month. Such returns shall show such further information as the treasurer may require to correctly compute and collect the surcharge levied. In addition to the information required on returns, the treasurer may request and the operator shall furnish any information deemed necessary for a correct computation of the surcharge levied. Such operator shall compute and remit to the treasurer the required surcharge due for the preceding calendar month. The remittance of the surcharge shall accompany the returns required under this article. If not paid on or before the 20th of each month, the surcharge shall be delinquent after such date, provided that no interest or penalty shall be charged on such return filed on or before the 20th day of such month. 
(b)  The treasurer may permit or require returns to be made by shorter or longer periods and upon such dates as he may specify. The form of return shall be prescribed by the treasurer and shall contain such information as he may deem necessary for the proper administration of this article. The treasurer may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days after notice, which amended return shall contain the information specified in the notice. 
(Code 1986, § 24-132; Code 2002, § 25-275) 
Sec. 25-275. - Payment. 
    At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to the treasurer the surcharge imposed by this article upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 24-133; Code 2002, § 25-276) 
Sec. 25-276. - Bond required. 
    Where the treasurer believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the state or remove or dissipate assets or for any other similar reason he deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under this article, he may require such operator to file with the city a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state in such amount as the treasurer may fix to secure the payment of any surcharge or penalties and interest due or which may become due from such operator. If the treasurer determines that an operator is to file such bond, he shall give notice to the operator specifying the amount of bond required, which shall in no event exceed twice the amount of the sum in controversy. The operator shall file such bond within five days after receiving the notice unless within such five days the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the city commission, at which time the necessity and amount of the bond shall be determined by the city commission. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with within 15 days thereafter. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the treasurer or cash in such amount as he may prescribe may be deposited with the treasurer who may, at any time after five days' notice to the depositor, apply them to any surcharge and/or any penalties due, and for that purpose the securities may be sold at private or public sale. 
(Code 1986, § 24-134; Code 2002, § 25-277) 
Sec. 25-277. - Refunds. 
(a)  Procedure. Under this article, the treasurer shall refund or credit any surcharge erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected if written application to the treasurer for such refund shall be made within 90 days from the date of payment thereof. For like causes and in the same period, a refund may be made upon the initiative and the order of the treasurer. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. Such application may be made by the person upon whom such surcharge was imposed and who has actually paid the surcharge. The application may also be made by the person who has collected and paid the surcharge to the treasurer, provided that the application is made within 90 days of the payment by the occupant to the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made. The treasurer, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit therefor on payments due from the applicant. 
(b)  Determination and hearing. Upon application for a refund, the treasurer may receive evidence with respect thereto and make such investigation as he deems necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the treasurer shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within 90 days after notice, shall apply in writing to the city commission for a hearing. After such hearing, the city commission shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. 
(Code 1986, § 24-136; Code 2002, § 25-278) 
Sec. 25-278. - Interest and penalties on delinquent surcharge. 
(a)  If any surcharge levied by this article becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for such surcharge shall pay interest on such unpaid surcharge at the rate of one and one-half percent per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency. 
(b)  In addition to the interest, if a return is not filed and the total amount of surcharge due remitted within 30 days from the due date as defined in this article, a penalty of ten percent of the total amount of surcharge due shall be assessed; but if a return is not filed and/or the total amount of the surcharge is not paid after 30 days from such due date, the penalty shall increase to 25 percent of the total amount of surcharge due. 
(Ord. No. 2208NS, § 6-20-2005) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2208NS, § 1, adopted June 20, 2005, amended § 25-278 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 25-278 pertained to interest on delinquent surcharge and derived from Code 1986, § 2-189; and Code 2002, § 2-324. 
Sec. 25-279. - Fraudulent returns. 
    The willful failure or refusal of any operator to make reports and remittances required under this article or the making of any false or fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any surcharge or a portion thereof rightfully due under this article shall be an offense against the city. 
(Code 1986, § 24-144; Code 2002, § 25-280) 
Sec. 25-280. - Collection by suit. 
    Such surcharge and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claim of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Ord. No. 2207NS, § 2, 6-20-2005; Code 2002, § 25-281) 
Sec. 25-281. - Proceedings to recover surcharge. 
(a)  Whenever any taxpayer or other person shall fail to collect and pay over any surcharge or surcharge penalty due and owing, or interest imposed by this article as herein provided, the city attorney shall, upon the request of the city treasurer, take appropriate action to enforce the payment of the same. 
(b)  Further, pursuant to the authority of 68 O.S. § 2704, all surcharges, interest and penalties imposed by this article are hereby declared to constitute a lien in favor of the city upon all franchises, property and rights to property, whether real or personal, then belonging to, or thereafter acquired, by the person, firm or corporation owing the surcharge, whether such property is employed by such person, firm or corporation in the conduct of its business, or in the hands of an assignee, trustee or receiver for the benefit of creditors, from the date said surcharges are due and payable under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any sum or sums collected or required to be collected in this article shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city; and as trustee, the collecting person, firm or corporation shall have a fiduciary duty to the city in regard to such sums and shall be subject to the trust laws of this state. Any person, firm or corporation who willfully or intentionally fails to remit the surcharge, after the surcharge levied by this article was collected from the occupant, and appropriates the surcharge held in trust to his own use, or to the use of any person, firm or corporation not entitled thereto, without the authority of law, shall be guilty of embezzlement. 
(Code 2002, § 25-282; Ord. No. 2207NS, § 3, 6-20-2005) 
Chapter 26 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal utilities generally, 11 O.S. § 22-104; relocation, etc., of property of public utilities, 11 O.S. § 32-104; public utilities generally, 11 O.S. §§ 35-101 et seq., 37-101 et seq.; state water and sewage laboratories, 27A O.S. § 2-4-201. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Investor-owned utility or rural electric co-operatives annual fee. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority granted municipalities pursuant to 17 O.S. § 158.43, the city does hereby assess an annual fee upon all investor-owned utilities and rural electric co-operatives that have entered into an agreement approved by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission with another retail electric supplier within an "affected area" of the city or have been assigned territory by the Oklahoma Corporation Commission pursuant to 17 O.S. § 158.43. 
(b)  The annual fee assessed by subsection (a) of this section shall be remitted to the city beginning 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(c)  The annual fee assessed by subsection (a) of this section upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts of each investor-owned utility or electric co-operative that is covered by the ordinance from which this section derives, shall be the amount of the franchise tax approved by the voters of the city, plus the current municipal sales tax. This fee replaces all other fees or taxes the businesses are subject to by the city as a result of the passage of Ordinance No. 2219NS. 
(d)  Pursuant to 17 O.S. § 158.43, the annual fee assessed by subsection (a) of this section shall be collected from the customers of all retail electric suppliers on the gross receipts from all retail sales made within the "affected area" within the municipal corporate limits and shall be remitted by the retail electric suppliers to the city. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, "affected area" means an area located within the city limits which, as a result of annexation, has two or more retail electric suppliers that are either investor-owned utilities, rural electric co-operatives, municipalities that provide electricity either directly or through a trust authority, or other political entity or any other retail supplier of electricity, that have been authorized to serve consumers in that annexed area. 
(f)  Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay the fee levied under this section shall be regarded as a trespasser within the city and shall be subject to ouster from said city, and in addition thereto, such person, firm or corporation shall be subject to legal action for collection of the amount of the fee and all expenses of collecting the same, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(g)  The fee imposed under this section shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets, located in the city of any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business included by definition herein. 
(Code 2002, § 26-1; Ord. No. 2421NS, §§ 1-7, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 2424NS, § 1, 2-1-2010) 
Secs. 26-2-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER RATES AND FEES 

Sec. 26-26. - Water rates. 
(a)  The minimum charge for water used by consumers inside the city limits shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  The rate to be charged for furnishing water for consumption outside the city limits shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  The city may furnish water to water authorities, nonprofit corporations and other entities who furnish water to individual users outside the city limits. The water rate for such organizations shall be the same as required in subsection (b) of this section except existing contracts. 
(d)  The city clerk is granted the authority to waive the sanitation and sanitary sewer rates when a water customer does not use any water but wants the water meter to remain in place, and the customer will be required to pay the minimum water bill. 
(Code 1986, § 25-62; Code 2002, § 26-26; Ord. No. 2167NS, § 1, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 2352NS, § 1, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 2410NS, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2484NS, §§ 1, 2, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-27. - Sewer rates. 
(a)  For purposes of providing funds for the maintenance of the city's sanitary sewer system and for other purposes, there are established charges for the use of the sanitary sewer system to be levied against each respective user within the city limits. 
(1)  The monthly charge for residential customers shall be based on the average amount of water used by such user during the winter months of November through February of each year. 
(2)  The monthly charge for commercial customers shall be based on the amount of water used by such user each month. 
(3)  The quarterly charge for hauled domestic wastewater shall be based on number of gallons discharged to the city POTW, and calculated using the table found in section 26-27(c) "commercial" and section 26-29(c). 
(b)  The charge for sanitary sewer use by consumers inside the city limits shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  The rate to be charged for furnishing water for consumption outside the city limits shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 25-63; Code 2002, § 26-27; Ord. No. 2167NS, § 2, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 2352NS, § 2, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 2410NS, §§ 3, 4, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 2484NS, §§ 3, 4, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 2, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-28. - Fees for wastewater disposal system. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established in article IV of this chapter. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. 
(b)  The city shall have the power and authority to require the payment of the following charges and fees; such charges and fees shall be established by resolution duly adopted by the city commission: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program. 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures. 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
(4)  Fees for permit applications. 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals. 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal, by the city, of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards. 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in article IV of this chapter. 
(c)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by article IV of this chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 25-118; Code 2002, § 26-28) 
Sec. 26-29. - User charge system for treatment of domestic wastewater. 
(a)  User charges. All users of the city-owned wastewater treatment system shall be charged a minimum charge as described in the city fee schedule and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission per month, plus an additional charge per 1,000 gallons of metered water consumption in the amount as described in the city fee schedule and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. For users not on a metered basis, the line maintenance utility director shall establish an estimated water consumption based on a comparison of the nonmetered user with a metered user of a similar class. 
(b)  User charge schedule. As the BOD, suspended solids and other pollutant concentrations discharged shall be approximately equal for all domestic users, users shall be charged on a volume basis in accordance with the following formula: 
C u = C b +C t V t (V u ) 
Where: 
C u = A user's charge per unit of time. 
C b = The user's share of the monthly costs not related to operation, maintenance and replacement (O&M&R). 
C t = Total operation and maintenance (O&M) costs per unit of time. 
V t = Total volume contribution from all users per unit of time (may include extraneous flows). 
V u = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time. 
(c)  Excessive strength charges. For any user, when the BOD exceeds 250 mg/l (the maximum limit for average domestic waste), the suspended solids exceed 250 mg/l (the maximum limit for average domestic waste) or when other pollutant concentrations exceed the range of concentrations of these pollutants in normal domestic sewage or in permitted industrial discharge, a surcharge shall be added to the basic charge. This surcharge shall be calculated by the following formula: 
C s = (B c (B) + S c (S) + P c (P))V u 
Where: 
C s = A surcharge for wastewater of excessive strength. 
B c = Operation and maintenance (O&M) cost for treatment of a unit of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). 
B = Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level. 
S c = Operation and maintenance (O&M) cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant. 
S = Concentration of SS from a user above a base level. 
P c = Operation and maintenance (O&M) cost for treatment of a unit of any pollutant. 
P = Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a base level. 
V u = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time. 
(d)  Review and revision. The user charge ordinance from which this section derives shall be reviewed not less often than every year regarding the wastewater contribution of users and user classes, the total costs of the operation and maintenance and replacement of the treatment works and its approved user charge schedule. The charges for users or user classes shall be revised to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes. 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance and replacement costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance, including replacement of the treatment works. 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year, and the rates shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(4)  Revenues from the project (e.g., sale of treatment-related byproducts, lease of the land or sale of crops grown on the land purchased under the grant agreement) shall be used to offset the cost for the operation, maintenance and replacement. The city shall proportionately reduce all user charges. 
(e)  Toxic pollutants charges. Each user who discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the costs of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. 
(f)  Notification. Each user shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with the regular bill, of the sewer use rate and the portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. Costs shall be broken down to show the operation and maintenance costs attributable to that user. 
(g)  Charges for extraneous flows. The costs of operation and maintenance for all flows not directly attributable to users, such as infiltration/inflow, shall be distributed among users on the same basis as operation and maintenance charges. 
(h)  Records. A financial management system shall be established and maintained by the city to document compliance with federal regulations pertaining to the user charge ordinance from which this section derives. The system will account for all revenues generated and expenditures for operation and maintenance and replacement. 
(i)  Billing. Users will be billed on a monthly basis with payment due 14 days after the date of billing. Users on metered water service will be billed on the same notice as water charges and will be designated as a separate entry. Users of the wastewater system not on metered service will be billed monthly on an individual notice for wastewater service at the rate established by the city manager or his designee. A user with an account that becomes delinquent will be notified immediately in writing by the city clerk that water and/or wastewater services will be terminated unless the account is paid in full. The city manager or his designee will utilize the law enforcement agency to assist as required in the control and management of the user charge system. 
(Code 1986, § 25-120; Code 2002, § 26-29; Ord. No. 2239NS, § 1, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 2530NS, §§ 1, 3, 2-18-2014; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Secs. 26-30-26-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public water supplies, 27A O.S. §§ 2-6-304, 2-6-305. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-56. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any section of this article, upon conviction, shall be fined the maximum allowed by the municipal court, plus costs. Each day of such violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 25-16; Code 2002, § 26-56) 
Sec. 26-57. - Right of entry. 
    Refusal on the part of the water customer to provide access after reasonable request for city-authorized purposes shall be deemed to be sufficient cause for discontinuance of service. The customer will be given a 48-hour notice if the premises are deemed inaccessible and will be asked to contact the customer service division to arrange for necessary access. Lack of contact by the customer may result in discontinuance of service without further notice. 
(Code 1986, § 25-27; Code 2002, § 26-57) 
Sec. 26-58. - Denial of service. 
    The city reserves the right to refuse to provide water service to a customer at any premises until all delinquent bills for prior or current utility services incurred with the city are paid or to any premises which may be found to be in violation of current city codes. The city shall not be required to provide service to a customer who uses an alias, a trade name, a business name or the name of a relative or another person as a device to escape payment of an unpaid obligation for prior service, and a customer's refusal to provide any requested information or providing false information may result in denial or termination of service. 
(Code 1986, § 25-26; Code 2002, § 26-58) 
Sec. 26-59. - Furnishing to other premises. 
    No property owner or water customer shall be allowed to connect or permit to be connected to his water system any water line or pipe serving any other property or premises than his own and used by him exclusively. Any property owner or occupant furnishing water through his meter to another property owner or occupant shall immediately be disconnected from the water system without notice. The meter used by such person shall be taken out and not replaced until the connection is disconnected from such separate premises and a fee, in an amount to be set in the city fee schedule adopted and updated by resolution of the city commission, paid to the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 25-50; Code 2002, § 26-59; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 2, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-60. - Evidence of diversion. 
    Proof of the existence of or an attempt to create any bypass, tampering or unauthorized metering shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the person responsible for the water account at the premises where such bypass, tampering or unauthorized metering or an attempt thereof is proven to exist had knowledge of the bypass, tampering or unauthorized metering or an attempt thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 25-75; Code 2002, § 26-60) 
Sec. 26-61. - Injury to or unlawful entry upon system. 
    No person shall enter upon, without lawful permission, or alter, tamper with, injure or knowingly allow the altering of any part of the city water system or any reservoir, settling basin, pipes, pumps or other appurtenances and equipment pertaining to the city water system. 
(Code 1986, § 25-17; Code 2002, § 26-61) 
State Law reference- Tampering with utility equipment, 76 O.S. § 23. 
Sec. 26-62. - Interfering with or damaging meters. 
    No person, other than a duly authorized city employee, shall alter, change or in any manner interfere with the water meter in use by any consumer or with any other equipment used by the city in the operation of its water system. Licensed plumbers shall have the right to temporarily turn off the water when it is necessary to make repairs or turn on the water when it may be necessary. No plumber shall leave any meter turned on except when the meter was turned on at the time when the repair work was undertaken. No person shall throw any material or substance into the meter box or injure, damage or deface in any manner any meter established by the city for water service to its people. 
(Code 1986, § 25-18; Code 2002, § 26-62) 
Sec. 26-63. - Private lines; service outside city limits. 
(a)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, no private water lines shall be allowed in the city. When an approved water supply is not available within one-quarter mile (1,320 feet), as further described in the subdivision regulations, a developer or subdivision may be served by individual water wells. Individual water wells must meet federal and state drinking water standards. The right for any subdivision or developer to use individual water wells will require an agreement between the individual and the city that, when a water supply does become available, the individual will connect to the city water supply and will also furnish, as needed, fire hydrants to meet city standards. 
(b)  Water service to customers outside the city limits shall only be allowed by approval of the city manager and the signing of a contract with the city for water service. 
(Code 1986, § 25-19; Code 2002, § 26-63) 
State Law reference- Municipal utilities outside corporate limits, 11 O.S. §§ 35-101, 37-120. 
Sec. 26-64. - Fraud or stealth to obtain. 
    No person shall by fraud or stealth in any way obtain water from the city water system or shall turn on the water service without having first made application at the customer service division of the city clerk's office in the regular manner and having complied with all provisions relating to water connection service. The amount of water that has been obtained by any person by fraud or stealth or without having been permitted by proper city officials in a manner as provided by law shall be established by the amount used by such person during the last preceding month that the meter operated and registered such amount, and such person shall pay for the water at the rate fixed by the city for the particular class of service obtained, before any further water service is permitted. In all cases of fraud or stealth, the city shall have the right to install apparatus, locks and objects as are necessary to prevent theft, at the expense of the consumer. 
(Code 1986, § 25-20; Code 2002, § 26-64) 
Sec. 26-65. - Tampering with main valves and hydrants. 
    All main valves throughout the entire city water system are for the exclusive use of the city in making repairs, extensions and other improvements, and no person shall, under any circumstances, use or tamper with the system without the written consent of the director of public works. All fire hydrants are directly under the exclusive control of the city. No person shall tamper with or secure water from any of these places in any other way than that for which they are intended. 
(Code 1986, § 25-21; Code 2002, § 26-65) 
Sec. 26-66. - Liability for failure of supply. 
    When the city water supply fails, whether from natural causes or accidents of any kind, the city shall not be held liable for any damage of any kind because of such failure. When the size of service and the amount of water used is such that the main pressure in the immediate vicinity is perceptibly affected, it shall be the duty of such person to install a storage tank of sufficient capacity to enable him to operate entirely without water directly from the water mains. In such cases, it shall be the duty of such person to keep a storage of water on hand to meet the demands of such business without imposing any heavy or unusual demand on the water system or appreciably reducing the water pressure in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1986, § 25-22; Code 2002, § 26-66) 
Sec. 26-67. - Drought management plan. 
(a)  Implementation of plan. 
(1)  Whenever either Twin Lakes or Wes Watkins reaches an elevation of 1,060 feet, the drought management plan set forth herein shall be implemented by the method deemed appropriate by the mayor and city commission, or by the city manager, until such time as approval can be ratified by the mayor and city commission. 
(2)  Requirements for all levels of restrictions: 
a.  Prohibit excess irrigation runoff or overspray onto impervious surfaces. 
b.  Irrigation systems with visible leaks will not be used until leak is repaired. 
c.  Hand watering is defined as handheld watering with shutoff nozzle. 
d.  Be cautious of installing new sod or seeding in the extreme heat season and be aware of what watering restrictions exist, if any. 
e.  As level restrictions progress, they also include the restrictions of the previous level(s). For example, level 2 will include the restrictions for level 1 as well as the restrictions for level 2. The exemption would be when the allowable days and times in the next level change, then the highest level would take precedence on days and time schedule. 
(b)  Voluntary restrictions. It is important to be constantly aware of water needs and understand that there are times when it is necessary to conserve water. Prudent use of this essential natural resource is the responsibility of every citizen. We must all take voluntary steps to conserve our water and this must be reinforced each summer, when the need for water becomes the greatest. Voluntary restrictions are requested from all customers yearround regardless of the demand or lake levels as a permanent conservation measure and include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Turn off the tap while shaving or brushing teeth. 
(2)  Shower use less water than baths. 
(3)  Plug up the sink or use a wash basin if washing dishes by hand. 
(4)  Keep a pitcher of drinking water in the refrigerator instead of letting the faucet run until the water gets cool. 
(5)  Wash only full loads of laundry or use appropriate water level or load size selection in washing machine. 
(6)  When replacing filters, look for water saving features that include the EPA WaterSense endorsements. They will have the EPA WaterSense logo. 
(7)  Voluntarily limit outdoor watering to the level 1 odd/even schedule or voluntarily water at most three days a week. 
(8)  For more water saving tips go to: www.shawneeok.org or www.epa.gov/watersense. 
(9)  For lawn watering information and calculation estimates go to: http://sip.mesonet.org. 
(10)  For more information contact the water treatment plant supervisor at 405-273- 0890. 
(11)  To view this document online go to: www.shawneeok.org/savewater. 
(c)  Mandatory restrictions. 
(1)  Level 1 mandatory restrictions. Level 1 mandatory restrictions begin when Twin Lakes reaches an elevation of 1,060 feet - 1988 National American Vertical Datum (NAVD 88), and/or the average weekly water treatment plant production exceeds 6.0 mgd. It is assumed that Wes Watkins remains at an elevation of 1,062 feet. Mandatory restrictions include the following: 
a.  Residential. Outside water usage restricted to 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. on the odd/even system defined as odd-numbered houses utilizing water on Monday and Thursday and even-numbered houses utilizing water on Tuesday and Friday during the above hours. 
b.  Commercial. Outside water usage restricted in the same manner as residential customers. 
(2)  Level 2 mandatory restrictions. Level 2 mandatory restrictions begin when Twin Lakes reaches an elevation of 1,059 (NAVD 88) feet, and/or the average weekly water treatment plant production exceeds 6.5 mgd. It is assumed that Wes Watkins remains at an elevation of 1,062 feet. Mandatory restrictions include the following: 
a.  Residential. Outside water usage restricted to 7:00 p.m. to midnight a.m. on the odd/even system defined as odd-numbered houses utilizing water on Monday and Thursday even-numbered houses utilizing water on Tuesday and Friday during the above hours. 
b.  Commercial. Outside water usage restricted in the same manner as residential customers as well as these additional measures: 
1.  Commercial car washes to employ best management practices. 
2.  Restaurants. Serve water only upon request. 
3.  Lodging. Have signage in rooms reflecting; change linens every three days for multiple night guests unless otherwise requested by guest. 
c.  Other. 
1.  Consider whether to start the process of obtaining permission to draw below recreational level in Wes Watkins Reservoir. 
2.  Power washing or spraying of water for washing impervious surfaces prohibited in this level. 
Note: During level 2 mandatory restrictions, it may be necessary to make withdrawals from the Wes Watkins recreational pool, after receiving appropriate approvals. 
(3)  Level 3 mandatory restrictions. Level 3 mandatory restrictions begin when Twin Lakes reaches an elevation of 1058 (NAVD 88) feet; and/or the average weekly water treatment plant production exceeds 4.5 mgd. Mandatory restrictions include the following: 
a.  Residential, other than household purposes. Outside water usage restricted to 7:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. on the odd/even system defined as odd-numbered houses utilizing water on Monday and even-numbered houses utilizing water on Friday during the above hours. Water usage is limited to handheld watering with shutoff nozzle of shrubs and young trees only. 
b.  Other. Lawn watering, refilling or adding water to public and private swimming pools and automobile washing forbidden. 
c.  Installation of new sod, seeding and landscaping prohibited. 
d.  Filling and operation of non-recirculating fountains and decorative water features prohibited. 
e.  Filling of outdoor and indoor pools and hot tubs prohibited. 
f.  Washing automobiles at noncommercial facilities prohibited. 
Note: During Level 3 mandatory restrictions, it may be necessary to make withdrawals from the Wes Watkins recreational pool, after receiving appropriate approvals. 
(4)  Level 4 mandatory restrictions. Level 4 mandatory restrictions begin when Twin Lakes reaches an elevation of 1057 (NAVD 88) feet and the average weekly WTP production exceeds four mgd. Mandatory restrictions include the following: 
a.  Residential. There will be no usage authorized, other than for indoor household purposes. 
b.  Commercial. Outside water usage restricted in the same manner as residential customers as well as level 2 and level 3 commercial restrictions with these additional measures: 
1.  Prohibit use of water for construction purposes. 
2.  All vehicle washing prohibited. 
c.  Other. Lawn watering, refilling or adding water to public and private swimming pools and automobile washing forbidden. 
Note: during level 4 mandatory restrictions, it may be necessary to make withdrawals from the Wes Watkins recreational pool, after receiving appropriate approvals. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of the proclamation, upon conviction, shall be fined as follows: 
(1)  First violation: An amount to be set in the city fee schedule adopted and updated by resolution of the city commission, plus costs. 
(2)  Second violation: An amount to be set in the city fee schedule adopted and updated by resolution of the city commission, plus costs. 
(3)  Third violation: An amount to be set in the city fee schedule adopted and updated by resolution of the city commission, plus costs. 
(4)  Fourth and subsequent violation: An amount to be set in the city fee schedule adopted and updated by resolution of the city commission, plus costs. 
In addition to such penalties, the water, sewer, and garbage services furnished by the city to such person who violates any of the provisions of such proclamation shall be subject to suspension summarily and without notice. 
(Code 2002, § 26-67; Ord. No. 2485NS, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 2551NS, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 3, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-68 - Plastic pipes and fittings used for water service. 
    The service line from the water main to the meter box and three feet beyond shall be type "K" soft copper or polyethylene water service tubing, color blue, copper tube size (CTS) PE 3408/3608, high density PE tubing, PC 200 (psi), DR 9 (outside diameter-based dimension ratio), in conformance with the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C901 and ASTM D2737. (All polyethylene water service lines will require tracer wire to be installed in accordance with the city water main installation specifications.) 
(Code 1986, § 25-24; Code 2002, § 26-68; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 4, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-69. - Construction of distribution mains. 
    There is adopted by the city, for the purpose of amending standards and specifications for the construction of water distribution main lines, that certain compilation entitled "Standard Specifications for Construction of Water Distribution Mains, Shawnee, Oklahoma," adopted July 1991, of which not less than three copies are filed in the office of the city clerk and are made a part of the public records of the city. The specifications are incorporated in this section as fully as if set out at length. Adoption of Ordinance No. 1821NS reaffirms the water distribution line policy that a 12-inch water line will be extended and built upon a section line road, and an eight-inch water line will be required on a half-section line or near proximity. All other water lines constructed within the city limits shall be six-inch diameter. All water lines and appurtenances thereto shall conform to the state department of environmental quality standards for public water supply facilities, as set forth in O.A.C. 252, chapter 625, "Public Water Supply Construction Standards," as adopted and as may be from time to time amended by the state board of health. 
(Code 1986, § 25-25; Code 2002, § 26-69) 
Sec. 26-70. - Water leaks to be repaired. 
    All private service lines or pipes leaking water either will be repaired or have the water shut off by the owner of the property within 30 days of discovery of the leak. Failure to repair the leak or shut off the water within 30 days of discovery will be punishable by a fine of up an amount to be set in the city fee schedule adopted and updated by resolution of the city commission on the 31st day after discovery. Each subsequent day that the leak continues to flow will be punishable by a fine, in the amount to be set in the city fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 26-70; Ord. No. 2241NS, § 1, 3-6-2006; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 4, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-71. - Individual water wells. 
(a)  No person shall drill or enlarge any water well, or subsequently use the water from such well, except upon: 
(1)  Application for a permit for such activity or usage from the community development department; 
(2)  Payment of a permit fee in the amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission; and 
(3)  Compliance with this Code and the rules and regulations of the Oklahoma Department of Health. 
(b)  Water from such wells shall be used only for domestic purposes on the premises where the well is located, and there shall be no interconnection of any kind between such well and the water supply of the city. Any nondomestic usage existing before June 5, 2006, may be continued to the same extent and for the same purposes, but such uses shall not be extended or increased. 
(c)  All wells drilled, deepened or completed are subject to the inspection and regulation of the city, and the operation of such wells is subject to the inspection and regulation of the city, so as to prevent pollution and/or damage to those water producing sands. 
(d)  Wells may be located anywhere on the property owner's premises; however, any well located outside of the rear yard of the property may have only the wellhead exposed with no other accompanying structure, pursuant to the zoning code of the city. No well may be drilled on an existing easement or right-of-way. 
(e)  All drilling mud must be removed manually and under no circumstances may the drilling mud escape the property. 
(f)  Should the city subsequently furnish water service to users of private water wells drawing water for household and/or commercial purposes, those persons owning such wells shall within 60 days connect to the public water supply. In such event, well water may continue being used for irrigation purposes, swimming pools, and other exterior purposes. 
(Code 2002, § 26-71; Ord. No. 2260NS, § 1, 6-5-2006; Ord. No. 2279NS, § 1, 9-18-2006; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 5, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-72. - Fire hydrant meter for bulk water purchase; deposit. 
    There is hereby established a refundable deposit in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, for the use of a city-owned water meter to be used on a fire hydrant for bulk water purchase for nonmunicipal purposes. Returning the meter in good working condition to the city will result in a refund of the entire amount of the deposit. Should the meter be lost or returned in a non-working condition, the deposit will be forfeited to the city in its entirety. 
(Code 2002, § 26-72; Ord. No. 2288NS, § 1, 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 6, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-73. - Fire hydrant use, maintenance and control. 
(a)  Fire hydrants and plugs connected with the waterworks, mains and laterals and located in the public streets, avenues or alleys of the city shall be under the direct supervision and control of the utility department and the utility director. 
(b)  The utility director or authorized agent shall, not less than once in each month, examine every fire hydrant and see that it is always accessible and in a good serviceable condition. 
(c)  The fire hydrants shall be used only by members of the fire department and other authorized city employees and shall not be used by contractors as a source of water supply for construction purposes. The responsibility for the inspection and repair of the fire hydrants shall rest upon the utility director. 
(d)  No person shall use, molest or connect any hose or any apparatus with any fire hydrant or plug without first having secured from the utility director a permit in writing authorizing such use, which shall specify the length of time, purpose and condition under which such hydrant or plug may be used. 
(Code 2002, § 26-73; Ord. No. 2534, § 4, 3-3-2014) 
Secs. 26-74-26-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CONNECTIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 26-96. - Application for service. 
(a)  When any person desires to connect with the city water system, he shall make application to the customer service division in the city clerk's office. The account will be placed in the name of the person who signs the application as the responsible party. The application shall contain at least the true name of the applicant; the applicant's date of birth, Social Security and/or student identification number, telephone number, employer and next of kin not residing at the same address; the service address and mailing address, if different; and such other information as the city may deem necessary in order to ensure the effective billing and collection of each account applied for. If the applicant is a corporation, the application must be completed in a person's name "doing business as" the corporation. 
(b)  Identification proving that the applicant is at least 18 years of age may be required. In addition, a legible, valid copy of an existing lease of a renter/tenant applying for service may be requested of the applicant. 
(c)  A single application for service cannot be made to apply to different locations nor to cover more than one point of delivery at the same location to be used by the same customer, unless the city determines that the physical characteristics of the facility served requires more than one point of delivery according to good engineering and operating practices. 
(d)  Before any connection is made for an applicant who applies for water service outside the city limits, the application shall be made in writing to the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 25-35; Code 2002, § 26-96) 
Sec. 26-97. - Tapping fee. 
    When an application is made for water service and when the water system has not been tapped and connected to the premises, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to collect a water tap fee in the amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 25-40; Code 2002, § 26-97; Ord. No. 2289NS, § 1, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 7, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-98. - Prerequisites; conditions. 
(a)  No water connection shall be made to any premises on which the plumbing has not been approved and such approval is not on file with the chief code enforcement officer. 
(b)  Every person using water from the city water system shall be liable to the city for all water used, according to the established rates and minimum charges and according to the conditions of this article. Such rates as are authorized by the city commission shall be kept on file with the city clerk and shall be subject to the inspection of any person at any time. 
(Code 1986, § 25-41; Code 2002, § 26-98) 
Sec. 26-99. - Making of connection. 
    After payment of the tapping fee and the required water deposit and after a tapping pit at the water main has been excavated by a licensed plumber, it shall be the duty of the city to make the required tap, provided that the tap shall not be larger than one inch. A licensed plumber shall install a type K copper line from the main to the meter and shall provide all the necessary fittings to make the meter setting, including type K copper extending 36 inches out of the meter tile on the house side, except the tapping saddle and corporation shop, which the city will furnish for taps one inch and smaller. If the tap is larger than one inch, it shall be made by a licensed plumber and paid for by the customer. For all taps larger than two inches in diameter, a tapping sleeve and valve are required; provided, however, before any such tap is made, reasonable notice shall be given to the city in order for city personnel to be present during the tapping operations. It shall be the duty of the plumber to fill in the tapping pit to the satisfaction of the city. The line maintenance utility director shall cause the meter to be turned on and note the reading and date that water service is established. 
(Code 1986, § 25-42; Code 2002, § 26-99; Ord. No. 1945NS, § 1, 10-18-1999; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-100. - Occupancy without application or deposit. 
    If the city leaves the water service connected to vacant premises, it shall not constitute consent by the city for any new occupant of such premises to use the service without making proper application for the service. An occupant using service without a deposit and/or an application shall be liable to the city for the deposit amount, as well as payment for all services received, which will be billed at the prevailing rates for all services available to the premises. The occupant will be required to show a lease or document specifying when occupancy began and will be billed back to the reading nearest to the date of the lease or, if such document is not available, back to the date of the last occupant terminating service. Failure to make an application and/or a deposit may result in immediate termination of service. 
(Code 1986, § 25-43; Code 2002, § 26-100) 
Sec. 26-101. - Transfer of service. 
(a)  An application and contract for water service is not transferable from one customer to another customer unless written authorization is obtained from the city clerk or designee. Service can be connected for the same customer moving from one address to another by the completion of a new application and by a new deposit except for a person who, prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, had on file with the city a lesser amount of deposit than set out in this article and who has been found by the city clerk or designee to have an established, acceptable credit record with the city. In that case the lesser amount of the deposit shall be applied to the request for transfer, and no new application or increased deposit will be required. However, the customer service division may request an update to the individual's account history, and such information may be acquired by telephone. 
(b)  For the purposes of what shall be ruled an unacceptable credit history for an individual, the city clerk or designee may, among other things, consider the frequency of a customer's account on the delinquency list for nonpayment of an account, instances of a meter having been disconnected for nonpayment of an account, insufficient checks for payment of an account and the use of an alias to avoid payment of an account. 
(c)  Transfer of service fee. When a customer requests to transfer his/her account from one location to another location within the city limits, or utilizing city utilities, the current deposit may be transferred to the new account. The transfer will not be allowed if there exists, or will exist, any past due balance from the prior account. The current balance may be transferred to the new location if that balance is not past due. If the deposit is being transferred to the new location, the transfer must not overlap more than ten calendar days. Any outstanding balance from a closed account may be transferred to an open account under the same customer or occupant's name. A transfer of service fee shall be set and imposed in an amount, per transfer, as described in the city fee schedule, which may be updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission; the transfer of service fee will be added to the customer's account at the time of the request. The city clerk or designee may request immediate payment before the transfer can occur if deemed necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 25-48; Code 2002, § 26-101; Ord. No. 2646NS, § 2, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 26-102. - Responsibility for payment on failure to receive bills. 
    Every water customer, whether owner or tenant, shall keep the customer service division advised of the customer's correct mailing address. The failure of any customer to receive water bills shall not be a valid excuse for failure to pay bills when due. 
(Code 1986, § 25-49; Code 2002, § 26-102) 
Sec. 26-103. - Connection with new lines. 
    Where new lines are installed, all water service shall be furnished from such new lines, and the public works director is authorized to abandon and discontinue any old lines upon ten days' notice to all users of water from the old lines. Such notice shall inform such users that they shall connect with the new lines within ten days or water service will be discontinued until connection with the new line is made, unless written authorization otherwise is obtained from the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1986, § 25-52; Code 2002, § 26-103) 
Sec. 26-104. - Filling swimming pools. 
    When any city water customer fills such customer's swimming pool from the house hydrant, the customer will be charged the normal water rate. However, the sewer rate will be adjusted to allow for the filling of the swimming pool. If a customer has the swimming pool filled from a fire hydrant, the customer will be charged the bulk water rate. 
(Code 1986, § 25-51; Code 2002, § 26-104) 
Secs. 26-105-26-130. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Deposits 

Sec. 26-131. - Exemptions. 
    Federal, state, local governmental agencies, institutions of higher education and public schools shall be exempt from making water deposits with the city. 
(Code 1986, § 25-47; Code 2002, § 26-131) 
Sec. 26-132. - Residential service. 
(a)  Residential deposit. The cash deposit for residential water service from the city water system shall be in an amount described in the city fee schedule, will be assessed to each new residential water service account established. The fee will be due at the time the account is established. The deposit amount may be amended or updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section a homeowner may be defined as a person owning a home presently which is used as that individual's place of residency; one who is in the process of purchasing a home for residency; one who owns a piece of property but leases or rents it out to another individual; or one who is renting or leasing to purchase the property which is planned as his place of residency. The city clerk or designee may, for a question concerning a customer's exact designation as to whether or not the customer shall be termed a "homeowner" or "renter," review the particular circumstances of the customer's position and make a determination from those findings. Evidence of a customer's claim to home ownership may be required, if necessary, by the customer service division. 
(c)  Processing fee. A processing fee in an amount described in the city fee schedule, will be assessed to each new residential water service account. The fee will be due at time the account is established. The fee amount may be amended or updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 25-36; Code 2002, § 26-132; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 1, 3-20-2017; Ord. No. 2646NS, §§ 3, 4, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 26-133. - Business or commercial service. 
(a)  The cash water deposit for a business or commercial establishment shall be based on the size of the meter and demand for service. The deposit shall be such sum as will at least cover three times the monthly bill of the consumer according to established rates and shall be determined by the city clerk or designee. The deposit shall in no case be less than the amount as described in the city fee schedule and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  For business and commercial establishments, an irrevocable letter of credit may be furnished the city in lieu of a cash deposit. This letter of credit must designate the city as beneficiary and be in an amount double the deposit figure which has been determined by the city for purposes of guaranteeing payment of the monthly utility bills. Any letter of credit so given shall be renewed annually. Failure to keep such letter of credit current by such annual renewal shall be treated in the same manner as failure to pay a monthly utility bill and may result in disconnection of service. 
(c)  In addition, a business or commercial establishment may post a surety bond, signed by a good and sufficient corporate surety company licensed to do business in the state, in lieu of a cash deposit. The surety bond shall be in an amount double the deposit figure which has been determined by the city and must designate the city as beneficiary. 
(d)  Further, for business or commercial establishments, on or before the first day of the 13th month of utility service, but not before the end of 12 continuous months of service, the business or commercial establishment may request that the amount of deposit be reviewed and adjusted to an amount determined to be in line with the current deposit schedule for the previous 12-month period of utility service. Such adjustment may result in an increase or decrease to the existing deposit. This adjustment shall be determined by the city clerk or designee. 
(e)  Landlords of vacant premises, real estate agents, property management specialists or builders/renovators, among others, may be permitted to furnish a blanket bond to cover those accounts which are multiple in nature. The blanket bond and amount must be approved by the city manager or designee. If the blanket bond is furnished as other than cash, all requirements for surety bonds as set out in subsection (c) of this section shall also apply. 
(Code 1986, § 25-37; Code 2002, § 26-133; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-134. - Construction meter. 
    Construction water meters set during the construction phase may be authorized upon receipt of a cash deposit in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 25-38; Code 2002, § 26-134; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 8, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-135. - Temporary service. 
(a)  Upon approval by the city clerk or designee, the city may extend temporary water service without requiring a deposit for special circumstances. 
(b)  The customer is required to complete a temporary utility service agreement at the time of connection and to prepay a service charge in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. The normal minimum water, sewer and sanitation rates will apply where such services are on the account, and the service will be disconnected without further notice at the expiration of the temporary utility service agreement; at which time, a deposit will then be required. The city may decline to provide temporary service if the applicant has a delinquent account for services provided at any other premises. 
(Code 1986, § 25-39; Code 2002, § 26-135; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 9, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-136. - Credit of account; unclaimed deposits. 
(a)  The water meter deposit required by this section shall remain with the city to the credit of the person paying the deposit, so long as service is continued at such location, and shall be subject to any charge for water, sewer or sanitation service which is unpaid or for repairs done by the city to such person's water meter. All deposit amounts which have not been claimed by or refunded to a customer within one year following termination of the utility service to the customer shall be paid over to the city unless it is claimed by the customer within 90 days from the date a notice is mailed by the city advising the customer of such unclaimed deposit. 
(b)  When a charge is made against such deposit for meter repair or a water bill, it shall be the duty of such person to pay the city such amount as is necessary to maintain the meter deposit in full during all times for rendering water service. 
(Code 1986, § 25-44; Code 2002, § 26-136) 
Sec. 26-137. - Increase. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to require a higher water deposit amount if a customer has received service in the past and has had service suspended for nonpayment. An existing customer's deposit may be increased if any of the following conditions occur: 
(1)  Service is suspended for failure to pay; 
(2)  Insufficient check; or 
(3)  Use of service without proper authorization from the city. 
(b)  If the character or volume of a customer's service should change at any time so that a customer's deposit is inadequate to ensure payment of bills, the city clerk or designee may require the customer to increase his deposit to an amount satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 25-45; Code 2002, § 26-137) 
Sec. 26-138. - Refund. 
    If any person using water from the city water system shall desire to discontinue such service, he shall notify the customer service division, who shall immediately order the disconnection. The city clerk or designee shall at that time cause the meter to be read and the amount due the city to be determined by comparison with the next preceding meter reading for the premises. Upon payment of such amount and all other applicable charges, the meter deposit shall be refunded. However, if, after all authorized charges have been made, it is found that the meter deposit is in excess of the amount due, such balance shall only be refunded for a final disconnect. If service is transferred, any and all of the remaining credit amount shall be transferred to the new service address account, and under no circumstances shall a refund be made to the customer or shall a refund be used in lieu of placing a new deposit on the new service address account. 
(Code 1986, § 25-46; Code 2002, § 26-138) 
Secs. 26-139-26-165. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Meters 

Sec. 26-166. - Required. 
    No person shall obtain any water from the city water system unless the water passes through a properly installed and approved meter. All water meters shall be provided by the city where the service requires the use of a one-inch meter or less. All other meters shall be supplied by the owner or user of the premises on which the meter is located at such owner's or user's expense. Upon installation and approval of the meter, the meter shall become the property of the city. All meters installed on the city water system shall be of a type and brand as approved by the line maintenance utility director. The city shall repair and replace any meter at any time it deems advisable. 
(Code 1986, § 25-80; Code 2002, § 26-166; Ord. No. 1945NS, § 2, 10-18-1999; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-167. - Location. 
    Water meters shall be placed as near as possible and convenient to the curb or the property line of the property served. Residential property meters shall be placed between the curb and sidewalk or between the property line and the street curb. Location of meters serving commercial and industrial properties shall be determined by the public works director. 
(Code 1986, § 25-81; Code 2002, § 26-167) 
Sec. 26-168. - Installation. 
(a)  All water meters installed on the city water system shall be of a type and brand as approved by the line maintenance utility director. 
(b)  Where two or more meters are supplied with one service line, the service line shall be not less than 11/4 inches in diameter, but in no case of less than adequate size to supply all meters at peak usage, and each meter shall be supplied with an individual cutoff. 
(c)  Meters shall be at least 18 inches and not more than 30 inches in the ground and, if a change in grade of the yard, parking or sidewalk is made, the service pipe and meter shall be changed to correspond with this requirement. 
(d)  All meters larger than two inches shall be installed with a bypass and appropriate valves. Bypasses may be required on two-inch meter installations where, in the judgment of the line maintenance utility director, uninterruptible service is important. 
(Code 1986, § 25-82; Code 2002, § 26-168; Ord. No. 1945NS, § 3, 10-18-1999; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-169. - Reading. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk, at least once a month, to have read the water meters located at all premises in the city or wherever located and to have made a record of such meter reading in a book to be kept for that purpose. Such record shall show the monthly reading, in each month for the preceding month, and the present reading. The city clerk shall have determined for such meter reading the amount of water consumed in each month by each customer. 
(Code 1986, § 25-83; Code 2002, § 26-169) 
Sec. 26-170. - Responsibility for repairs. 
    Water meters shall be protected at all times from freezing or other injury. If an injury shall occur, the public works department shall make the necessary repairs of its own meters without cost to the occupant or user, when such was not caused by any neglect of care by the occupant or user. A failure to keep the water box covered shall be the responsibility of the user, and damages caused by freezing due to failure to cover the water box shall be the liability of the user and paid for by the user. A defect of installation in such a way as to resist freezing shall be cause for the city to make its own repairs. For privately owned meters, the owner or user shall make all repairs at his own cost or the city will make such repairs, upon request, at the cost of such user or owner. 
(Code 1986, § 25-84; Code 2002, § 26-170) 
Sec. 26-171. - Testing. 
(a)  Any person receiving water through a meter supplied by the city who desires to have the accuracy of the meter tested may do so by making a deposit in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, with the customer service division. The public works director will then bring the meter in for testing. If after proper testing the meter is found to be incorrect by more than two percent in favor of the city, the deposit shall be returned to the customer and correction made only for that month for which a bill was last rendered. If the meter is found to be correct or within two percent of correct, the amount to be set in the city fee schedule shall become the property of the city and shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(b)  If a meter fails to register, the monthly water rent due the city shall be determined by an average of the three preceding months that the meter last registered. 
(Code 1986, § 25-85; Code 2002, § 26-171; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 10, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-172. - Two meters serving single premises. 
    When a water consumer's piping or plumbing is divided, necessitating the use of two or more meters, each meter shall be handled and regarded as for separate and distinct consumers, to each of which will apply the regular water rates and minimum charges, until such plumbing or piping is so arranged as to permit the use of but one meter. Under no circumstances shall the consumption shown by the two or more meters in use by the same consumer be added or lumped together in order to reduce the net sum due the city. 
(Code 1986, § 25-86; Code 2002, § 26-172) 
Sec. 26-173. - Meter maintenance fees. 
    The rate to be charged to each account for the maintenance of meters is as follows: 
    Residential: $6.00 per month per meter. 
    Commercial: 
Meter Size Rate Per Month 3/4" meter $ 6.00 ?" meter $ 6.00 1" meter $ 6.00 11/2" meter $ 7.00 2" meter $ 9.00 3" meter $13.00 4" meter $17.00 5" meter $21.00 6" meter $25.00 8" meter $34.00  
The amount to be charged for meter maintenance fees shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2646NS, § 5, 12-17-2018) 
Secs. 26-174-26-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BILLING AND BILLING ADJUSTMENTS 

Sec. 26-201. - Estimated bills. 
    The city's water meters shall be read on approximately 30-day intervals, and billing for service will normally be submitted at monthly intervals. Whenever it is not possible with reasonable diligence to read meters for each billing period, the city may submit an estimated bill to the customer, which will be based upon previous usage and other available information. As necessary, the amount of such estimated bill may be subsequently adjusted when the next actual reading is obtained. 
(Code 1986, § 25-60; Code 2002, § 26-201) 
Sec. 26-202. - Delinquency; late payment penalty. 
    All water bills are due and payable upon receipt. If the bill is not paid by the due date, water service shall be subject to being discontinued. If the bill is not paid in full on or before the due date, a late payment penalty, in an amount to be set in the city fee schedule adopted and updated by resolution of the city commission shall be assessed. 
(Code 1986, § 25-61; Code 2002, § 26-202; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 11, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-203. - Adjustment of bills. 
    When a water customer questions his billed usage for any time period because of gross discrepancies, the account shall be checked for clerical and technical accuracy. If it is reasonably determined that the city is not responsible for the unusual usage in question, the city manager or designee may, on a case-by-case basis, make adjustments to the account. 
(Code 1986, § 25-61.1; Code 2002, § 26-203) 
Secs. 26-204-26-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CREDIT AND COLLECTION POLICIES 

Sec. 26-231. - Discontinuance of service for nonpayment; reconnection charges; deposit increase. 
(a)  Applicability. Water service shall be discontinued for any person who owes a past-due and delinquent utility account who is a recipient, beneficiary or consumer of water, whether such account is offered by some other name or not. 
(b)  Amount due; increase of deposit. The gross amount due shall be the current utility bill plus the penalty and any arrears. If the utility bill, penalty and arrears are not paid in full by the past-due date, water service shall be subject to being discontinued. No water service shall be reestablished until all bills are paid. Furthermore, the amount required for the deposit will be doubled based on the current prevailing deposit rates. 
(c)  Resetting meter. In certain instances, if the city determines that a meter or any other related property should be removed from a customer's premises to prevent the unauthorized taking of city water services, a charge in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission will be assessed to the customer's account for resetting the meter. 
(d)  Administrative fee for process of disconnecting. Once the city water department begins the process of disconnecting water service to a customer due to late payment or failure to pay a water bill, an administrative fee, in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, will automatically be assessed to that customer's bill, regardless of whether the customer pays the bill prior to actual disconnection of water service. 
(e)  Rescheduling fee. When a customer schedules a time for the service to be turned on, or reconnected, the customer, or adult occupant, must be present at the appointment time. If the customer, or adult occupant, is not present, and a time must be rescheduled, the customer's account will be assessed a fee in an amount described in the city fee schedule, which may be amended or updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(f)  Cutoff notice fee. If an account has not been paid in full by the due date, a cutoff notice may be sent to the account holder; if a cutoff notice is sent, a fee will be assessed to the customer's account in an amount described in the city fee schedule, which may be amended or updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(g)  After-hours connection service fee . If a customer requests to have utility services connected, or reconnected after the normal business hours of the customer service office, that customer shall pay, in advance of the reconnection, a fee in an amount described in the city fee schedule, which may be amended or updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, together with the current utility bill, plus any penalty, and any arrears. The payment for the after-hours reconnect service must be paid 30 minutes prior to the end of the normal business hours for the customer service office. The allotted time for the reconnect service will be two hours given to the customer at the time of payment and the customer will be required to be at the location at the time the reconnection is made. 
(Code 1986, § 25-65; Code 2002, § 26-231; Ord. No. 2090NS, § 1, 2, 4-7-2003; Ord. No. 2189NS, § 1, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 2239NS, §§ 2, 3, 2-21-2006; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 12, 3-20-2017; Ord. No. 2646NS, §§ 6-8, 12-17-2018) 
Sec. 26-232. - Extension of time to pay. 
    When the city clerk or designee determines the facts warrant an extension of time to pay a utility bill, such extension may be granted. Such an extension shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 60 days. Failure to comply with any extension agreement may result in disconnection of service without further notice, and no additional extension will be granted for one year from the date of the broken agreement. 
(Code 1986, § 25-66; Code 2002, § 26-232) 
Sec. 26-233. - Dishonored checks. 
    There is levied, for the purpose of defraying bookkeeping costs and expenses, a charge in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, which shall become a part of the account of any customer in the city when any check given in payment of water, sewer, sanitation or other service charges is returned from the bank after payment is refused for any reason. A returned check is considered nonpayment of a bill. Further, failure to replace the returned check with cash or a certified/cashier's check before 11:00 a.m. on the next working day after notification that the check has been returned will result in immediate disconnection of utility service without further notice. If two such returned checks are made to the city for utility service within any last preceding 12-month period, payment of each monthly bill by such customer of the next 12-month period of ensuing service shall be made and accepted only when tendered by certified/cashier's check, cash or money order. 
(Code 1986, § 25-67; Code 2002, § 26-233; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 13, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-234. - Collection remedies. 
    On utility accounts which are found to be in default, the city manager or designee may institute all collection remedies available to the city, including, but not limited to, collection agency services and garnishment or execution on property, if the city obtains a judgment against the customer in a suit to collect money owed. If such suit is filed, the court cost shall be included in the suit as money owed. 
(Code 1986, § 25-68; Code 2002, § 26-234) 
Sec. 26-235. - False information to avoid charges. 
    If the city clerk or designee receives sufficient evidence to indicate that a customer has provided false information to establish water service at a new location to avoid the payment of charges owing at a previous location, the city shall transfer the charges owed to the current account, and the charges shall become a part of the customer's utility bill, at which time the entire bill becomes subject to the city's payment policy. 
(Code 1986, § 25-69; Code 2002, § 26-235) 
Secs. 26-236-26-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Sewer improvements, 11 O.S. § 37-201 et seq.; sewage generally, 27A O.S. § 2-6-401 et seq.; state water and sewage laboratories, 27A O.S. § 2-4-701. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Administrator means the person designated by the city to manage the implementation and enforcement of the industrial pretreatment program. The city may designate the public works director, the utility director or other qualified individual who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities under this article. 
    Approval authority means the administrator of Region VI of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or designee. 
    Authorized representative of the industrial user means the authorized representative of an industrial user, who may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president if the industrial user is a corporation. 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively. 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1) or (2) of this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building drain means the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the publicly owned treatment works. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the measure of the oxygen consuming capacity expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable matter, and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. The laboratory determination of COD shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Analysis Methods. 
    Color means the optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density. 
    Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
    Control authority means the "approval authority" defined in this section or the utility director if the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Domestic wastewater means the wastewater normally discharged into the sanitary connections of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard thereafter promulgated is in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act into the publicly owned treatment works, including holding tank waste discharged into the system. 
    Industrial user means any user of publicly owned treatment works, identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, as amended and supplemented. 
    Industrial waste means all waterborne solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastewater, or distinct from normal domestic wastewater. 
    Inspector means the city code enforcement officer, or any duly authorized representative thereof. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of the publicly owned treatment works' National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder or more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Medical wastes means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the weight-to-volume ratio expressed in metric equivalent. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with the section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity at the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction of a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b or (1)c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined had commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun or caused to begin, as a part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    Normal domestic wastewater means the normal wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewer of the city in which the average concentration of suspended solids is established at 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l), the average concentration of five-day BOD established at 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the publicly owned treatment works into waters of the United States in quantities or concentration which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the publicly owned treatment works' National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
    pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units. 
    Pollutant means any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater, i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, odor. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. These prohibitions appear in section 26-404. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-quarter inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights and the use of which is controlled by public authority. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances that convey wastewater to the publicly owned treatment works treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment works. For purposes of this article, the term "publicly owned treatment works" also includes any sewers that convey wastewaters to the publicly owned treatment works from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's publicly owned treatment works. 
    Publicly owned treatment works treatment plant or POTW treatment plant means that portion of the publicly owned treatment works designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Receiving stream means that body of water, stream, or watercourse receiving the discharge waters from the wastewater treatment plan or formed by the waters discharged from the wastewater treatment plant. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water and groundwater, or unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. It shall include all sanitary sewer trunk lines, main lines, collector lines, lateral lines, and sewage treatment plants and all sewer lines connected to the city's sewer lines or treatment plants, whether owned by the city or not. 
    Septic tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's publicly owned treatment works: 
(1)  That is subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater; 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the publicly owned treatment works treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the publicly owned treatment works operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Single-family residential unit means a building containing one dwelling unit and designed for or used exclusively by one family. 
    Slug load means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 26-404 or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard analysis methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition at the time of analysis of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes as prepared by the Environmental Protection Agency's Water Quality Control Laboratory, Cincinnati, Ohio, or other procedures set forth in the federal regulations, 40 CFR 136, Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
    Storm sewer of storm drain means a sewer that carries stormwater and surface water and drainage but excludes domestic wastewater and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means the resulting water from rainfall or any other form of precipitation. 
    Surcharge means the charge in addition to the user charge which is made on those users whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as normal domestic wastewater. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means one of 126 pollutants or combination of those pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of section 307 of the Act (33 USC 1317). 
    Treatment plant effluent means any discharge of pollutants from the publicly owned treatment works into waters of the state. 
    Two-family residential unit means a building containing two dwellings and designed for or used exclusively by two families; also includes the word "duplex." 
    Unpolluted water means water containing none of the following; free or emulsified grease or oil, acids or alkalis, phenols, or other substances imparting taste or odor to receiving water, toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; and noxious or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than ten milligrams per liter each of suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed 20 color units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in standard analysis methods. 
    User means a person having a contract for water service, at a particular location if the location has a sanitary sewer connection with the city system; or if there is no water contract on file, then the person who is charged with water bills for the location or who pays same, or if a private water supply is used, then the proprietor or owner of the location having the sewer connection. 
    User charge means the charge made on all users of the sanitary sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values defined as normal domestic wastewater. 
    Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the publicly owned treatment works. 
    Wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued under subdivision II of division 2 of this article. 
    Wastewater treatment works means all facilities for collection, pumping, treatment, and all city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge from the city wastewater facility. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1986, § 25-96(a); Code 2002, § 26-261; Ord. No. 1977NS, § 1, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-262. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations used in this article shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand CFR Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical oxygen demand EPA Environmental Protection Agency gpd Gallons per day l Liter mg Milligrams mg/l Milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System O&M Operation and maintenance POTW Publicly owned treatment works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act SIC Standard industrial classification SDWA Safe Drinking Water Act TSS Total suspended solids USC United States Code  
(Code 1986, § 25-97; Code 2002, § 26-262) 
Sec. 26-263. - Purpose; policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludges; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the city wastewater system. 
(c)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the city wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that an existing customer's capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article. 
(d)  This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the publicly owned treatment works. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the utility director of the publicly owned treatment works shall administer, implement and enforce this article. 
(Code 1986, § 25-100; Code 2002, § 26-263; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-264. - Fines and civil penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated this article; a wastewater discharge permit; or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, including costs for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the city may recover reasonable technical and administrative costs, punitive damages, attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit against the user found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 25-98; Code 2002, § 26-264; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 14, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-265. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or a wastewater contribution permit or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, plus costs. 
(Code 1986, § 25-99; Code 2002, § 26-265; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 15, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-266. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Emergency suspensions. Under this article, the administrator or designated representative may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons. The administrator or designated representative may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the publicly owned treatment works, causes the city to violate any condition of its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or which presents or may present endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. If the user fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the administrator or designated representative shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the publicly owned treatment works or the receiving stream or endangerment to any individual. The administrator or designated representative shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in subsection (b) of this section are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the administrator, prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections (b) and (d) of this section. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(b)  Termination of discharge; revocation of permit. Any user that violates the following conditions of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or orders issued under this article is subject to discharge termination and/or revocation of the permit: 
(1)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(2)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or 
(4)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained in this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and offered the opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(c)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained in this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the administrator or designated representative may serve upon the user a written notice of violation stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the administrator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(d)  Show cause hearing. The administrator or designated representative may order any user that causes or contributes to a violation of this article; a wastewater discharge permit; or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained in this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement to appear before the administrator or designated representative and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(1)  A user may be accompanied by legal counsel if so desired. The city may request that the city attorney be present. 
(2)  The meeting shall be closed to the public. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony may be taken under oath and recorded stenographically. A transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges. 
(e)  Consent orders. The administrator or designated representative is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include the specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified in the order. 
(f)  Compliance orders. When the administrator or designated representative finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained in this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within 180 days. If the user does not come into compliance within the specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Cease and desist orders. When the administrator or designated representative finds that a user is violating this section, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued under this section or any other pretreatment standard or requirement or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the administrator or designated representative may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to immediately comply with all requirements and take such appropriate remedial or preventive actions as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other enforcement action against the user. 
(h)  Citation and fines. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user that is found to have violated any section of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this article or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. Such fine shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. For of monthly or other longterm average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. Fines shall be assessed in the following manner: 
(1)  The administrator or designated representative shall issue a citation to appear in municipal court to the user found to be in violation. 
(2)  The citation shall state the nature of the violation and a date by which the fine shall be paid to the municipal court. 
Issuance of a citation and fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other enforcement action against the user. 
(Code 1986, § 25-101; Code 2002, § 26-266; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 16, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-267. - Industrial wastewater dischargers. 
(a)  When requested by the administrator, every industrial user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing its discharge. The administrator is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this article and subjects the violator to the penalties set out in section 26-266. 
(b)  The administrator may require any industrial user, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits in accordance with subdivision II of division 2 of this article as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 25-102; Code 2002, § 26-267) 
Sec. 26-268. - Standards for public sanitary sewer lines. 
    There is adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing standards and specifications for the construction of sanitary sewer lines, the current edition of Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Sanitary Sewer Lines, Shawnee, Oklahoma, of which not less than three copies are filed in the office of the utilities department and are made a part of the public records of the city, and the specifications are incorporated in this section as fully as if set out at length. All sanitary sewer lines and water pollution control facilities shall conform to the state department of health standards for water pollution control facilities as set forth in ODH Engineering Bulletin No. 0587, as adopted and as may be from time to time amended by the state board of health. 
(Code 1986, § 25-119; Code 2002, § 26-268) 
Sec. 26-269. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  The city shall require to be provided and operated, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities and/or a manhole as approved by the city engineer to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 25-105; Code 2002, § 26-269) 
Sec. 26-270. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, approval authority and where the NPDES state is the approval authority, the Environmental Protection Agency shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and Environmental Protection Agency will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Code 1986, § 25-106; Code 2002, § 26-270) 
Sec. 26-271. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be accepted into the publicly owned treatment works at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area and at such times as are established by the administrator, provided such wastes do not violate section 26-404 or 26-407 or any other requirements established or adopted by the city. Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such facilities shall be issued by the administrator. 
(b)  The discharge of hauled industrial wastes is strictly prohibited without prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the city utility director. The utility director shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such wastes, if such waste would interfere with the treatment plant operations. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this article. 
(c)  Fees for dumping septage will be established as a part of the industrial user fee system as authorized in section 26-28. 
(Code 1986, § 25-121; Code 2002, § 26-271; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 5, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-272. - Sewer connection. 
(a)  Sewer connection within 30 days. The owners of all lots lying alongside or abutting upon any alley or street upon which a lateral of the city system of sanitary sewers is now, or hereafter will be laid, shall connect all water closets, urinals, sinks, or other places where refuse, slops, wastewater, or domestic waste of any kind is accumulated or deposited, within 30 days after the completion of such lateral. 
(1)  The facilities required by this subsection shall be the sanitary water closet type when such building is located within 250 feet of a sanitary sewer and is accessible thereto. 
(2)  No person owning property accessible to a sanitary sewer as defined in this section shall permit the accumulation of waste, slops, wastewater or domestic waste of any kind upon such property except in facilities required by this section. 
(3)  The public sewer system will be used whenever such system is available by all persons discharging any wastewater, industrial waste, or other polluted liquids unless an exception is granted by the inspector. 
(b)  Separate connection required for each building. Each building shall be separately and independently connected with the sanitary sewer where one is provided, except where two or more buildings are on the same lot of ground. 
(c)  Connection to be made by licensed plumber. No person shall make any connection to the sanitary sewer, except as properly licensed plumber. 
(d)  Connections with storm sewers or natural outlet prohibited. No person shall deposit or discharge any wastewater, industrial waste, other polluted waters or liquids on public or private property, in or adjacent to any natural outlet or any natural watercourse, or in any storm sewer within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city without the approval of the state department of environmental quality. 
(e)  Connections to laterals only. No private sewer connections, whether or not within the city limits, shall be made to any sewer line directly or indirectly connected with the city sewer system other than to a lateral constructed to serve the private premises in question, except by a special contract approved by the inspector. 
(f)  Wastewater tap fees. Any person wishing to establish a connection to any city sewer line, connected directly or indirectly with the city's sewer system shall pay a wastewater tap fee to the city clerk, in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 26-272; Ord. No. 1976NS, §§ 1-5, 8-7-2000; Ord. No. 2289NS, § 2, 11-20-2006; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 17, 3-20-2017) 
Sec. 26-273. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors; exception. 
(a)  Interceptors provided as required. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when, in the opinion of the inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, and, or other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Private dwellings excepted. Interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(c)  Approval of interceptors. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the inspector and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be constructed under the supervision of the inspector and shall be maintained by the user, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 2002, § 26-273; Ord. No. 1976NS, § 6, 8-7-2000) 
Sec. 26-274. - Tampering with sewage works prohibited. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is a part of the sewage works. 
(Code 202, § 26-274; Ord. No. 1976NS, § 7, 8-7-2000) 
Secs. 26-275-26-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMITS AND REPORTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 26-301. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs and from city inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program or pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the industrial user furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1986, § 25-108; Code 2002, § 26-301) 
Secs. 26-302-26-325. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Wastewater Contribution Permits 

Sec. 26-326. - Required; scope. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge wastewater into the city's publicly owned treatment works without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the administrator. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the permittee to the penalties set out in section 26-266. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligations to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. The administrator may require other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(b)  Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes to the publicly owned treatment works must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin. Any existing significant industrial user that discharges industrial wastes into the publicly owned treatment works shall not cause or allow such discharges to the publicly owned treatment works to continue after 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the administrator. Any significant industrial user proposing to introduce new wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents must obtain a revised wastewater discharge permit before any such change. An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which such proposed change in the volume or character of wastewater discharge will begin. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(a); Code 2002, § 26-326) 
Sec. 26-327. - Application. 
(a)  An industrial user required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee in the amount required by the city. In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all industrial users required to have a wastewater discharge permit must submit the information required by section 26-363. The administrator shall prepare a form to be used as a permit application. In addition, the following information may be requested: 
(1)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(2)  Number and type of employees and proposed or actual hours of operation. 
(3)  Each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production. 
(4)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(5)  The site plans, floor plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size, location and elevation and all points of discharge. 
(6)  Time and duration of discharge. 
(7)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the administrator to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(b)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant for revision. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(b); Code 2002, § 26-327) 
Sec. 26-328. - Application signatories and certification. 
    All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: 
    "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(c); Code 2002, § 26-328) 
Sec. 26-329. - Approval or denial. 
    The administrator will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user on the application for a wastewater contribution permit and may require additional information. Within 15 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the administrator will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. The administrator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(d); Code 2002, § 26-329) 
Sec. 26-330. - Duration. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the administrator. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(e); Code 2002, § 26-330) 
Sec. 26-331. - Required contents. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the administrator to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the receiving water of the publicly owned treatment works, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality and protect against damage to the publicly owned treatment works. Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the duration of the wastewater discharge permit, which in no event shall exceed five years. 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification and approval from the city and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  Effluent limits applicable to the industrial user based on applicable standards in federal, state and local law. 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law. 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(6)  Industrial users must notify the POTW immediately of changes that occur at the facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge, thereby allowing the POTW to re-evaluate the need for a slug control plan or other actions to prevent such discharges. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(f); Code 2002, § 26-331; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 6, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-332. - Additional contents. 
    Wastewater discharge permits may contain but need not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
(2)  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
(3)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(4)  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or routine discharges. 
(5)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(6)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater to be discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. 
(7)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
(8)  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(9)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the administrator to ensure compliance with this article and federal and state laws, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(g); Code 2002, § 26-332) 
Sec. 26-333. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of the effective date of the permit. 
(b)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(c)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit conditions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(e)  If the city fails to act within 15 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(f)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a petition with the district court for the county within 30 days of the administrative decision. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(h); Code 2002, § 26-333) 
Sec. 26-334. - Modifications. 
(a)  The administrator may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance. 
(3)  A change in the publicly owned treatment works that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the publicly owned treatment works, the city's personnel or the receiving waters. 
(5)  Violation of any terms or condition of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting. 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13. 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
(b)  The filing of a request by the permittee for a modification of the wastewater discharge permit does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(i); Code 2002, § 26-334) 
Sec. 26-335. - Transferability. 
    A wastewater discharge permit may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the administrator and the administrator approves the transfer of the wastewater discharge permit. The notice to the administrator must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes. 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur. 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(j); Code 2002, § 26-335) 
Sec. 26-336. - Revocation. 
    A wastewater discharge permit may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge. 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the city of a changed condition. 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(6)  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records. 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
(8)  Failure to pay fines. 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility. 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(k); Code 2002, § 26-336) 
Sec. 26-337. - Reissuance. 
    A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration date of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1986, § 25-103(l); Code 2002, § 26-337) 
Secs. 26-338-26-360. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Reports by Permittee 

Sec. 26-361. - Scope. 
    This subdivision sets out the various reporting requirements for industrial users as required in 40 CFR 403.12 of the general pretreatment regulations. Submission of the reports required by sections 26-364 and 26-365 will not be required when the city collects all the information required for the reports. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104; Code 2002, § 26-361) 
Sec. 26-362. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Required. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the publicly owned treatment works shall be required to submit to the city a report that contains the information listed in this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of its discharge, a new source and any source that becomes an industrial user subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall be required to submit to the city a report that contains the information listed in this section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharge. This report is identified as the baseline monitoring report (BMR) and shall contain the following required information: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners. 
(2)  Environmental control permits. A list of environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the publicly owned treatment works from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurements. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the publicly owned treatment works from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and longterm average concentrations and/or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures set forth in this article. 
(6)  Certification of pretreatment standards. A statement reviewed by the authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide the additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this subsection must meet the requirements set out in section 26-266(f). 
(b)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 26-328. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(a); Code 2002, § 26-362) 
Sec. 26-363. - Compliance schedule progress report. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by section 26-362(a)(7). The schedule contains progress increments in the form of dates of the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include the hiring of an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine operation). No such increment shall exceed nine months. The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the administrator no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(b); Code 2002, § 26-363) 
Sec. 26-364. - Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the utility director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to be a qualified professional. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(c); Code 2002, § 26-364; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-365. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency determined by the administrator but in no case less than twice per year (in April and October), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with this subdivision. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the publicly owned treatment works, using procedures prescribed in this subdivision, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(d); Code 2002, § 26-365) 
Sec. 26-366. - Report of changed condition. 
(a)  Each industrial user is required to notify the administrator of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(b)  The administrator may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including submission of a wastewater discharge permit application. 
(c)  The administrator may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  No industrial user shall implement the planned changed conditions until and unless the administrator has responded to the notice of changed conditions. 
(e)  For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants shall be deemed significant. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(e); Code 2002, § 26-366) 
Sec. 26-367. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  If any discharge occurs, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge or a slug load which may cause potential problems for the publicly owned treatment works, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless waived by the administrator, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the publicly owned treatment works or natural resources or any damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article. 
(c)  Each failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(d)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call if a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section occurs. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(f); Code 2002, § 26-367) 
Sec. 26-368. - Reports from nonsignificant industrial users. 
    All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the administrator may require. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(g); Code 2002, § 26-368) 
Sec. 26-369. - Notice of violation. 
    If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city with 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to resample if the publicly owned treatment works performs monitoring of the industrial user at least once a month or if the publicly owned treatment works performs sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(h); Code 2002, § 26-369) 
Sec. 26-370. - Hazardous waste notification. 
(a)  Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the city, the Environmental Protection Agency Regional Waste Management Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into a publicly owned treatment works of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the Environmental Protection Agency hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than ten kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the publicly owned treatment works, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during the calendar month and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 961-33(e) requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  For any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the publicly owned treatment works, the Environmental Protection Agency Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and the state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substances within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  If any notification is made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(i); Code 2002, § 26-370) 
Sec. 26-371. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as a part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in applicable categorical pretreatment standards. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(j); Code 2002, § 26-371) 
Sec. 26-372. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this section, the industrial user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. If flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the administrator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(k); Code 2002, § 26-372) 
Sec. 26-373. - Timing of reports. 
    Written reports required under this subdivision will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(l); Code 2002, § 26-373) 
Sec. 26-374. - Recordkeeping. 
    Industrial users shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records and information required to be retained under this article. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this article or where the industrial user has been specifically notified by the administrator of a longer retention period. 
(Code 1986, § 25-104(m); Code 2002, § 26-374) 
Secs. 26-375-26-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES AND LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 26-401. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 26-263. 
(Code 1986, § 25-114; Code 2002, § 26-401) 
Sec. 26-402. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on wastewater discharges shall apply when they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 25-113; Code 2002, § 26-402) 
Sec. 26-403. - Pretreatment standards adopted solely by city. 
    The city is granted the authority to establish pretreatment and effluent discharge standards on its own initiative. If new pretreatment or discharge standards, solely initiated and adopted by the city, or revisions to existing city standards are considered, a public hearing shall be held before the city commission prior to the adoption thereof. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least 15 days prior to the hearing in a legal publication of general circulation within the city. In addition, all known users and other interested persons affected by the proposed standards shall be mailed written notice of the public hearing. Comments and suggestions received at the public hearing shall be considered during the preparation of the city's final pretreatment standards. 
(Code 1986, § 25-115; Code 2002, § 26-403) 
Sec. 26-404. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the publicly owned treatment works any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the publicly owned treatment works, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirement. Furthermore, no industrial user may contribute the following substances to the publicly owned treatment works: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the city wastewater collection system and publicly owned treatment works, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or more than 9.0 or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the publicly owned treatment works or equipment or endangering personnel. 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the publicly owned treatment works resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the publicly owned treatment works or any wastewater treatment or sludge process or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(5)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 65 degrees Celsius (150 degrees Fahrenheit) or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the publicly owned treatment works in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge locations designated by the city, in accordance with section 26-271. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(10)  Any wastewater which imparts color that cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the publicly owned treatment works' National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. Color, in combination with turbidity, shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent from the seasonable established norm for aquatic life. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except as specifically approved by the administrator in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations. 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the administrator. 
(13)  Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(14)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the administrator in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(15)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(16)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the publicly owned treatment works. 
(17)  Any discharge of fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin is limited to 100 mg/l. 
(b)  Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. All floor drains located in process or material storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the publicly owned treatment works. 
(Code 1986, § 25-109; Code 2002, § 26-404; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 7, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-405. - Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards generally. 
    Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The utility director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Code 1986, § 25-110; Code 2002, § 26-405; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-406. - Notice of new Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards; appeal. 
(a)  If new or revised Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards are mandated and promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency, the utility director will analyze such standards and determine which users are affected thereby. After the utility director makes such determination, the affected users shall be notified in writing. 
(b)  After receipt of the notice mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, any user may contest the determination of the utility director by addressing a letter of protest to the utility director within ten days from the date such notice is received. The utility director, after receipt of the protest, shall review the new standards and respond, in writing, to the protest within 30 calendar days from the receipt of the protest. During this 30-day period, the city attorney shall also render his written opinion as to whether the utility director has made his determination in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws. If, after the completion of this review, the utility director issues a determination that the new or revised pretreatment standards are applicable to the protesting user, any additional protest must be submitted to a court of competent jurisdiction by the affected user. 
(Code 1986, § 25-111; Code 2002, § 26-406; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-407. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)  Specific pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations of the following pollutants that are above the concentrations listed in the pretreatment program document or, in combination with other contributors, shall cause pass through or interference at the city wastewater treatment plant(s): 
(1)  Arsenic. 
(2)  Cadmium. 
(3)  Chromium. 
(4)  Copper. 
(5)  Cyanide. 
(6)  Lead. 
(7)  Mercury. 
(8)  Molybdenum. 
(9)  Nickel. 
(10)  Phenols. 
(11)  Selenium. 
(12)  Silver. 
(13)  Thallium. 
(14)  Zinc. 
(b)  Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the publicly owned treatment works. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal, unless indicated otherwise. 
(c)  At his discretion, the administrator may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of concentration-based limits. BOD, TSS and phenol limits may apply to specific permits as deemed necessary by the administrator. At his discretion, the administrator may also impose limits for conventional pollutants by means of a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1986, § 25-112; Code 2002, § 26-407; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 8, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-408. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(Code 1986, § 25-116; Code 2002, § 26-408) 
Sec. 26-409. - Accidental discharges/slug control plan. 
(a)  Generally. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge or prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. The administrator may require any industrial user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years, the administrator shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges. 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals. 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the publicly owned treatment works of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in section 26-404. 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building and containment structures and equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants including solvents and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. If an accidental discharge occurs, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the publicly owned treatment works of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge; the type of waste, concentration and volume; and corrective actions. 
(b)  Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the utility director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the publicly owned treatment works, fish kills or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call if a dangerous discharge occurs. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1986, § 25-117; Code 2002, § 26-409; Ord. No. 2530NS, § 1, 2-18-2014) 
Sec. 26-410. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facility required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  The city shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a list of industrial users which, during the preceding 12 months, have been in significant noncompliance, in accordance with the general pretreatment regulations, or which have otherwise significantly violated this article. 
(c)  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the Environmental Protection Agency or approval authority upon request. 
(Code 1986, § 25-107; Code 2002, § 26-410) 
Secs. 26-411-26-435. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE 

Sec. 26-436. - Adopted. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Private Sewage Disposal Code, 2003 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the private sewage disposal code of the city, regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of individual sewage disposal systems in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 7-400; Code 2002, § 26-436; Ord. No. 2131NS, § 1, 1-20-2004) 
Sec. 26-437. - Amendments. 
    Section 101.1 (page 1, second line) is amended by inserting the following: The City of Shawnee, Oklahoma. 
    Section P-106.4,2 (page 5) is amended by inserting the following: 
(1)  New construction, single-family residence. For new construction in a single-family residence, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
(2)  New construction, commercial or multiple occupancy. For new construction in a commercial or multiple occupancy, the fee shall be included in the building permit fee. 
(3)  Change of an existing service. For change of an existing service in a residential, commercial or multiple occupancy, the fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, per occurrence. 
(4)  Reinspection. For reinspection made necessary because of defective work, a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, of $25.00 shall be charged for the first occurrence and a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule adopted and updated from time to time by resolution of the city commission, for every subsequent occurrence. 
(6)  Construction without a permit. The permit fee shall triple if any person commences construction prior to obtaining a permit. 
    Section 106.4.3(2) (page 5) is amended by inserting the following: The permit fee will not be refunded when work has not been done under the permit issued in accordance with this code. 
    Section 106.4.3(3) (page 5) is amended by inserting the following: The plan review fee will not be refunded when work has not been done under the permit issued in accordance with this code. 
(Code 2002, § 26-437; Ord. No. 2259NS, § 1, 5-15-2006; Ord. No. 2597NS, § 18, 3-20-2017) 
Chapter 27 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation and maintenance of trees, 11 O.S. § 22-122; encroachments and obstructions in streets, 11 O.S. § 36-107. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 27-1-27-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-26. - Title to trees, shrubbery and parking abutting streets; injury; powers of city. 
(a)  The owners of real estate situated in the city abutting upon public streets and avenues shall have, subject to the lawful supervision of the city over its streets, such title to and right to property in: 
(1)  Growing trees situated in front of such real estate, but within the boundary line of the streets and avenues, and within the curbline; or 
(2)  Parking and ornamental shrubbery planted and cultivated within the curbline of the streets and avenues. 
(b)  The title and rights in subsection (a) of this section are granted so as to enable the owners, in case of wrongful injury or destruction of the trees, shrubbery or parking, to recover from the person or corporation causing the injury or destruction the full damages which the abutting property in front of which they are situated may sustain by reason thereof, notwithstanding the fee title to the land in such streets and avenues may not be in the owner of the abutting property. 
(c)  The abutting property owners shall also have, subject to the limitations provided in this section, the right of action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin wrongful injury to or destruction of the trees, shrubbery or parking. The necessary trimming of such trees or shrubbery to permit the proper stringing and passage of utility and other wires shall not be considered as a wrongful injury. 
Nothing in this section shall deprive the city commission of the ordinary supervision of its streets or of the right to direct, by proper ordinance, the manner of planting or cultivating such trees, shrubbery or parking on the part of the street where they shall be so planted and cultivated and from exercising reasonable supervision of the trees, shrubbery or parking and causing them to be trimmed and grown in such manner as not to interfere with public travel upon the streets and sidewalks or other public use. 
(Code 1986, § 26-1; Code 2002, § 27-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 36-106. 
Sec. 27-27. - Trimming by property owners. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking means and includes the area between the edge of a street or avenue and the property line of property abutting such street or avenue. 
    Such distances means all of the area within 100 feet of public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys and other public places. 
(b)  Every person who is the owner of or who as agent has the control of any real property or premises situated within the city abutting on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place shall trim and keep trimmed all trees and shrubs on such real property and premises and the parking contiguous or adjacent thereto. 
(c)  Such owner or agent shall remove or cause to be removed all dead, partially dead or damaged trees and shrubs located within such distances from public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys and other public places which constitute hazards to pedestrians or vehicular traffic if such trees or shrubs or limbs therefrom should fall or be blown down by the winds. 
(d)  If such owner or agent desires to remove only dead or damaged limbs from live trees or shrubs, such removal shall be accomplished in a manner as to eliminate such hazard; otherwise the entire tree or shrub shall be removed. 
(e)  Removal of trees and shrubs in parking areas shall be accomplished in such a manner that stumps shall not be unsightly or hazardous to pedestrians. Such unsightly or hazardous stumps are declared to be public nuisances. 
(f)  The branches of trees which overhang any portion of streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks or other public places shall be trimmed in such manner that the lowermost branches thereof shall be at least 15 feet above the portion of the street or avenue level and at least ten feet above the level of the sidewalks or other public places. 
(Code 1986, § 26-2; Code 2002, § 27-27) 
Sec. 27-28. - Manner of trimming generally. 
    All trees and shrubs located in the streets, parking or other public places shall be pruned and trimmed in the following manner: 
(1)  No tree shall be topped, except in the process of removal, line clearance, storm damage, building interference or dieback. 
(2)  Maple and walnut shall be pruned when in leaf. Emergency cuts are allowable when the public safety is involved. 
(3)  Cuts shall be made flush with the trunk or branch to prevent leaving stubs when a branch is removed. 
(4)  Trees and shrubs in the parking shall be trimmed in such a manner as to prevent their interference with traffic on the street or sidewalk. Limb clearance of mature trees shall be a minimum of 15 feet over the street and ten feet over the walk. 
(5)  Old stubs, dead limbs, cross limbs and rubbing limbs shall be removed; the crown shall be balanced; and improperly made cuts shall be recut when practicable. Limbs requiring excessively large removal cuts, particularly on older trees, should be made only with intent to create more sound, more safe and more desirable specimens without allowing for ultimate entrance of decay. 
(6)  No spurs or climbers shall be used, except when removing a tree. 
(7)  The manner in which trees and shrubs are trimmed inside the property line is at the discretion of the property owner. 
(8)  All trees and shrubs when removed in the parking shall be done under the supervision of the parks superintendent. 
(Code 1986, § 26-3; Code 2002, § 27-28) 
Sec. 27-29. - Safety in pruning, trimming and removal. 
    The following safety regulations shall be followed at all times in connection with the pruning, trimming and removing of trees and shrubs: 
(1)  Suitable street and sidewalk warning signs shall be placed in such a manner as to give safe and reasonable warning. The use of red flags and flagmen to coordinate safe dropping of trees or limbs is mandatory except where no humans are jeopardized by such actions. 
(2)  At least one responsible person shall coordinate operations on the ground at any time a person is working in the upper portions of a tree. 
(3)  Red lanterns or flares and adequate barriers shall be placed and properly maintained in an effective manner on or about any obstruction remaining on or adjacent to the parking area after dark. Holes resulting from tree and shrub removals shall be properly filled so as not to constitute a hazard. 
(4)  If it is necessary that the regular flow of traffic will be impeded or restricted in any way, prior notification of such intent shall be reported to the police and fire departments. 
(Code 1986, § 26-4; Code 2002, § 27-29) 
Secs. 27-30-27-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE TO TRIM, PRUNE OR REMOVE 

Sec. 27-56. - Required; fees. 
    No person shall do any trimming, pruning or removing of trees and shrubs for hire or engage in such business within the city unless such person applies for and obtains a license to conduct such business and pays to the city clerk a license fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per annum. Such license fee shall expire on December 31 of each year following the date of issuance. The full annual fee shall be paid in advance, and no license shall be issued for less than the full annual fee. 
(Code 1986, § 26-5; Code 2002, § 27-56) 
State Law reference- Duration of municipal licenses, 11 O.S. § 22-107. 
Sec. 27-57. - Bond. 
(a)  Before any license is issued to any person engaged in the business of pruning, trimming or removing trees, he shall file a surety bond with the city clerk in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, payable to the city and conditioned that: 
(1)  The principal will at all times do all pruning, trimming and removing of trees strictly in accordance with this article; 
(2)  All work will be done in a good and workmanlike manner; 
(3)  The city shall be fully indemnified and held whole and harmless from any cost, expense, damages to real property or personal injury done to any person or property in the prosecution of such work as a tree pruner that may arise out of or be occasioned in the performance of such work; and 
(4)  He will cause all streets, alleys and sidewalks that have been impaired in any manner to be repaired and put in the same condition as they were before the work was done. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any tree pruner until such bond has been filed with and approved by the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1986, § 26-6; Code 2002, § 27-57) 
Sec. 27-58. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Before any license required under this division is issued to a tree pruner, he shall file with the city clerk an insurance policy for an indemnity fund as provided in this section. 
(b)  The insurance policy shall be issued by any insurance company licensed to do business in the state and shall provide public liability insurance for every operation or job performed by such tree pruner for the injury or death of any one person, for the injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident and for property damage in any one accident growing out of such work. Such liability insurance coverage shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The policy shall further provide that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation has been given to the city clerk, and such policy shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city for any changes therein. 
(d)  The policy shall be approved by the city manager or designee and endorsed thereon. The policy shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. The policy shall be made for the use, benefit and protection of the city and for the use, benefit and protection of any person who may suffer injury either to his person or property because of any accident or omission or negligence of any tree pruner. If such policy is approved by the city manager or designee, it shall remain in full force and effect during the life of any such license issued. 
(e)  If, after the approval of such policy and after the issuance of the license, the policy is allowed to lapse or is not renewed by the payment of premiums, the city manager may cancel any license issued under this division, after notice to the licensee and after an opportunity to be heard. The cancellation of any policy shall in no way affect or terminate any liability arising prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(Code 1986, § 26-7; Code 2002, § 27-58) 
Sec. 27-59. - Labeling of business vehicles. 
(a)  Except for passenger automobiles, all motor vehicles used in any manner by a person issued a license under this division, while such vehicles are used in the scope of such business, shall be identified by having conspicuously placed on both sides of each vehicle an identification number issued by the city to the licensee. Such number shall be issued by the licensing clerk in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  All such numbers shall be printed at least two inches in height. They shall be preceded by the capital letter "S," indicating the city, and a second letter "T," identifying the type of trade. Identifying letters shall be followed by the identification number given to the licensee by the office of the city clerk upon application for the license or renewal of the license. 
(Code 1986, § 26-9; Code 2002, § 27-59) 
Secs. 27-60-27-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMUNITY BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE AND TREE BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2629NS, adopted Mar. 19, 2018, changed the title of Div. 3 from "City Beautification Committee and Tree Board" to "Community Beautification Committee and Tree Board." 

Sec. 27-75. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beautification committee. The beautification committee is herein defined as the community beautification committee responsible for overseeing the long range planning and development for all city parks and open spaces, promote and orchestrate community enhancement projects, and serve as the tree board. 
    Park trees. Park trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Street trees. Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Code 2002, § 27-75; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 1, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 2629NS, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 27-76. - Creation and establishment of a community beautification committee. 
    There is hereby created and established a community beautification committee, hereafter referred to as "committee", as approved by the mayor and city commission. 
(Code 2002, § 27-76; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 2, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 2629NS, 3-19-2018) 
Note- See editor's note at Div. 3. 
Sec. 27-77. - Composition, appointment and term of committee members. 
(a)  Composition. 
(1)  The committee will consist of one city commissioner; 
(2)  The committee will consist of ten at-large members whom shall only include individuals that are either: 
a.  Residents of the city; 
b.  Business or property owners within the city; or 
c.  Employed within the city. 
(b)  Appointment. At-large members shall be appointed by the city mayor. 
(c)  Term. The term of at-large members shall be three years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his/her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. No. 2606NS, § 1, 6-19-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2606NS, § 1, adopted June 19, 2017, amended the former § 27-77 to read as set out herein. The former § 27-77 pertained to term of office and derived from Code 2002, § 27-77; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 3, adopted Nov. 18, 2002; and Ord. No. 2323NS, § 1, Aug. 6, 2007. 
Sec. 27-78. - Compensation. 
    Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 2002, § 27-78; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 4, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-79. - Duties and responsibilities of the tree board. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the tree board, hereafter referred to as the "board", to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. The board, when requested by the city commission, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of this work. 
(Code 2002, § 27-79; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 5, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-80. - Operation. 
    The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 2002, § 27-80; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 6, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-81. - Street tree species to be planted. 
    The following list constitutes the official street tree species for Shawnee, Oklahoma. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission of the board. 
Small Trees: Medium Trees: Large Trees: Redbud Honey locust Kentucky coffee tree Maple, amur Oak, English Oak, burr Smoke tree Oak, red Oak, sawtooth Crepe myrtle White poplar Oak, Shumard Hawthorn Golden rain tree Oak, northern red Winterberry euonymus Chinese chestnut Oak, water Cherry laurel Chinese pistache Cottonwood (male) Yaupon holly Pear, Callery Bald cypress Pear, capitol Pear, aristocrat Elm, lacebark Pear, Redzic Maple, shantung Elm, cedar Pear, Cleveland select Osage orange Black gum Pear, chanticleer Western soapberry Hackberry Russian olive Caddo American holly Gingko Atlas cedar Improved loblolly London plane tree  
(Code 2002, § 27-81; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 7, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-82. - Spacing. 
    The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 27-81, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: Small trees, 20 feet; medium trees, 30 feet; and large trees, 40 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Code 2002, § 27-82; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 8, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-83. - Distance from curb and sidewalks. 
    No tree may be planted closer to any curb than four feet or any sidewalk than three feet. 
(Code 2002, § 27-83; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 9, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-84. - Distance from street corners. 
    No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug. 
(Code 2002, § 27-84; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 10, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-85. - Utilities. 
    No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section 27-81 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Code 2002, § 27-85; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 11, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-86. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with sections 27-81-27-85. 
(Code 2002, § 27-86; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 12, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-87. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the board. The proper technique to trim trees from around utility wires is correctional trimming or V-pruning. 
(Code 2002, § 27-87; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 13, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-88. - Pruning, corner clearance. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs with constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Code 2002, § 27-88; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 14, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-89. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Said owners at their own expense shall do removal within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owners property tax notice. 
(Code 2002, § 27-89; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 15, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-90. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Code 2002, § 27-90; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 16, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-91. - Interference with city tree board. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this division. 
(Code 2002, § 27-91; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 17, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-92. - Arborists license and bond. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule annually in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of a bond and of liability insurance for bodily injury and for property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. Such bond and insurance coverage shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 2002, § 27-92; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 18, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-93. - Review by city commission. 
    The city commission shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree board to the city commission who may hear the matter and make final decision. 
(Code 2002, § 27-93; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 19, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 27-94. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this division shall be, upon conviction or plea of guilty, subject to a fine in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 2002, § 27-94; Ord. No. 2077NS, § 20, 11-18-2002) 
Chapter 28 - WELLS, OIL AND GAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, 52 O.S. § 1 et seq.; municipal powers as to oil and gas, 52 O.S. § 137; municipal tax on utilities, 68 O.S. § 2601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned well means: 
(1)  Each well in which production casing has been run but which has not been operated for six months. 
(2)  Any well in which no production casing has been run and for which drilling operations have ceased for 30 consecutive days. 
(3)  Any other well for which there is no current city permit. 
    Artificial production means the raising to the surface of the earth, by means other than natural flow, of petroleum or natural gas. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portions thereof." 
    City means the municipality of Shawnee, Oklahoma, its departments, boards or the officers thereof. 
    Corporation commission means the state corporation commission. 
    Deleterious substance means any chemical, saltwater, oil field brine, waste oil, waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud or injurious substance produced or used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and processing of oil, gas or condensate. 
    Enhanced recovery means an operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into a source of supply for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom. 
    Fire marshal means the duly qualified city fire marshal. 
    Flow lines means all pipelines starting from a particular well and connected to an individual oil and gas separator. 
    Gathering system means all pipelines operated as incident to the development and operation of oil and/or gas fields and secondary recovery projects. 
    Highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Motor vehicle means any automobile, truck, truck tractor, trailer or semitrailer or any motorbus or any self-propelled vehicle not operated or driven upon fixed rails or tracks. 
    Natural production means the rising to the surface of the earth, by natural flow, of petroleum or natural gas. 
    Oil and gas inspector means that person employed by the city to enforce this chapter or his authorized representatives. 
    Operator means any person who owns or who has ever owned any working interest in any well bore located within the corporate limits of the city and any person who operates or who has ever operated any well on a contractual basis for any working interest owner. 
    Permittee means the person to whom a permit is issued under this chapter. 
    Person means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, trust, cooperative or other type of organization. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any natural waters of the city, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water of the city as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such water harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare; to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other beneficial uses; or to livestock, animals or aquatic life. 
    Pressure maintenance means an operation by which gas, water or other fluids are injected into a supply of oil to maintain pressure or retard pressure decline therein for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom and which has been approved by the corporation commission after notice and hearing. 
    Public building means all buildings used or designed and intended to be used for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, health care or education. Public buildings include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Armories. 
(2)  Mortuary chapels. 
(3)  Assembly halls. 
(4)  Auditoriums. 
(5)  Exhibition halls. 
(6)  Museums. 
(7)  Courtrooms. 
(8)  Libraries. 
(9)  Hospitals. 
(10)  Schools. 
(11)  Churches. 
    Right-of-way is expressly limited to all public rights-of-way or streets or other public property within the city. 
    Saltwater means any water containing more than 500 milligrams per liter chlorides. 
    State means the State of Oklahoma, its branches, departments, agencies, boards or the officers thereof. 
    Street means street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or any other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portion thereof." 
    Treatable water or fresh water means surface and subsurface water in its natural state, which may or may not require treatment to be useful for human consumption, and which contains less than 10,000 parts per million total dissolved solids and/or 5,000 parts per million chlorides. 
    Trunk line pipelines means common carrier pipelines and other main pipelines not included in the definition of gathering lines, expressly including their rights-of-way as defined and established by instruments of records in the office of the county clerk. 
    Waters of the city means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the city or any portion thereof. 
    Well means, unless specifically qualified, any hole or bore, of any depth, for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, minerals or liquified matter or for the injection or disposal of any of such. 
    Well site means the surface location of any intended well. 
(b)  All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used in this chapter which are not specifically defined shall have that meaning customarily attributable to the words and phrases by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
(Code 1986, § 27-2; Code 2002, § 28-1) 
Sec. 28-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    In order to protect the public health, peace, safety and welfare of the city and its residents, this chapter is enacted to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and controls for drilling operations and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances within the corporate limits of this city. The provisions set forth in this chapter shall be considered as minimum requirements and shall not relieve any person from any duty imposed by law to use reasonable care and take reasonable precautions for the safeguarding of people and the protection of noninterference with property rights. 
(Code 1986, § 27-1; Code 2002, § 28-2) 
Secs. 28-3-28-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-31. - Oil and gas inspector. 
(a)  The city manager shall employ an oil and gas inspector and assistants, if necessary, whose duty it shall be to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The oil and gas inspector shall have authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by this chapter to determine compliance with this chapter and the provisions of all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state. Failure of any person to permit access to the oil and gas inspector shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records specified in this chapter relating to the status or condition of any well or project or the appurtenances thereof within the city. This material shall remain confidential unless necessary as evidence of the violation of any of the sections of this chapter. Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  In enforcing this chapter, the oil and gas inspector shall have such power and authority as set forth in this section and elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, §§ 27-10, 27-31; Code 2002, § 28-31) 
Sec. 28-32. - Geologist. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the city manager shall have the authority to employ a geologist to: 
(1)  Review the drilling permit application; 
(2)  Furnish the city manager oversight reports as needed; 
(3)  Supervise surface pipe installation; 
(4)  Conduct blowout prevention (BOP) tests; 
(5)  Observe cementing of casing; 
(6)  Inspect plugging operations; and 
(7)  Supply final reports as directed by the city manager and oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 27-11; Code 2002, § 28-32) 
Sec. 28-33. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any section of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any of the sections of this chapter or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant to this chapter or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to this chapter or who shall neglect to comply with the terms of this chapter shall be fined in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(c)  The permittee and all of his co-owners, partners, associates, employees and contractors or any other persons who may have assisted in the commission of any violation of this chapter shall each be deemed guilty of a separate offense. 
(d)  The violation of each separate section of this chapter and provision of the permit and of the bond shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate section or provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section, it is further provided that the oil and gas inspector may, upon ten days' written notice to the permittee, hold a hearing to consider the revocation or suspension of any permit issued under this chapter. Any violation of this chapter or the terms of the permit shall be sufficient grounds for revocation or suspension. The written notice issued by the oil and gas inspector must specify the alleged grounds for revocation or suspension and the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(f)  Any continuing offense shall be considered a public nuisance, the remedies for which under law shall be in addition to those enumerated in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 27-34; Code 2002, § 28-33) 
Sec. 28-34. - Order to cease operations. 
    The oil and gas inspector shall apply to the city manager for a hearing upon an order issued under this chapter, which hearing shall be held not longer than 24 hours after the issuance of the order by the oil and gas inspector. The city manager shall determine if proper cause existed and, if not, shall order the permitted activity to resume without delay. If the city manager determines that proper cause did not exist for the order to cease activity to issue, he shall make whatever ruling is proper to ensure rectification of the cause of the peril. Such ruling and compliance with it by the permittee shall not be construed to absolve the permittee of any liability for any violation of this chapter or for any damage or injury caused thereby. 
(Code 1986, § 27-32; Code 2002, § 28-34) 
Sec. 28-35. - Relief by injunction or other action. 
    No penalty imposed by and pursuant to this division shall interfere with the city's right also to apply to the proper courts of the state for an injunction or other appropriate action against such person. 
(Code 1986, § 27-35; Code 2002, § 28-35) 
Sec. 28-36. - Appeals. 
    Any permittee aggrieved by any order, directive or ruling issued by the oil and gas inspector or by any ruling by the city manager made pursuant to this chapter may appeal the order, directive or ruling to the city commission, which shall hear the matter at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The lodging of such appeal shall not stay the enforcement of any of the sections of this chapter. The city commission, upon hearing the matter, may issue whatever ruling or order is appropriate, provided that such ruling or order be in keeping with the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 27-33; Code 2002, § 28-36) 
Sec. 28-37. - Release of bonds and insurance on sale of well. 
    Upon the sale of a present operating oil or gas well, the city clerk will release certificates of insurance and bonds only upon the presentation of new certificates presented by the purchaser of the well. A fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule per well or a flat fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for ten or more wells will be charged as a processing fee. 
(Code 1986, § 27-25; Code 2002, § 28-37) 
Secs. 28-38-28-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 28-66. - Required. 
    It shall be an offense for any person to drill, operate, maintain or abandon any oil or gas well within the corporate limits or to work upon or assist in any way in such work unless a permit for such work is authorized by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 27-16; Code 2002, § 28-66) 
Sec. 28-67. - Application. 
(a)  A permit required under this division shall be issued only to the designated operator of the oil and gas leasehold interest. Every applicant for such permit shall, at least 20 days prior to the proposed commencement of such work, file with the city clerk a written application addressed to the city commission for the permit. The written application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of each owner of an interest in the oil and gas lease under which such well is to be drilled or work is to be done. 
(2)  The name and address of the person in charge of the operation and maintenance of the well. 
(3)  The name and address of the person in charge of the work to be done under the permit. 
(4)  The exact physical location of the proposed well and a street address or descriptive general location easily identifiable by the public. 
(5)  If the proposed well is to be drilled and operated under a written pooling agreement of several leasehold estates, such area to be pooled shall be set forth and described: 
a.  That the owners of more than 80 percent of the surface area exclusive of streets and alleys within 300 feet, and 90 percent of such owners within 150 feet, of the proposed well site have consented in writing to the drilling of such well at such location. The mere execution of an oil and gas lease shall not be accepted as compliance with this requirement, unless such lease describes specifically the location of the proposed well and consents to such location; and 
b.  That the owners of the leasehold interest and persons in charge of the drilling, operation, maintenance and work of such proposed well are familiar with this Code and the city ordinances and will abide by the provisions thereof. 
(6)  A statement indicating the source of water to be used for drilling purposes. A water well may not be drilled for oil and gas drilling purposes within the city. 
(7)  A statement indicating the exact manner of transporting the product to market if the permitted well is completed as a producer. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied with a payment in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, which will pay for the permit fee and the first year operation fee. 
(Code 1986, § 27-17; Code 2002, § 28-37) 
Sec. 28-68. - Exhibits to application. 
    An applicant for a permit required under this division shall attach to his application exhibits reflecting the following: 
(1)  Exhibit A. A certificate of an attorney at law authorized to practice law in the state or a certificate of a bonded abstractor whose office is located in the county reflecting the names of the owners of interest in the real estate situated within 300 feet of the proposed well site. 
(2)  Exhibit B. A plat with detailed, scaled dimensions of the proposed well location, lot and property lines within 300 feet of such well site, with notation or reference thereon to the surface owner of all such property as reflected by exhibit A. 
(3)  Exhibit C. A dimensioned drawing of the proposed well site reflecting the proposed well and the location of the drilling rig, motors, tanks and other principal equipment to be used in the drilling, maintenance and operation and other work of such well with reference being made to property lines and structures (nature of structures being noted) located within 100 feet of the well site. 
(4)  Exhibit D. A copy of approved intent to drill received from the corporation commission. 
(5)  Exhibit E. A copy of a planned flow line from the well location to a gathering system. Such plan shall be reviewed by the city engineer, the oil and gas inspector and other related departments. (Methods of right-of-way acquisition needed and rules governing the construction of flow lines will be described in a later section.) 
(Code 1986, § 27-18; Code 2002, § 28-68) 
Sec. 28-69. - Bond. 
(a)  Every applicant for a permit required under this division, at the time of filing his application, shall submit a corporate surety bond in favor of the city in an amount as described in the city fee schedule executed by the applicant and a corporate surety authorized to do business within the state and conditioned that the applicant shall: 
(1)  Pay the city and discharge any liability imposed by law upon it on account of injury to property, private or public, or person, including death, received or suffered by the city or any person resulting directly or indirectly and however remote from the drilling, operation, maintenance, abandonment, plugging or any other work relating to such well. 
(2)  Defend the city and hold it free and harmless of all judgments, fees and expenses incident thereto from all claims and causes of action arising out of the granting of such permit and the drilling, operation, maintenance, abandonment and plugging of the well. 
(3)  Pay all fees and sums due the city under this chapter and comply with and abide by the city ordinances and laws of the state and, if the applicant fails to do so, to pay all costs and expenses incident for a determination, by test or otherwise, whether such failure to comply with such ordinances and laws has resulted in any damage to the city or others and, if so, pay the expenses and costs of correcting such condition created by such failure and all damages resulting therefrom. 
(b)  The city commission may increase or reduce the amount of each bond required at or after the issuance of such permit. 
(c)  If the applicant is the holder of permits to drill and operate oil or gas wells within the corporate limits, all of such wells may be covered by a blanket corporate surety bond in an amount as described in the city fee schedule in lieu of the bond for each well as provided in this section. Such blanket bond shall be issued upon same terms and conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  In lieu of the corporate surety bond in an amount as described in the city fee schedule mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, the applicant may submit a continuing irrevocable letter of credit in an amount as described in the city fee schedule issued by a bank in the city. The letter of credit shall be subject to the approval of the city commission. The letter of credit shall be issued on the basis that the applicant shall perform all conditions imposed upon him pursuant to the terms of this division and upon the same terms and conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section. If the letter of credit is submitted in lieu of a corporate surety bond, such letter of credit shall be issued to cover the entire life of the well plus 12 months after abandonment and plugging. 
(e)  Every well drilled in the city shall be covered by a corporate surety bond or letter of credit as provided in this section for the entire life of the well plus 12 months after abandonment and plugging. If bonds or letters of credit are issued on an annual basis, they shall be renewed, and such bonds and letters of credit shall contain provisions that, after the expiration of the term for which such bonds or letters of credit are issued, they shall cover acts and omissions which occurred during the term for which such bonds or letters of credit were issued. 
(f)  If any bond or letter of credit required in this section shall lapse or become void for any reason whatsoever, the permit issued under this division shall immediately become inoperative and void until a new bond or letter of credit shall be provided and filed with the city clerk or the existing bond or letter of credit reinstated in full force, and the well shall be shut down and all operations and production thereof suspended and discontinued until the filing of such new bond or letter of credit or reinstatement of such existing bond or letter of credit. The city manager shall have the power and authority under the city's police powers to suspend any permit on any well that is not covered by such bond or letter of credit and shut down the operation of such well until there is complete compliance with the terms of this section. 
(g)  The bond or letter of credit shall be approved by the city manager or designee and endorsed thereon. The bond or letter of credit shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1986, § 27-19; Code 2002, § 28-69) 
Sec. 28-70. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Before a permit shall be issued under this division, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance on an insurance policy for an indemnity fund as provided in this section. 
(b)  The insurance policy shall be issued by a company licensed and authorized to do business in the state and shall provide public liability insurance coverage for each operation required in the conduct of such work. The insurance policy shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule insuring the applicant and the city against all claims or causes of action made against either or both the applicant and the city for damages to persons or property arising out of the drilling, maintenance, operation, production or other work done with respect to such proposed oil and gas well. 
(c)  The policy cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation is given to the city clerk, and such policy shall carry an endorsement of actual notice to the city of any changes therein. 
(d)  The insurance policy shall be approved by the city manager or designee and endorsed thereon. The insurance policy shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(e)  The insurance policy shall be made for the use and benefit and protection of the city and for the use and benefit and protection of any person who may suffer injury either to his person or property because of an accident or omission or negligence of any person or his agents or servants engaged in such work. If such policy is approved by the city manager or designee, it shall remain in force and effect during the life of such policy. 
(f)  If the policy is cancelled, the permit granted shall immediately terminate without any action on the part of the oil and gas inspector, and the applicant's or permittee's rights to operate under the permit shall cease until the applicant or permittee files additional insurance as required in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 27-20; Code 2002, § 28-70) 
Sec. 28-71. - Publication; public hearing. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a permit, bond and insurance certificate required under this division, if 52 O.S. § 318.3 is not complied with, the city commission shall cause notice of such application to be published in three consecutive issues of a daily newspaper printed and having a general circulation within the city, which notice shall state the name of the applicant, the proposed location of the well and the date and place of the hearing of the city commission, at which time and place the application shall be considered. The hearing on the application shall be at the next regularly scheduled city commission meeting after the last publication of such notice. Upon hearing the application, the city commission may authorize the city clerk to issue the permit for drilling, operation and maintenance of the well; provided, however, that no application shall be approved by the city commission unless consent to such location of the well is given in writing by the current owners of more than 80 percent of the surface of the area within 300 feet and 90 percent of such owners within 150 feet of such proposed well site. 
(b)  The city commission shall have the power and reserves the authority to refuse any application for a permit where, because of the location of the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements in its vicinity and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for civic or other purposes or for other reasons the city commission considers, such proposed well might constitute a hazard to the public health, welfare and safety. When a permit shall have been issued, the permit shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city commission unless, within 120 days from the date of issue, actual drilling of the well shall have commenced and, after drilling of a well or rework shall have commenced, the cessation for a like period of drilling or rework operations or the cessation of production of oil or gas from the well after production shall have commenced shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this division. It shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling or reworking of such well without the issuance of another permit. 
(Code 1986, § 27-21; Code 2002, § 28-71) 
Sec. 28-72. - Denial; cancellation of application. 
    If the permit required under this division is refused or if the applicant notifies the city clerk in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his application or if the bonds, insurance or letter of credit of the applicant are not approved, the cash fee filed with the application shall be refunded to the applicant, except that there shall be retained therefrom by the city a processing fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 27-22; Code 2002, § 28-72) 
Sec. 28-73. - Renewal fees. 
(a)  Every applicant who has been granted a permit for a gas well as provided in this division shall make payable, 30 days before the anniversary date, a renewal fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule for an annual renewal permit. 
(b)  Every applicant who has been granted a permit for an oil well as provided in this division shall make payable, 30 days before the anniversary date for an annual renewal permit, either of the following fee amounts: 
(1)  If the price per barrel of Oklahoma Sweet has averaged less than $15.00 per barrel for the 12 months preceding the anniversary date of the permit, a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(2)  If the price per barrel of Oklahoma Sweet has averaged $15.00 or more per barrel for the 12 months preceding the anniversary date of the permit, a fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 27-23; Code 2002, § 28-73) 
Sec. 28-74. - Prior nonpermitted wells. 
    All oil and gas wells drilled and operating prior to adoption of the application process of this division and governance rules shall bring all such wells into compliance in accordance with all rules, regulations and procedures as outlined in this chapter. Each well shall have six months from the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived to be brought into full compliance. At that time, each operator will file for an annual renewal permit in an amount as described in the city fee schedule with the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 27-24; Code 2002, § 28-74) 
Secs. 28-75-28-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 28-101. - Compliance with applicable laws. 
    All of the general rules and regulations of the corporation commission are incorporated into this chapter and may be enforced by the oil and gas inspector and city geologist. Any violation of any of these rules and regulations shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as provided for in article II of this chapter. If any conflicts occur between the sections of this chapter and the corporation commission rules and regulations, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Code 1986, § 27-44; Code 2002, § 28-101) 
Sec. 28-102. - Well site location. 
(a)  No well site shall be located nor shall any tank batteries, well facilities or equipment be located and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location unless the owners of more than 80 percent of the surface area exclusive of streets and alleys within 300 feet, and 90 percent of such owners within 150 feet, of the proposed well site have consented in writing to the drilling of such well at such location. The distance shall be calculated from the well bore. 
(b)  No well site shall be located or shall any tank batteries, well facilities or equipment be located and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than 500 feet to any public building or religious building as defined in this chapter unless the applicant has obtained written permission for the location of the well from the owners and lessees of such public building. This distance shall be calculated from the well bore, tank batteries, well facilities and equipment to the closest exterior point of the building. 
(c)  No oil or gas well site shall be located and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than 300 feet to any freshwater well that has not been abandoned. This distance shall be calculated from the well bore to the freshwater well bore. 
(d)  This section shall also apply to any dwellings, public buildings under construction or to any freshwater wells being drilled on the date the application for a permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(e)  The application of this section to a proposed well shall be determined by examining the existing uses of the surrounding property as of the date the application for a permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector 
(Code 1986, § 27-40; Code 2002, § 28-102) 
Sec. 28-103. - Location in streets and alleys; blocking or closing of streets and alleys. 
    No oil or gas well site shall be located and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is within any of the city streets or alleys, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any drilling or production operation except upon the written approval of the oil and gas inspector, and then only temporarily. 
(Code 1986, § 27-41; Code 2002, § 28-103) 
Sec. 28-104. - Determination of routes to well site. 
(a)  At least 20 days prior to the actual commencement of any operations at the oil or gas well site, the permittee shall notify the oil and gas inspector in writing of the proposed date for commencement of such operations. Such notification shall also contain the following information: 
(1)  The permittee shall identify the maximum length, width and weight of any motor vehicles and the maximum weight of the load to be carried by any motor vehicle to be used in traveling to and from the well site. 
(2)  The permittee shall submit a complete list of the proposed routes to and from the well site for all motor vehicles to be used to travel to and from the well site. Such list shall identify any and all highways within the city limits proposed to be used by such motor vehicles in traveling to and from the well site. 
(3)  The oil and gas inspector may also require any additional information which he deems necessary to evaluate the proposed routes. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the notification required under subsection (a) of this section, the oil and gas inspector shall have five working days to review the information submitted by the permittee. 
(c)  Following review of the information submitted by the permittee, the oil and gas inspector shall prepare a written order which either approves or disapproves the routes to and from the well site as proposed by the permittee. If the oil and gas inspector disapproves of all or part of the proposed routes, the inspector shall designate alternate routes which are acceptable to the city. 
(d)  During all drilling and production activities for the particular well, all motor vehicles used by any person to travel to and from the well site shall be restricted to the highways approved by the oil and gas inspector as appropriate routes to and from the well site. 
(e)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the power and authority to amend the order designating routes to and from the well site upon his own initiative or upon application by the permittee. 
(Code 1986, § 27-42; Code 2002, § 28-104) 
Sec. 28-105. - Affidavit upon completion of well. 
    Upon completion of the oil or gas well, the operator shall certify by affidavit that the well has been set according to good engineering practices. The affidavit shall stipulate the number of sacks of cement, the class of cement, blended materials, weight of cement in pounds per gallon, cement displacement pressure, final pumping pressure and whether checkvalves (float shoes, float collar) held the pressure. Commencement and completion times of such operation shall be stipulated. The affidavit shall be completed by a cementing service company and signed by both the operator and the cementing service company. The affidavit shall be submitted to the city geologist. 
(Code 1986, § 27-50; Code 2002, § 28-105) 
Sec. 28-106. - Ingress and egress. 
    Lease roads to oil or gas wells shall be maintained in such manner as to safely and comfortably allow for ingress and egress of city or state personnel traveling in a common passenger motor vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 27-58; Code 2002, § 28-106) 
Sec. 28-107. - Safety precautions. 
    Persons drilling, operating or maintaining any oil or gas well shall use all necessary care and shall take all precautions which shall be reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect the public. The sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, and compliance with the terms of this chapter shall not be deemed to relieve any person of any additional duty imposed by law. 
(Code 1986, § 27-73; Code 2002, § 28-107) 
Sec. 28-108. - Damage to public property. 
    Any damage to paving, sidewalks, streets, alleys, curbing, parking, sewers or other public property arising out of any work relating to an oil or gas well shall be repaired immediately by the holder of the permit for such well, and the repairs shall be made in accordance with requirements of the city manager or city engineer and under his supervision. 
(Code 1986, § 27-59; Code 2002, § 28-108) 
Sec. 28-109. - Noise and other nuisances. 
    All oil or gas well drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as possible, dust, noise, vibration or noxious odors and shall be in accordance with the best available technology incident to exploration for, drilling for and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in exploration, drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they became available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance. 
(Code 1986, § 27-47; Code 2002, § 28-109) 
Sec. 28-110. - Fire prevention. 
    All permittees under this chapter shall maintain adequate firefighting apparatus and supplies at the well site at all times during drilling and production operations. Adequate firefighting apparatus and supplies shall include but shall not be limited to all of the following: 
(1)  During drilling operations, the permittee shall provide a minimum of four portable fire extinguishers, the size, rating, distribution and maintenance of which shall be in accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standard no. 10 entitled "Portable Fire Extinguishers" and NFPA standard no. 30 entitled "Flammable Liquids Code." 
(2)  In locations where flammable vapors may be present, precautions shall be taken to prevent ignition by eliminating or controlling sources of ignition. Sources of ignition may include open flames, lightning, smoking, cutting and welding, hot surfaces, frictional heat, sparks (static, electrical and mechanical), spontaneous ignition, chemical and physical-chemical reactions and radiant heat. National Fire Protection Association standard no. 77, Recommended Practice of Static Electricity, and National Fire Protection Association standard no. 78, Lightning Protection Code, provide information on such protection. 
(3)  The permittee shall protect all hazardous materials and/or special hazards at the well site in accordance with applicable National Fire Protection Association standards. 
(4)  The permittee shall also comply with such other requirements that the oil and gas inspector or the city fire marshal may prescribe for the particular well. 
(Code 1986, § 27-48; Code 2002, § 28-110) 
Sec. 28-111. - Drilling equipment. 
(a)  All drilling, reentry and operations at any oil and gas well within the city limits shall be conducted in accordance with the best available technology. All casing, valves, blowout preventers, drilling fluids, tubing, bradenhead, Christmas trees and well head connections shall be of the type and quality consistent with the best available technology. The setting and cementing of casing and running of drill stem tests shall be performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the best available technology. All persons engaged in drilling or production operations shall observe and follow the recommendations or regulations of the American Petroleum Institute and the corporation commission, except as specifically addressed by this chapter. A copy of all logs associated with the surface casing shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(b)  Blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked over or in which tubing is being changed. Wells being drilled shall have at least three hydraulically operated blowout preventers installed, and these blowout preventers shall meet the American Petroleum Institute recommendation for class 3M blowout preventers. Wells being drilled shall also have a kill line, chokeline and choke manifold which meet the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute for class 3M blowout prevention equipment. 
(Code 1986, § 27-43; Code 2002, § 28-111) 
Sec. 28-112. - Surface casing and inspection. 
(a)  An oil or gas well in the city shall be cased and casing cemented from the top of such well hole to the depth not less than that recommended by the corporation commission and the city engineer. Such casing, commonly referred to as "surface pipe," shall be set and cemented as stated in this subsection prior to drilling the well beyond the depth of the surface pipe. 
(b)  The permittee shall notify the city manager at least 24 hours prior to running the pipe for such work, for the purpose of permitting the city manager or other authorized city representative to inspect such pipe on location, and at least two hours and not more than three hours before commencing the procedure to cement the pipe the city manager shall be notified thereof in order that a city representative may observe the procedure. No pipe shall be used unless approved by the city manager or other authorized city representative, and the cementing of the pipe shall be done in the presence of such representative and approved by him. 
(c)  The depth of surface casing shall be determined by the corporation commission. The cement used shall be class C and tested at 1,500 pounds per square inch after 24 hours. Test results shall be forwarded to the city geologist or oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 27-45; Code 2002, § 28-112) 
Sec. 28-113. - Pits. 
    Steel mud or circulating pits shall be used for oil or gas wells. Such pits and contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within 60 days after completion of the well. No earthen pits shall be allowed unless small and temporary and approved in writing by the oil and gas inspector. All such earthen pits must be lined and approved in writing by the oil and gas inspector. Catchbasin pits shall be used only for the purpose of catching any deleterious substance runoff and shall be not greater than 320 cubic feet. Emergency pits shall be emptied as soon as the emergency is over, and all such pits shall be emptied and then leveled within 15 days after completion of the well. 
(Code 1986, § 27-46; Code 2002, § 28-113) 
Sec. 28-114. - Disposal of mud. 
    The disposal of drilling mud from an oil or gas well shall be by transporting the mud to a state-licensed disposal site. The mud may not be buried in an earthen pit, pumped down the well bore or down the annulus of a well or spread on the surface of the ground within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 27-49; Code 2002, § 28-114) 
Sec. 28-115. - Open hole formation or drill stem testing. 
(a)  All open hole formation or drill stem testing of an oil or gas well shall be done during daylight hours, with adequate advance notification thereof to the city geologist to enable him to be present during such testing. 
(b)  All open hole formation or testing shall be done into steel tanks or flared properly in the case of gas. 
(Code 1986, § 27-51; Code 2002, § 28-115) 
Sec. 28-116. - Fracturing and acidizing. 
    In the completion of an oil and gas injection disposal or service well, where acidizing or fracturing processes are used, no oil, gas or other deleterious substance or pollutant shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. 
(Code 1986, § 27-52; Code 2002, § 28-116) 
Sec. 28-117. - Swabbing, bailing and purging wells. 
    In swabbing, bailing or purging an oil or gas well, all deleterious substances removed from the bore hole shall be placed in appropriate tanks or pits, and no substance shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. The permittee and operator shall also comply with article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 27-53; Code 2002, § 28-117) 
Sec. 28-118. - Rupture in surface or production casing. 
    If a rupture, break or opening occurs in the surface or production casing of an oil or gas well, the permittee or the operator or drilling contractor shall promptly report the incident to the oil and gas inspector. Immediate action shall be to repair such casing and the repairs witnessed by the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 27-54; Code 2002, § 28-118) 
Sec. 28-119. - Depositing substances. 
    No person shall deposit, drain or divert into or upon any public highway, street, alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon any oil or oily liquid with petroleum content or any mud, rotary mud, sand, water or saltwater or in any manner permit by seepage, overflow or otherwise any of such substances to escape from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person and flow or be carried into or upon any public highway, street, alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 27-56; Code 2002, § 28-119) 
Sec. 28-120. - Flaring of gas. 
    All produced gas from an oil or gas well shall either be sold or flared with the flaring procedures being approved by the oil and gas inspector and the fire marshal. 
(Code 1986, § 27-57; Code 2002, § 28-120) 
Sec. 28-121. - Facilities. 
(a)  For oil or gas wells, all lease equipment shall be painted and maintained in a good state of appearance and shall have posted in a prominent place a metal sign not less than two feet square in area which shall contain the following information: the permittee's name, appropriate phone numbers, lease name, location of the drill site by reference to the United States Survey and identifying numbers of all permits. 
(b)  The oil and gas inspector shall also have the power and authority to enforce orders of the city commission to require such general landscaping of any well site as it deems necessary. The term "general landscaping" shall mean the aesthetic improvement of land by adding trees, shrubs, lawns, ground cover, etc. 
(c)  All pumps, tanks and equipment used in the operation of a completed oil or gas well shall be enclosed on all sides by either a sightproof wooden stockade fence at least six feet in height or a woven wire fence of not less than nine-gauge chainlink wire mesh of not less than two inches, at least six feet high, with additional angular extension outwardly secured by three strands of barbed wire. Such fence shall be constructed not less than three feet from outside the base of the embankment within 90 days of completion of the drill site or erection of storage tanks, whichever occurs first. During drilling operations, a watchman shall be maintained on the premises at all times who will be charged with the responsibility of protecting the general public from any hazard resulting from the conduct of such drilling operations. If such watchman is not employed, the entire well location shall be fenced as in the operation of a completed well. The oil and gas inspector is empowered to determine which type of fencing is best for any particular location. 
(Code 1986, § 27-60; Code 2002, § 28-121) 
Sec. 28-122. - Motive power. 
    Motive power for all oil or gas well pumping equipment shall be electricity. The oil and gas inspector shall have authority to waive the requirements of this section if he determines in a particular case that electric pumping equipment is not necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1986, § 27-61; Code 2002, § 28-122) 
Sec. 28-123. - Loss of well control. 
    If loss of control of any oil or gas well occurs, the operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control of the well, regardless of any other section of this chapter, and shall notify the oil and gas inspector as soon as practicable after receipt of notice by his employees of the occurrence of such loss of well control endangering persons or property. If and when the oil and gas inspector certifies in writing to the city clerk that, in his opinion, danger to persons or property exists because of the loss of well control (briefly describing the circumstances) and the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable necessary steps to regain control of the well, the oil and gas inspector may employ any well control experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services or may incur any other expenses for labor or material which the oil and gas inspector deems necessary to regain control of the well. The city shall have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners who have voluntarily joined in the drilling of the well to secure payment of any expenditure so made by the city pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1986, § 27-62; Code 2002, § 28-123) 
Sec. 28-124. - Storage tanks and separators. 
(a)  Crude oil storage tanks shall not be constructed, operated or used except to the extent of two low-type steel tanks for oil storage, not exceeding 500 barrels capacity each and constructed and maintained in accordance with the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to locate a storage tank or separator site nearer than 150 feet to any residence or commercial or public building within the city. 
(b)  A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil. All such facilities shall be constructed and maintained to control vapors. Each oil and gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. If excessive vapors are released from the tanks, the oil and gas inspector may require that a vapor recovery system be installed and operated to prevent the release of gas vapors into the atmosphere. 
(Code 1986, § 27-66; Code 2002, § 28-124) 
Sec. 28-125. - Impounding around tanks by diking. 
    When protection of adjoining property or waterways is by means of impounding by diking around the tanks of an oil or gas well, such system shall comply with the following: 
(1)  A slope of not less than one percent away from the tank shall be provided for at least 50 feet or to the dike base, whichever is less. 
(2)  The volumetric capacity of the diked area shall not be less than the greatest amount of liquid that can be released from the largest tank within the diked area, assuming a full tank. To allow for volume occupied by tanks, the capacity of the diked area enclosing more than one tank shall be calculated after deducting the volume of the tanks, other than the largest tank, below the height of the dike. 
(3)  To permit access, the outside base of the dike at ground level shall be not closer than ten feet to any property line that is or can be built upon. 
(4)  Walls of the diked area shall be of earth, steel, concrete or solid masonry designed to be liquidtight and to withstand a full hydrostatic head. Earthen walls three feet or more in height shall have a flat section at the top not less than two feet wide. The slope of an earthen wall shall be consistent with the angle of repose of the material of which the wall is constructed. Diked areas for tanks containing class I liquids located in extremely porous soils may require special treatment to prevent seepage of hazardous quantities of liquids to low-lying areas or waterways in case of spills. 
(5)  Where provision is made for draining water from diked areas, such drains shall be controlled in a manner so as to prevent flammable or combustible liquids from entering natural watercourses, public sewers or public drains, if their presence would constitute a hazard. Control of drainage shall be accessible under fire conditions from outside the dike. 
(6)  Storage of combustible materials shall not be permitted within the diked area. 
(Code 1986, § 27-67; Code 2002, § 28-125) 
Sec. 28-126. - Leakage of deleterious substance. 
    If any leakage or spillage of any pollution or deleterious substance occurs from an oil or gas well, whatever the cause thereof, the permittee shall promptly notify the oil and gas inspector. If, in the judgment of the oil and gas inspector, such leakage or spillage represents a potential environmental hazard, he may issue whatever corrective orders he deems appropriate and additionally may require the appropriate testing of the surface and subsurface for pollutant incursion, the cost of all such testing to be paid by the permittee. 
(Code 1986, § 27-68; Code 2002, § 28-126) 
Sec. 28-127. - Accumulation of vapor. 
    The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to require the immediate shutting in or closing of any oil or gas well if he finds that there exists, within a 100-foot radius of any well, any gas or gasoline vapor in a quantity sufficient to constitute, in his judgement or in the judgment of the fire marshal, a fire hazard. The well shall remain shut in or closed in until the hazard and its cause have been remedied. 
(Code 1986, § 27-69; Code 2002, § 28-127) 
Sec. 28-128. - Inspection of pressure lines. 
    The oil and gas inspector shall inspect all pressure lines in use at any oil or gas well or at any project. All tubing, fittings, equipment or connections shall be tight, safe and free from leaks. 
(Code 1986, § 27-70; Code 2002, § 28-128) 
Sec. 28-129. - Burning of trash. 
    No permittee or any other person shall burn any trash or debris upon the oil or gas well site. 
(Code 1986, § 27-71; Code 2002, § 28-129) 
Sec. 28-130. - Surface facilities, location. 
    Whenever necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public, the oil and gas inspector is authorized to direct any permittee or operator to locate, relocate, remove or replace any oil or gas well surface facilities located within a particular drilling unit. 
(Code 1986, § 27-72; Code 2002, § 28-130) 
Sec. 28-131. - Abandonment and plugging; permit. 
(a)  Every person owning or operating any oil or gas well and the officers, agents and employees of such person shall begin removing all derricks, machinery, concrete foundations and any and all other objects that interfere with the leveling of the land within a period of 60 days from the day of abandonment of the well and shall remove such objects in a workmanlike manner. Such person shall also grade, level and restore the land to a condition better than before the well was first commenced. 
(b)  Whenever any well having sufficient surface casing to meet the requirements of this chapter is abandoned, it shall also be the duty of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a 200-foot cement plug in the bottom of the surface casing, with the bottom of the plug 100 feet below the surface casing section, and to set a 50-foot cement plug in the top of the surface casing. A 200-foot cement plug shall also be placed in the well bore within 100 feet of the shallowest zone known to produce hydrocarbons in the area. The oil and gas inspector may require that the two lowermost cement plugs be tested applying drill string weight on the cement plug after the cement has set to confirm that the plug has hardened and is in the correct location. When any cement plug is found to be deficient, an additional cement plug shall be placed in the well bore, or other appropriate corrective action shall be taken. No surface or conductor string of casing may be pulled or removed from a well. During initial abandonment operations, it shall also be the duty of the permittee and operator to flood the well with mud-laden fluid. This fluid shall have a density of not less than nine pounds per gallon and a viscosity of not less than 36 funnel seconds as measured with a standard Marsh funnel. However, in no case shall the density of this mud be less than the density of the mud used to complete the drilling of the well or less than the density required to create sufficient hydrostatic pressure to prevent the well from attempting to kick or flow. Prior to commencing plugging operations, the oil and gas inspector shall be notified so that he may witness the plugging operations. 
(c)  Whenever a permittee or operator desires to abandon and plug any well drilled within the city, except a dry hole, the permittee or operator shall apply to the city clerk for a permit to plug the well. The application for the permit to plug the well shall be on forms provided by the oil and gas inspector and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. In the application for a permit to plug a well, the applicant shall include evidence of the depth of the base of the fresh water in the vicinity of the well, copies of all corporation commission reports filed on the well, a well bore diagram showing the present condition of the well and a well bore diagram showing the proposed plugged condition of the well. Copies of any temperature surveys or cement bond logs run to determine the top of the cement outside the casing strings shall be included in the permit application. 
(d)  Whenever any well having a lesser amount of surface casing than required by this chapter is abandoned, it shall be the duty of the permittee or operator of the well to plug the well in accordance with this subsection. To effect the plugging of the well, the production casing shall be cut at a depth at least 200 feet deeper than the base of the freshwater zones, and the upper section of the production casing shall be removed from the well bore. The well bore shall be reentered and circulated clean to the depth of at least 200 feet below the base of the freshwater zones. A cement plug shall be placed in the well bore with the bottom of the plug located at the top of the production casing stub and the top of the plug located at least 100 feet inside the surface casing. If the production casing cannot be removed as required, the operator or permittee shall propose an alternative plugging procedure, but no plugging may be performed unless the procedure has been approved by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified so that he may witness the plugging of the well. The remainder of the plugging requirements for wells not having sufficient surface casing shall be the same as for wells which do have sufficient surface casing. 
(e)  In exceptional circumstances, the oil and gas inspector shall have authority to approve plugging procedures other than those set forth in this section. Such approval shall be in writing and shall be signed by the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 27-75; Code 2002, § 28-131) 
Secs. 28-132-28-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SWABBING WELLS 

Sec. 28-161. - Compliance. 
    No person shall begin the operation of swabbing an oil or gas well without first complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 27-80; Code 2002, § 28-161) 
Sec. 28-162. - Lubricator. 
    No oil or gas well shall be swabbed before a device, commonly known as a lubricator, has been placed on the flow casing above all outlets or flow lines of the well. The lubricator shall be not less in diameter than the flow casing and equipped with an adequate oil saver or stuffing box at the top. The total inside length of the lubricator shall be not less than five feet more than the total length of swab and turn back on the swab line. The lubricator shall have a nipple of not less than two inches in diameter and not more than four inches in length, placed not more than six inches from the top and on the flow lines between the gate valve on the flow lines and flow casings. The nipple shall be provided with a gate valve not less than two inches in size. All equipment and parts of the lubricator shall be of a type designed and tested to withstand a pressure of 3,000 pounds per square inch. All pressure tests shall be by the hydrostatic method. 
(Code 1986, § 27-81; Code 2002, § 28-162) 
Sec. 28-163. - Valves on lines leaving flow casing. 
    All lines leaving the flow casing of any oil or gas well shall be equipped with a gate valve of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch test and the same size of the line and shall be placed not farther than 24 inches from the flow casing. 
(Code 1986, § 27-82; Code 2002, § 28-163) 
Sec. 28-164. - Deleterious substances. 
    In swabbing, bailing or purging an oil or gas well, all deleterious substances removed from the bore hole shall be placed in appropriate tanks, and no substance shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh water. 
(Code 1986, § 27-83; Code 2002, § 28-164) 
Secs. 28-165-28-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENHANCED RECOVERY SYSTEM AND DISPOSAL WELLS 

Sec. 28-191. - Compliance; order to cease operation. 
    If the oil and gas inspector finds that any person is operating in violation of this article, he, in concert with the city manager, shall order the activity to cease until compliance is made with this article. No person shall renew such activity until the oil and gas inspector finds compliance has been made and permission given for the renewed activity. Any deviation from any approved plan of operations must be submitted to the oil and gas inspector for review and subsequently submitted to the city commission for approval. 
(Code 1986, § 27-98; Code 2002, § 28-191) 
Sec. 28-192. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person or operating company shall initiate any enhanced recovery system or reenter any oil or gas well or drill an original oil or gas well to be used for enhanced recovery purposes or disposal of saltwater or other deleterious substances without first obtaining the necessary permit therefor. Such permit shall consist of two separate parts as follows: 
(1)  Permit to operate. 
(2)  Permit to drill or reenter and construct. 
(b)  No person or operating company shall convert any well from natural or artificial production to be used for enhanced recovery or disposal without first obtaining the necessary permit therefor. 
(c)  No person shall reenter any abandoned or plugged and abandoned well or drill an original well to be used for enhanced recovery or disposal without first obtaining the necessary permit therefor. 
(Code 1986, § 27-86; Code 2002, § 28-192) 
Sec. 28-193. - Permit application. 
    An application for a permit as is required by section 28-192 shall contain complete information required by the city manager and the oil and gas inspector, including the following: 
(1)  A block map of each project well site showing all equipment to be used, location of the pipeline, access roads and distances from any well to any and all fences, public roadways and buildings within a radius of 300 feet. 
(2)  A city street map of the project showing the location of the following: 
a.  All supply, disposal, injection and producing wells. 
b.  Conduits. 
c.  Tank batteries. 
d.  Injection pumping station and appurtenant equipment. 
e.  All wells in the project area and those located in the sections immediately adjacent, to include producing, plugged and abandoned and disposal. 
f.  All public and domestic freshwater supply wells within 1,000 feet of any proposed enhanced recovery project well or proposed disposal well. 
g.  Access roads. 
(3)  Evidence that all wells in the project area and adjacent sections were plugged and abandoned in compliance with corporation commission regulations at the time well was plugged and abandoned. A plugging record (OCC Form 1003) to demonstrate compliance is acceptable. 
(4)  All wells associated with the enhanced recovery project shall be indicated by status (e.g., plugged and abandoned, injection, water source, oil, etc.) and shall show the following information: 
a.  Surveyed surface location. 
b.  Footage location (surface casing). 
c.  Derrick floor and ground level elevation (new permitted wells). 
d.  Drilled total depth. 
e.  Size, depth and quality of surface and production casing, including zones from which casing has been removed. 
f.  Location of all plugs, packers, cement plugs, tubing anchors, etc., within the well bore. 
g.  Packer body total depth. 
h.  Depth and nature of all cement squeeze operations. 
i.  Volume and type of cement used on surface and production strings. 
j.  Top of cement behind pipe. 
k.  Formation name and depth of all open perforations in a producing open hole. 
(5)  Fee and operator name for each disposal well. 
(6)  One copy of all cement bond logs and production logs. 
(7)  One copy of all work performed on the well. 
(8)  Copies of all information supplied to the corporation commission, and such commission's approval of the project. 
(Code 1986, § 27-87; Code 2002, § 28-193) 
Sec. 28-194. - Application and inspection fee. 
(a)  Each submitted application for an enhanced recovery project will be accompanied with a one-time fee in an amount as described in the city fee schedule. A similar fee will be required for a disposal well. 
(b)  An annual inspection fee is levied upon each well within an enhanced recovery project operated or maintained under a permit issued from the city. Such fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, payable to the city 30 days before the annual anniversary date of the issuance of any permit under this article. 
(c)  An annual inspection fee is levied upon each disposal well operated and maintained under a permit issued from the city. Such fee shall be in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, payable to the city on or before the annual anniversary date of the issuance of any permit under this article. 
(d)  No permit for any well shall be considered valid for any year for which the annual fee has not been paid. 
(e)  Upon the completion of the enhanced recovery project or disposal well application required and accompanied by the appropriate required fee, the city manager and staff shall have at least 30 business days to review the application and make a recommendation of approval or disapproval to the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 27-88; Code 2002, § 28-194) 
Sec. 28-195. - Operation and equipment requirements. 
(a)  Every enhanced recovery or disposal well shall be so constructed as to seal the injection zone from the upper portion of the casing. The annulus between the injection tubing and the casing shall be filled with a noncorrosive fluid, then sealed, and a one-fourth-inch female fitting with cutoff valve shall be attached so that the pressure in the annulus may be measured by the oil and gas inspector by attaching a gauge having a one-fourth-inch male fitting. The annulus between the production casing and the injection tubing shall be pressure tested to a pressure of at least 250 pounds per square inch greater than the injection pressure proposed for the well. The pressure testing shall be witnessed and state approved by the oil and gas inspector. Copies of the corporation commission form no. 1015 shall also be filed with the oil and gas inspector. Pressure shall be maintained in the annulus sufficient to monitor the fluids in the annulus. Any significant deviation from the established pressure shall be cause to shut down the well and may result in cancellation of the operating permit until such time as the established pressure can once again be maintained. 
(b)  Injection lines for such wells shall be buried in a trench not less than four feet and shall be pressure-tested (static) annually at a minimum of 150 percent of the pressure normally encountered at the injection pump discharge for a period of hours to be fixed by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified in writing five days in advance of such test and may supervise the test. Test results shall be filed with the city upon completion. 
(c)  The annulus between the production casing and the surface casing shall be equipped with the appropriate fittings to provide a one-fourth-inch female fitting equipped with a cutoff valve so that the pressure in the annulus may be measured by the oil and gas inspector. Any indication of pressure which deviates proportionately to the injection pressure to the tubing injection pressure on this annulus shall be cause to shut down the well and may result in the cancellation of the operating permit until such time as the problem can be corrected. 
(d)  The permit for an enhanced recovery or disposal well shall state the maximum injection pressure. Exceeding this injection pressure shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  The injection tubing or injection line near the injection tubing shall be equipped with a one-fourth-inch female fitting and cutoff valve so that the oil and gas inspector may measure the injection pressure by the installation of a gauge equipped with a standard one-fourth-inch male fitting. 
(f)  Before performing any down-hole work on an enhanced recovery or disposal well, the operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector at least five days in advance of performing this work. The oil and gas inspector shall witness the installation of tubing and packer in an enhanced recovery or disposal well. The annulus between the injection tubing and the production casing shall then be pressure tested to a pressure at least 250 pounds per square inch in excess of the approved injection pressure. The oil and gas inspector shall witness the pressure testing of this annulus. The pressure test shall be repeated at least once a year and shall be witnessed by the oil and gas inspector. 
(g)  The permittee or operator of the well shall submit to the oil and gas inspector a monthly report stating the amount of water injected during the month and the maximum tubing pressure if requested. A copy of corporation commission forms 1012 and 1072 shall be submitted yearly to the oil and gas inspector. 
(h)  The location of all injection lines for enhanced recovery or deleterious substance disposal wells shall be recorded by the Oklahoma One Call System or otherwise brought into compliance with the Oklahoma Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act, 63 O.S. § 142 et seq. 
(Code 1986, § 27-89; Code 2002, § 28-195) 
Sec. 28-196. - Additional bond and insurance coverage. 
    In addition to drilling bond requirements as stated in section 28-69, the operator of an enhanced recovery project shall provide the following within the project application process: 
(1)  A statement stating that permittee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability attributable to granting the permit. 
(2)  The permittee shall carry a policy of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, and such policy shall: 
a.  Contain coverage for contamination or pollution of surface or subterranean streams, watercourses, lakes or public or private water supplies. 
b.  Be conditioned for payment of all damages due to injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the drilling, operation or maintenance of the proposed well or any structure, machinery, equipment, pipelines or appurtenances used in connection therewith. 
c.  Name the permittee and the city as coinsured. 
d.  Be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business within the state, and the policy shall be in the aggregate providing for a minimum coverage in an amount as described in the city fee schedule, combined single limit. 
(3)  The permittee shall file with the city clerk certificates of such insurance and bond. The insurance policy and bond shall not be cancelled without actual written notice received by the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the effective date of cancellation. If the insurance policy is cancelled, the permit granted shall terminate immediately, and the permittee's rights to operate under the permit shall cease immediately until the permittee files additional insurance as provided in this section. Further, if the insurance policy is cancelled or allowed to expire, the city manager shall notify the electric company of the violation, and service to all wells not conforming shall be discontinued immediately. For other wells (not electric) an injunction will be filed immediately. 
(Code 1986, § 27-90; Code 2002, § 28-196) 
Sec. 28-197. - Drilling, testing and maintenance of freshwater monitoring wells. 
(a)  Prior to the commencement of any enhanced recovery project or disposal well program, the permittee and the operator thereof shall be required to drill monitoring wells located in any and all freshwater zones within the enhanced recovery unit or disposal area. 
(b)  The number of monitoring wells will be determined by the city manager and oil and gas inspector. The criteria for determining the number of monitoring wells will be based upon the number of surface acres, number of injection wells, surface deterrents to the location of monitoring wells and other factors based upon the best judgment of the city manager and oil and gas inspector. 
(c)  Every six months from and after the issuance of the permit for the enhanced recovery or disposal well, the permittee and the operator thereof shall cause water samples to be obtained from the test water well by a registered hydrologist. The hydrologist shall then subject the water sample to an analysis to determine all of the following: chloride content, pH, conductivity, total dissolved solids, sulfates, the direction of freshwater flow and barium content. A certified report containing the results of such analysis shall then be forthwith filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(d)  The testing and analysis required by subsection (c) of this section shall be the responsibility of the permittee and operator and at their expense and shall be conducted by a registered professional hydrologist approved by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified in writing ten days in advance of such testing and may be present for the testing. 
(e)  The oil and gas inspector is empowered to require further water testing procedures to be conducted and/or require additional wells to be drilled as are necessary, in his judgment, to safeguard all waters of the city from pollution. 
(f)  If reports from monitoring wells are unsatisfactory, the oil and gas inspector, with approval of the city manager, is empowered to require immediate remedies to be enacted, including the cessation of all operational activities. 
(Code 1986, § 27-91; Code 2002, § 28-197) 
Sec. 28-198. - Domestic and public water wells. 
(a)  Domestic and public water supply wells located within a radius of one-quarter mile of any enhanced recovery or disposal well shall be tested prior to beginning injection and disposal and annually thereafter for the presence of deleterious substances such as chlorides, sulfates and dissolved solids. Such testing is the responsibility of the permittee and, at the permittee's expense, is to be conducted by a registered hydrologist approved by the oil and gas inspector. The oil and gas inspector shall be notified five days in advance of such testing and may be present. Test results shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector upon completion. If the permittee is unable to comply with the required tests, the permittee shall submit a written statement specifying the reasons for noncompliance. 
(b)  The permittee is liable for damages to any domestic or public water supply wells located within the permitted enhanced recovery unit. 
(c)  Failure to comply with mandatory testing and without city-approved reasons for noncompliance by the permittee is grounds for fines to be levied. Determination of the fine will be made by the city manager and the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 27-92; Code 2002, § 28-198) 
Sec. 28-199. - Standards for fittings and other related material. 
    Under this article, all fittings, tubing and pipeline materials which come into direct contact with saltwater or other deleterious fluids shall be designed and manufactured from corrosive-resistant material. Pipe and fittings must be designed with sufficient wall thickness or must be designed with adequate protection to withstand anticipated external and internal pressure loads that will be imposed on the pipe and fittings after installation and must meet a minimum in design factor of 1.5. 
(Code 1986, § 27-93; Code 2002, § 28-199) 
Sec. 28-200. - Special requirement for injection pipelines. 
    The placing of injection pipelines pursuant to this article shall be done under provisions located within this chapter with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Nonmetallic materials shall be buried with a metallic tracing material. 
(2)  There shall be installed adequate monitoring devices and safety controls which will shut off or isolate systems deviating from normal operating pressure and rates. 
(3)  If soft material, rocks or other unsuitable material of poor bearing qualities are found at the bottom of pipe trenches/excavations, stabilization shall be achieved by over excavating and backfilling to grade with an approved compacted bedding such as sand, fine gravel, crushed stone or a concrete foundation with a sand bedding. 
(4)  Pipes shall be sleeved and otherwise protected from damage should tunneling or street boring be necessary. 
(5)  Pipes shall be sleeved and adequately supported where conditions are such that the piping must be elevated due to obstacles such as rivers or other similar conditions. 
(6)  Backfill around pipes shall be free of rocks, frozen chunks, broken concrete and other rubble which may damage or misalign the pipe during the backfill and tamping operation. 
(7)  All buried pipe shall be provided with a warning tape installed at an approximate depth of 12 inches below the surface of the ground above the pipe. 
(8)  Pipeline warning posts shall be arranged and designed to clearly identify the buried pipeline and provide an emergency phone number should a break occur. 
(Code 1986, § 27-94; Code 2002, § 28-200) 
Sec. 28-201. - Drilling, completion and maintenance of water source wells. 
(a)  A drilling application must be submitted for an enhanced recovery water source well. The application will be the same format and the applicable fee will be the same as any well application drilling permit. 
(b)  The entire well bore will be cemented. 
(c)  A bond log will be submitted to the oil and gas inspector. 
(d)  If any leakage or spillage of any pollution or deleterious substance occurs, whatever the cause thereof, the permittee shall cause the city manager or the oil and gas inspector to be notified promptly. If, in the judgment of the city manager, such leakage or spillage represents a potential environmental hazard, he may issue whatever corrective orders he deems appropriate and, additionally, may require the appropriate testing of the surface and subsurface for pollutant incursion, the cost of such test to be borne by the permittee. 
(Code 1986, § 27-95; Code 2002, § 28-201) 
Sec. 28-202. - Stationary equipment noise abatement. 
(a)  Stationary equipment or other appurtenances used in relation with an enhanced recovery project or disposal well shall be maintained at a low noise level. The following are rules and requirements for such a procedure: 
(1)  The following table shall be used to determine the acceptable noise level for all sites: 
TABLE 1. FOR LIMITING SOUND LEVELS FOR LAND USE SITES 
Zoning District Classification Time Averaged Minimum/Maximum Sound Level Limits, dBA Residential 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 55-65 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 50-60 Commercial/ 
business 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 60-70 10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 55-60 Industrial/ 
agriculture 24 hours a day 70-80  
(2)  The permittee of an enhanced recovery project or disposal well is obligated to install devices, buildings or other procedures to maintain an acceptable noise level. 
(b)  Authorization for the city to ascertain acceptable noise levels is indicated in sections 20-170(a)(1) and 20-171(4). 
(c)  The oil and gas inspector is authorized to use acceptable scientific measuring devices to determine the noise levels at any operational location. This shall be done on an irregular schedule. 
(d)  If the noise level is above acceptable levels at any operational site, the oil and gas inspector shall inform the permittee to immediately apply remedial methods to lower the excessive noise. 
(e)  If the excessive noise level is not lowered as determined by the oil and gas inspector, the city manager is authorized to assess a penalty of an unspecified amount which may include an operational cessation order. 
(Code 1986, § 27-96; Code 2002, § 28-202) 
Sec. 28-203. - Deepening and sidetracking wells from existing well bores. 
    Under this article, deepening an existing well bore or sidetracking a well from an existing well bore shall be permitted upon proper approval from the corporation commission and the city manager or the oil and gas inspector and may require city commission approval. 
(Code 1986, § 27-97; Code 2002, § 28-203) 
Secs. 28-204-28-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PIPELINES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-231. - Supervision by city officials. 
    The city manager, director of public works, oil and gas inspector, city engineer and the chief of police shall exercise constant supervision of the pipelines, flow lines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment located in the streets, alleys and public places and report to the city commission all violations of this article and all dangerous defective or unsuitably placed pipelines, flow lines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment and guard the public at all times from the dangers incident to the erection, maintenance and operation of all pipelines, flow lines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment used in connection with the sale or distribution of natural or artificial gas to consumers in the city and its environs and in the gathering of raw hydrocarbons from producing oil and gas wells within the city limits and in the transportation of water or saltwater used in connection with enhanced recovery of oil and gas wells within the city limits in, under or upon the streets, alleys or public places. 
(Code 1986, § 27-106; Code 2002, § 28-231) 
Sec. 28-232. - Limitations upon rights granted. 
    The sections of this article or any acts and proceedings conducted under this article shall not be construed as a grant by the city of the right or privilege to use the streets, alleys or public places for the purposes provided in this article or any purpose except for and during the annual period immediately succeeding the time fixed for payment of fees to the city and then only if such payment is actually made. 
(Code 1986, § 27-107; Code 2002, § 28-232) 
Sec. 28-233. - Interpretation. 
(a)  None of the sections of this article shall be construed or operate to prevent or render unnecessary the securing of any franchise for the erection, maintenance or operation of pipelines, flow lines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment in, under or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places if the pipelines and the equipment referred to are used in the sale or distribution of natural or artificial gas to consumers in the city and its environs, nor shall any section of this article or any act or proceeding conducted under this article be construed as a grant by the city of the right or privilege to use the streets, alleys or public places for the purposes provided. 
(b)  The compensation provided by ordinance for the unfranchised use of the streets, alleys and public places shall be in lieu of damages for occupation and use and shall be in addition to other penalties provided for in this article. 
(c)  The city does not waive any of its rights to have the charges provided for in this article upheld as a tax as authorized under the Charter. 
(d)  This article or any part of it may be altered or repealed at any time, and no rights or privileges shall ever be acquired under it which may not be withdrawn, altered or modified by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 27-108; Code 2002, § 28-233) 
Sec. 28-234. - Violations. 
    Each day's violation of any section of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 27-122; Code 2002, § 28-234) 
Sec. 28-235. - Abatement of nuisances. 
    The city engineer, oil and gas inspector and/or the chief of police shall summarily abate or remove any of the pipelines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment declared by this article to be a nuisance immediately upon the order given by the city commission. No person shall prevent or attempt to prevent any city officer or employee or agent from abating or removing any such pipelines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment declared to be a nuisance or interfere with such officer, employee or agent when engaged in or attempting to engage in such work. 
(Code 1986, § 27-121; Code 2002, § 28-235) 
Sec. 28-236. - Fee collection procedure. 
    The taxes and fees required to be paid by this article shall be deemed a debt to the city, and upon failure to pay them the city may maintain a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery and collection of the debt. 
(Code 1986, § 27-119; Code 2002, § 28-236) 
Sec. 28-237. - Discontinuance of unsafe pipeline. 
    If a pipeline becomes unsafe or is not maintained as provided in this article or if any of the contents escape, the person in control of the line shall immediately discontinue its use and shut off all its contents until the line is repaired. 
(Code 1986, § 27-120; Code 2002, § 28-237) 
Sec. 28-238. - Special provisions for refined natural gas pipelines. 
(a)  All pipelines, connections and fixtures installed or used for the purpose of the transportation of refined natural gas shall be equivalent to the specifications of the National Gas Safety Code adopted and approved by the United States Department of Commerce and now in force as to thickness, weight, size, strength and general character of material, workmanship and manner of installation. 
(b)  The location of pipelines used to transport refined natural gas to consumers will be located in the utility reserve associated with the granting of the franchise permitted by ordinance. Extensions of such lines may be installed in private rights-of-way after being granted permission by the individual surface owners. All plats relating to the installation of consumer lines shall be made available to the office of city engineer. 
(Code 1986, § 27-109; Code 2002, § 28-238) 
Sec. 28-239. - Special provisions for hydrocarbon flow lines and gathering systems. 
    The granting of an application for drilling within the city limits implies the applicant has the right to retrieve and transport oil, gas and water from the oil or gas well. Certain restrictions related to health and safety shall be placed upon the method of transportation of these products. They are as follows: 
(1)  A gathering system with lines larger than 2 7/8 inches outside diameter pipe shall be laid in the least restrictive rights-of-way. Such should be within a sparse population area with no major restoration processes necessary. These areas may be within private or public property designations. Such an area may be designated as a "pipeline corridor." 
(2)  Individual flow lines to specific wells located from the pipeline corridor may be permitted for lines of 2 7/8 inches or less to be placed within a utility right-of-way or private property for not more than three-quarters of a mile. This type of line may carry oil, gas or water or a combination thereof. Permission for use of a private right-of-way must first be obtained prior to an application being presented to the city for approval. Private surface permission should be based upon proper compensation, surface restoration and particular individual restrictions. The formal application for a specific flow line shall be submitted to the city engineer for inspection prior the issuance of street boring permits. The cost of permits is defined by ordinance, and all restrictions applicable to the laying of lines are listed in other ordinances and compliance will be monitored. 
(3)  An applicant for the permit required by this article shall file a plan with the city engineer showing in detail the size of the pipeline and the depth and width and the exact location of the excavation or pipeline with particular reference to all structures or lines of the city or any public utility company, sidewalk, pavement or other public improvement. Plans for a gathering system shall be submitted to the city engineer for inspection prior to the issuance of street boring permits. The cost of permits are defined by ordinance, and all restrictions applicable to the laying of lines are listed in other ordinances and compliance will be monitored. 
(4)  All street crossings will be bored and cased with proper identifications installed after construction is finished. No bore will be attempted without a boring permit granted by fee from the city. Such fee is established by ordinance. 
(5)  All proposed gathering systems and specific flow lines will be granted final approval by the city commission. 
(6)  A cathodic protection of pipelines will be installed for all lines. 
(7)  Line markers and other appurtenances will be installed as needed. 
(Code 1986, § 27-110; Code 2002, § 28-239) 
Sec. 28-240. - Pipe specifications for flow lines and gathering systems. 
(a)  Pipe specifications for flow lines will conform to the following requirements or better: 
(1)  The pipe shall be new, no more than 2 7/8 inches outside diameter, coated and wrapped, capable of maintaining a minimum 1,000 pounds of pressure. 
(2)  Individual sections of pipe will be joined by either a continuous butt weld or by the electric resistance weld. 
(3)  All pipe will be inspected by the appropriate officials before the pipe is welded. 
(b)  Pipe specifications for gathering systems lines shall comply with rules and regulations supplied by the state corporation commission and the state department of transportation and other regulations as specifically supplied by the city engineer and other city officials. All metal pipe shall be coated and wrapped. All pipe will be inspected by city officials prior to installation. Metal pipe sections will be joined by either a continuous butt weld or by the electric resistance weld. 
(Code 1986, § 27-111; Code 2002, § 28-240) 
Sec. 28-241. - Pressure limitations. 
    Under this article, pressure in any line shall not exceed those permitted by the rules, regulations or orders of the corporation commission in force. All lines shall be operated and maintained in a safe manner at all times so as to prevent all leakage or escape of their contents. 
(Code 1986, § 27-112; Code 2002, § 28-241) 
Sec. 28-242. - Ditches. 
(a)  All ditches for pipelines shall be excavated in a manner that will have the smallest possible opening in the public and private property. Specifically, flow lines of 2 7/8 inches or less shall be placed in a ditch not less than four inches or not wider than six inches. Gathering system lines larger than 2 7/8 inches shall be placed in a ditch at least six inches (plus or minus) wider than the outside diameter of the pipe so that there is a minimum six-inch (plus or minus) space between the outside diameter and the ditch wall. 
(b)  The right-of-way shall be restored to the original or better condition during restoration operations. 
(Code 1986, § 27-113; Code 2002, § 28-242) 
Sec. 28-243. - Pipes under streets. 
    On streets and alleys, all pipelines shall be buried to a minimum depth of 30 inches below the normal surface of the ground, the depth to be measured from the top of the pipe, and shall be approved by the city engineer and/or street department supervisor. 
(Code 1986, § 27-114; Code 2002, § 28-243) 
Sec. 28-244. - Removal or change of pipe. 
    If it becomes necessary to change or remove any pipeline, the entire expense of change or removal shall be borne by the owner upon the approval of the city engineer and/or street department supervisor; removal or change shall be made within five days after notice is given by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 27-115; Code 2002, § 28-244) 
Sec. 28-245. - Testing of transmission, gathering system and flow lines; correction of defects. 
    Each owner or operator of a transmission, gathering system and flow lines shall have it tested at least once every six months for the purpose of determining whether it is in safe condition and free from leaks, breaks or open spaces and shall make a report of the test supported by an affidavit by the person making the test to the oil and gas inspector. The test may be by the stench method, electrical detection method or any other method other than a pressure method approved by the oil and gas inspector, provided that each line at the time of its installation shall be tested by the oil and gas inspector and a report of the test shall be filed with the city engineer before the operation of that line. Testing periods shall end on September 15 and March 15 of each year. No person shall continue the operation of any pipeline after the termination of any testing period provided in this section without having it tested and making the required report. For failure to make the test and report or if the report discloses or it otherwise appears that any line is leaking, defective or unsafe, the oil and gas inspector shall, within five days of such disclosure or within five days after the closing of any testing period, close and shut the pipeline. 
(Code 1986, § 27-116; Code 2002, § 28-245) 
Sec. 28-246. - Fees for interchanging of pipelines. 
    If a pipeline covered by this article is placed in a ditch where another similarly covered pipeline is being removed and if it is not necessary to deepen the ditch and a high-pressure line is not exchanged where a low-pressure line has previously been, a fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be collected. However, when it is necessary to deepen the ditch and the new pipeline being placed in the ditch is a high-pressure line taking the place of a low-pressure line, an additional fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for the removal of the old line. 
(Code 1986, § 27-117; Code 2002, § 28-246) 
Sec. 28-247. - Alternative to removal of pipelines under paving. 
    In lieu of the actual removal of a pipeline or portion thereof located underneath any paved street or alley, the owner of a pipeline for which a removal permit has been applied for and issued may relinquish his ownership and abandon that portion beneath any paving by first pumping the pipe full of mud and securely plugging each end of the pipe left beneath the paving. Before abandoning and plugging the pipe, the owner shall file with the city clerk or shall incorporate in the application for the removal permit a written transfer and assignment to the city of all his interest, possession and title in and to the abandoned pipe and shall give 48 hours' previous written notice to the city engineer and/or street department supervisor as to when and where the owner proposes to plug the pipe. The work shall be subject to inspection and approval of the city engineer and/or street department supervisor or authorized representative. 
(Code 1986, § 27-118; Code 2002, § 28-247) 
Secs. 28-248-28-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCAVATION PERMIT 

Sec. 28-276. - Required. 
    No person shall make an excavation in any part of the public property or in any public utility reserve for the purpose of laying, removing, installing or maintaining a pipeline without first having obtained a permit from the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 27-127; Code 2002, § 28-276) 
Sec. 28-277. - Consent of property owners. 
    Where a pipeline is laid in any public utility reserve, the applicant for a pipeline permit shall first obtain written permission or consent from all owners of property through and over which the public utility reserve runs before applying for a permit under this division. 
(Code 1986, § 27-128; Code 2002, § 28-277) 
Sec. 28-278. - Expiration; renewal. 
(a)  A permit issued pursuant to this division shall expire one year from its date of approval and shall be renewed upon payment to the city clerk of the fee established by ordinance, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Any permit may be revoked upon ten days' notice for failure to pay the fees required, and each day's continuance of the pipeline after such revocation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 27-129; Code 2002, § 28-278) 
Secs. 28-279-28-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 28-306. - Franchise or permit required. 
(a)  No person shall erect, lay, maintain or operate any pipelines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment used or which are to be used in the sale or distribution of natural or artificial gas to consumers in this city and its environs and maintained or operated in, under or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places or assist or participate therein without a franchise or permits as required by this article. 
(b)  All pipelines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment used in the sale or distribution of natural or artificial gas to consumers in this city and its environs and maintained or operated in, under or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places without a franchise or permits as required by this article are declared to be public nuisances. 
(Code 1986, § 27-137; Code 2002, § 28-306) 
Sec. 28-307. - Nonfranchised pipeline fee. 
(a)  For each year a person who maintains or operates any pipeline used in the sale or distribution of natural or artificial gas to consumers in this city and its environs in, under or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places without a city franchise, he shall pay, on May 1 of each year, an annual oil and gas regulation and inspection fee in the amount established by ordinance. Copies of such ordinance are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  If the person has or secures a franchise to maintain and operate the pipelines or any of the appliances referred to in section 28-306 in, under or upon the city streets, alleys or public places, he shall not be required to make any further payments as provided in subsection (a) of this section during the life of the franchise unless such provision is made in the franchise. 
(Code 1986, § 27-138; Code 2002, § 28-307) 
Sec. 28-308. - Permit for excavations. 
(a)  No person shall, without a franchise, make any excavation in any part of the city streets, alleys or public places for the purpose of laying or installing any pipelines or meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment for use in connection with the sale or distribution of natural or artificial gas to consumers in this city and its environs unless he shall first have obtained a permit from the city commission to do so under division 2 of this article. 
(b)  If any pipelines or other appliances referred to in subsection (a) of this section are laid or installed without first obtaining the permit, the maintenance or operation of it in the streets, alleys and public places shall constitute all offense, and each day that the pipeline or other appliances are so maintained or operated shall constitute a separate offense. However, if the person has or secures a franchise to maintain and operate the pipelines or other appliances enumerated in subsection (a) of this section in, under or upon the city streets, alleys or public places, he shall not be required to obtain the permits provided in section 28-239 unless such provision is made in the franchise. 
(Code 1986, § 27-139; Code 2002, § 28-308) 
Sec. 28-309. - Annual report of pipeline use and gross receipts. 
(a)  Any person maintaining or operating any pipelines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and related equipment used in the sale, or distribution of natural or artificial gas to consumers in the city and its environs in, under or upon any of the streets alleys or public places without a franchise shall, on April 10 of each year, file with the community development director a statement or diagram verified by an affidavit of the general or local manager or agent of such person showing the number of pipelines and the number of rods of the pipelines which occupy the streets, alleys or public places which are maintained or used by him. 
(b)  Any person so maintaining or operating such pipelines, meters, valves, gauges, pumps, appliances and equipment as set forth in subsection (a) of this section and conducting such business of selling or distributing natural or artificial gas to consumers of the city shall also file with the city clerk, on April 10 of each year, a statement verified by the affidavit of the general or local manager or agent of such person showing the gross receipts of such person for the previous year from March 31 of that year to and including March 31 of the year in which the statement is made resulting from sale or distribution of natural or artificial gas to consumers in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 27-140; Code 2002, § 28-309) 
APPENDIX A 
CITY FEE SCHEDULE 
Municipal Code Site Department Description Fee Fine Bond Insurance CHARTER Part I Art V Sec 4 Charter Bond of city manager and other appointive officers and employees $25,000.00 CHAPTER 1:
GENERAL PROVISIONS Part II Chapter 1 Sec 1-10(a) (1) and (b) General Provisions General penalty. Class A offenses: Maximum fine for all alcohol and drug related offenses, plus cost $800.00 Part II Chapter 1 Sec 1-10(a) (2) and (b) General Provisions General penalty. Class B offenses: Maximum fine for violations of ordinances regulating pretreatment of wastewater and stormwater discharges $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 1 Sec 1-10(a) (3) and (b) General Provisions General penalty. Class C offenses: Maximum fine for all other violations $750.00 CHAPTER 2:
ADMINISTRATION Part II Chapter 2 Art IV Div 3 Sec 2-206(13) Administration City clerk. Fee charge per page for photocopy all ordinances, papers, records, or commission proceedings $0.25 Part II Chapter 2 Art IV Div 3 Sec 2-206(13) Administration City clerk. Fee charge per page for certifying all ordinances, papers, records, or commission proceedings $1.00 Part II Chapter 2 Art VI Div 1 Sec 2-358 Administration Human rights. Maximum fine $500.00 CHAPTER 3:
ADVERTISING
AND SIGNS Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 1 Sec 3-37(c) Advertising and Signs Redemption fee for impounded sign $25.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 2 Sec 3-69(a) (1) Advertising and Signs Portable signs (temporary) $25.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 2 Sec 3-69(a) (2) Advertising and Signs Permanent signs $25.00 x 4 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 3 Sec 3-96(a) Advertising and Signs Electrical and non-electrical sign contractors license $75.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 3 Sec 3-97(a) Advertising and Signs Electrical and neon sign hanger's license $50.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 3 Sec 3-97(b) Advertising and Signs Late license renewal fee $15.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 3 Sec 3-98(a) Advertising and Signs Bond required prior to any license $2,000.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 3 Sec 3-98(a) Advertising and Signs When the number of permits issued to any person shall cover more than 50 signs, panels or structures of 25 feet in length or less, the penal sum of such bond shall be increased $2,000.00 for each additional 40 of such panels, signs or structures or fraction thereof for which permits are issued to such person. $2,000.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 3 Sec 3-98(b) Advertising and Signs Insurance policy required. Minimum liability policy amount for injury or death of one person in one accident $5,000.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 3 Sec 3-98(b) Advertising and Signs Insurance policy required. Minimum liability policy amount for injury or death of any number of persons in any one accident $10,000.00 Part II Chapter 3 Art II Div 3 Sec 3-98(b) Advertising and Signs Insurance policy required. Minimum liability policy amount for property damage in any one accident $5,000.00 CHAPTER 4:
ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (1) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Brewer's license $1,250.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (2) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Oklahoma brewer's license $125.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (3) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Distiller's license $3,125.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (4) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Winemaker's license $625.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (5) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
State winemaker's license $75.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (6) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Rectifier's license $3,125.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (7) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Wholesaler's license $3,500.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (8) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Interim wine and spirits wholesaler's license $3,000.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (9) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Class B wholesaler's license $625.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (10) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Interim beer distributor's license $750.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (11) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Package store's license $905.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (12) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Interim retail wine license $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (13) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Interim retail beer license $500.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (14) Alcoholic Beverages occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Mixed beverage license-initial and renewal $1,005.00 and $905.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (15) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Bottle club's license-initial and renewal $1,000.00 and $900.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (16) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Caterer's license-initial and renewal 
  
If caterer is holder of a mixed beverage license issued by the city $1,250.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (17) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Caterer's license-initial and renewal $1,005.00 and $905.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (18) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Special event license, per day $50.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (19) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Special event license, annual/quarterly $55.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(a) (20) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Beer and wine license-initial and renewal $500.00 and $450.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(b) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
License fee for Section 501(c)(19) exempt service organizations $500.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(c) (1) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
Annual public event license $1,005.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-5(c) (2) Alcoholic Beverages Occupation tax schedules/liquor license: 
  
One-time public event license $255.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-7(b) Alcoholic Beverages Possession by minors: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-9(b) Alcoholic Beverages Posting of signs by business: 
  
Spread of minimum fine and maximum fine $2,500.00 
to 
$5,000.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art I Sec 4-9(c) Alcoholic Beverages Posting of signs by business: 
  
Failure to post a sign fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art II Sec 4-43(c) Alcoholic Beverages License for retail dealer 
  
Annual license fee for retail dealer of nonintoxicating beverages, e.g. 3.2 beer: Sales on premises versus sales off premises On premises 
$20.00 
Off premises 
$10.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art II Sec 4-47(b) Alcoholic Beverages Possession by minors: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art II Sec 4-49(a) Alcoholic Beverages Posting by business of state penalty for obtaining for persons under 21 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 4 Art II Sec 4-49(b) Alcoholic Beverages Posting by business of state penalty for obtaining for persons under 21 
  
Maximum fine, per day $50.00 CHAPTER 5:
ANIMALS Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-1 Animals Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-2(e) Animals Cruelty: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-3(g) Animals Vicious animals: 
  
Maximum fine $200.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-5(2) Animals Keeping porcine, goats, sheep, or hoofed animals other than bovines or equines 
  
Goat, sheep, or hoofed animal-permit fee $10.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-5(3) Animals Keeping porcine, goats, sheep, or hoofed animals other an bovines or equines 
  
Porcine-permit fee $10.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-17 Animals Abandoning animals in public or private place: 
  
Fine upon conviction $200.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-18 Animals Use of traps: 
  
Fine $100.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-20(a) Animals Animal a nuisance: 
  
Bond $500.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art I Sec 5-20(g) Animals Animal a nuisance: 
  
Fine $200.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art II Sec 5-50 Animals Impoundment: 
  
Initial seizure and impoundment fee $30.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art II Sec 5-50 Animals Impoundment: 
  
Per day seizure and impoundment fee $10.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art II Sec 5-50 Animals Impoundment: 
  
Seizure and impoundment-use of tranquilizer fee $20.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art II Sec 5-51(d) Animals Redemption: 
  
Maximum Fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art III Div 2 Sec 5-111(b) Animals Dogs: 
  
Annual fee for adult unaltered male or female 
  
Note: Seniors 50% discount $20.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art III Div 2 Sec 5-111(b) Animals Dogs: 
  
Annual fee for adult altered male or female 
  
Note: Seniors 50% discount $10.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art III Div 2 Sec 5-119 Animals Dogs: 
  
Issuance of duplicate tags: 
  
Fee to replace lost or stolen dog license tag $1.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art III Div 4 Sec 5-178(1) Animals Dogs: 
  
Redemption; release: 
  
Initial impoundment fee and per day impoundment fee $30.00 
and 
$10.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art III Div 4 Sec 5-179 Animals Dogs: 
  
Adoption in lieu of disposal fee; together with spay/neuter deposit and cost of city license tag $10.00 
and 
$50.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art III Div 5 Sec 5-208 Animals Dogs: 
  
Kennels: 
  
Dog kennel operation annual license $200.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art IV Div 2 Sec 5-276 Animals Cats: 
  
Annual fee for adult unaltered male or female 
  
Note: Seniors 50% discount $20.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art IV Div 2 Sec 5-276 Animals Cats: 
  
Annual fee for adult altered male or female 
  
Note: Seniors 50% discount $10.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art IV Div 2 Sec 5-281 Animals Cats: 
  
Issuance of duplicate tags: 
  
Fee to replace lost or stolen cat license tag $1.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art IV Div 3 Sec 5-307(1) & (2) Animals Cats: 
  
Redemption; release: 
  
Initial impoundment fee and per day impoundment fee $30.00 
and 
$10.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art IV Div 3 Sec 5-308 Animals Cats: 
  
Adoption in lieu of disposal fee; together with spay/neuter deposit and cost of city license tag $10.00 
and 
$50.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art IV Div 4 Sec 5-338(a) Animals Cats: 
  
Kennels: 
  
Cat kennel operation annual license $200.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art V Sec 5-372 Animals Dog and cat sterilization 
  
Sterilization or agreement and deposit required for adoption $50.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art V Sec 5-374(2) Animals Maximum fine of violation of form agreement $500.00 Part II Chapter 5 Art V Sec 5-379 Animals Dog and cat sterilization 
  
Failure to comply: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 CHAPTER 6:
AVIATION Part II Chapter 6 Art III Sec 6-58(b) Aviation $500.00 CHAPTER 7:
BUILDINGS AND
BUILDING REGU-
LATIONS Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations New construction of a room, addition, building, or structure fee-residential $0.17 per 
square foot Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations New construction of a room, addition, building, or structure fee-commercial $0.20 per 
square foot Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Remodel or alteration of existing structure- construction of a room, addition, building, or structure fee-residential $0.17 per 
square foot Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Remodel or alteration of existing structure- construction of a room, addition, building, or structure fee-commercial $0.20 per 
square foot Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Construction of an accessory structure (between 200-400 feet): 
  
Permit fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Plan check fee for building plan review 25% of the 
building 
permit fee Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Removal of structure to another location permit fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Demolition permit fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Swimming pool permit fee $60.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Driveway permit fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 109.2(A) Buildings and Building Regulations Minimum permit fee $20.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 114.4 Buildings and Building Regulations Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art II Sec 7-32 Sec 114.3 Buildings and Building Regulations Unlawful continuance minimum and maximum fine amounts $100.00, 
$500.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 3 Sec 7-126(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electricians. Qualifications. Issuance of certificate of registration: 
  
Initial electrical contractor fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 3 Sec 7-126(b) Buildings and Building Regulations Electricians. Qualifications. Issuance of certificate of registration: 
  
Annual renewal electrical contractor fee $75.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Change of an existing service, single family residence fee-up to 200 amps $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Change of an existing service, single family residence fee-200 to 400 amps $100.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Change of an existing service, single family residence fee-400+ amps $150.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Change of an existing service, commercial or multiple occupancy fee-up to 200 amps $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Change of an existing service, commercial or multiple occupancy fee-200 to 400 amps $100.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Change of an existing service, commercial or multiple occupancy fee-400+ amps $150.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Elevator fee: 
  
Per each passenger elevator $15.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Elevator fee: 
  
Per each freight elevator $3.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations electrical inspection fees 
  
Reinspection made because of defective work: 
  
First occurrence $25.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Reinspection made because of defective work: 
  
Subsequent occurrence(s) $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art III Div 4 Sec 7-160(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Electrical inspection fees 
  
Temporary electrical pole fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VI Div 1 Sec 7-299 Buildings and Building Regulations Refrigeration, air conditioning, and forced air heating 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VI Div 1 Sec 7-302(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Refrigeration, air conditioning, and forced air heating 
  
Registration with city: 
  
Contractor license fee-initial and renewal $100.00, 
$75.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VI Div 2 Sec 7-331(3) (4) Buildings and Building Regulations Refrigeration, air conditioning, and forced air heating. Permits and inspections. Permits fees: 
  
Change of existing service fee $25.00 
($500.00 
max) Part II Chapter 7 Art VI Div 2 Sec 7-331(3) (4) Buildings and Building Regulations Refrigeration, air conditioning, and forced air heating. Permits and inspections. Permits fees: 
  
Reinspection fee because of defective work-first occurrence, and subsequent occurrence $25.00, 
$50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VI Div 2 Sec 7-331(3) (4) Buildings and Building Regulations Refrigeration, air conditioning, and forced air heating. Permits and inspections. Permits fees: 
  
Construction without a permit Triple the 
permit fee Part II Chapter 7 Art VII Div 1 Sec 7-362 Sec P-113.2(3) Buildings and Building Regulations Plumbing 
  
Change of existing service fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VII Div 1 Sec 7-362 Sec P-113.2(4) Buildings and Building Regulations Plumbing 
  
Reinspection fee because of defective work-first occurrence, and subsequent occurrence $25.00, 
$50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VII Div 1 Sec 7-362 Sec P-113.2(5) Buildings and Building Regulations Plumbing 
  
Boring fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VII Div 2 Sec 7-397(1) Buildings and Building Regulations Registration of plumbers 
  
Qualifications and registration fees-initial $100.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VII Div 2 Sec 7-398(a)(1) Buildings and Building Regulations Registration of plumbers 
  
Qualifications and registration fees-annual renewal fee $75.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VII Div 2 Sec 7-400(b) Buildings and Building Regulations Registration of plumbers 
  
Liability insurance minimums $5,000.00, 
$10,000.00, 
$5,000.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art VIII Sec 7-432(4) Buildings and Building Regulations International Property Maintenance Code: 
  
Minimum and maximum fine amounts $50.00, 
$500.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XI Sec 7-521 Buildings and Building Regulations Fair housing 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XIV Sec 7-612 Buildings and Building Regulations Demolitions of buildings: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XIV Sec 7-614(b) Buildings and Building Regulations Demolitions of buildings: 
  
License fee $75.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XIV Sec 7-615 Buildings and Building Regulations Demolitions of buildings: 
  
Surety bond $10,000.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XIV Sec 7-616(b) Buildings and Building Regulations Demolitions of buildings: 
  
Liability insurance minimums $50,000.00, 
$100,000.00, 
$50,000.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XV Sec 7-646(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Storm cellars: 
  
Annual license fee for engaging in the business of constructing or repairing $75.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XV Sec 7-646(b) Buildings and Building Regulations Storm cellars: 
  
Annual license fee for engaging in the business of constructing or repairing-late fee $15.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XV Sec 7-647(a) Buildings and Building Regulations Storm cellars: 
  
Surety bond for engaging in the business of constructing or repairing $2,000.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XV Sec 7-648(b) Buildings and Building Regulations Storm cellars: 
  
Liability insurance minimums for engaging in the business of constructing or repairing $5,000.00, 
$10,000.00, 
$5,000.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XVI Div 1 Sec 7-676 Buildings and Building Regulations Moving of buildings: 
  
Minimum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XVI Div 2 Sec 7-713 Buildings and Building Regulations Moving of buildings: 
  
Minimum fine $25.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XVI Div 2 Sec 7-713 Buildings and Building Regulations Moving of buildings: 
  
Permit fee: 
  
For building up to 24 feet in width $50.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XVI Div 2 Sec 7-713 Buildings and Building Regulations Moving of buildings: 
  
Permit fee: 
  
For building 30 feet to 32 feet in width $75.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XVI Div 2 Sec 7-714(b) Buildings and Building Regulations Moving of buildings: 
  
Surety bond $2,000.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XVI Div 2 Sec 7-715(b) Buildings and Building Regulations Moving of buildings: 
  
Minimum liability insurance $5,000.00, 
$10,000.00, 
$5,000.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XVI Div 2 Sec 7-716(c) Buildings and Building Regulations Moving of buildings: 
  
Clean up deposit prior to issuance $500.00 Part II Chapter 7 Art XVI Div 2 Sec 7-717 Buildings and Building Regulations Moving of buildings: 
  
Time limits for completion of moving-per day fee for exceeding allowable days in permit $10.00 CHAPTER 8:
BUSINESS, PERMITS
AND LICENSES Part II Chapter 8 Art II Sec 8-32(c) Business, Permits, and Licenses Alarm permits required. Fines tied to violation 1st conviction $25.00; subsequent conviction $100.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art II Sec 8-34(a) Business, Permits, and Licenses Alarm fees required: initial registration $25.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art II Sec 8-34(b) Business, Permits, and Licenses Alarm fees required: renewal license $15.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art II Sec 8-34(c) Business, Permits, and Licenses Alarm fees required: reinstatement fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art II Sec 8-35 Business, Permits, and Licenses False alarms 1st conviction $25.00; subsequent conviction $100.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art II Sec 8-40 Business, Permits, and Licenses Enforcement of all other section violations 1st conviction $25.00; subsequent conviction $100.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VI Div 1 Sec 8-192 Business, Permits, and Licenses Peddlers, solicitors, and itinerant merchants: penalty for violation $500.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VI Div 2 Sec 8-224 Business, Permits, and Licenses License fee $3.00 per 
day; or $15.00 
per week; or 
$50.00 per 
year Part II Chapter 8 Art VI Div 2 Sec 8-225(a) Business, Permits, and Licenses Bond $2,000.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VI Div 3 Sec 8-256 Business, Permits, and Licenses Penalty for violation $500.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VI Div 3 Sec 8-259 Business, Permits, and Licenses Snow cone merchant's license $25.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VI Div 4 Sec 8-291 Business, Permits, and Licenses Charitable solicitations: penalty for violation $500.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VII Sec 8-326 Business, Permits, and Licenses Pawnbrokers: violations penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VII Sec 8-327 Business, Permits, and Licenses Pawnbrokers: regulatory fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VII Sec 8-328(a) Business, Permits, and Licenses Pawnbrokers: bond $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VIII Sec 8-363 Business, Permits, and Licenses Auctioneers: 
  
License fee per annum; per day in lieu of per annum; per week in lieu of annum; per month in lieu of annum $100.00; 
$10.00; 
$20.00; 
$30.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VIII Sec 8-364 Business, Permits, and Licenses Auctioneers: 
  
Bond $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art VIII Sec 8-515 Business, Permits, and Licenses Medical marijuana establishments $100.00 $200.00 
per day Part II Chapter 8 Art VIII Sec 8-516 Business, Permits, and Licenses Marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use $25.00 $200.00 
per day Part II Chapter 8 Art IX Div 1 Sec 8-398 Business, Permits, and Licenses Residential sales: 
  
Violations penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art IX Div 2 Sec 8-434 Business, Permits, and Licenses Residential sales: 
  
License fee $10.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art X Div 1 Sec 8-465 Business, Permits, and Licenses Vehicles for hire: 
  
Violations penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 8 Art X Div 2 Sec 8-505 Business, Permits, and Licenses Vehicles for hire: 
  
Initial license fee; license fee for each additional vehicle $25.00; 
$10.00 CHAPTER 9:
CABLE
COMMUNICATIONS Part II Chapter 9 Art II Div 1 Sec 9-38(c)(1) (2) Cable Communications Liability and indemnification: 
  
Insurance General liability insurance: 
Bodily injury per person-$500,000.00. 
Bodily injury per occurrence-$1,000,000.00. 
Property damage per occurrence-$1,000,000.00. 
Property damage, aggregate-$1,000,000.00. 
  
Automobile insurance: 
  
Bodily injury per person-$500,000.00. 
Bodily injury per occurrence-$1,000,000.00. 
Property damage per occurrence-$1,000,000.00. Part II Chapter 9 Art II Div 2 Sec 9-66(b) Cable Communications System requirements: 
  
Bond $125,000.00 CHAPTER 10:
CEMETERIES Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-1 Cemeteries Violations penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-9 Cemeteries Sale of lots: 
  
Adult lot; infant lot $400.00; 
$200.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees: 
  
If the city provides such services $400.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees: 
  
Additional tent fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees: 
  
Opening and closing infant graves $200.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees 
  
Cremation burials $100.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees: 
  
After 4:00 p.m. Monday thru Friday and overtime charge $250.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees: 
  
Overtime charge Saturday prior to 12:00 noon $350.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees: 
  
Overtime charges after 12:00 noon on Saturday $450.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees: 
  
Overtime charge for services on a nonfederal municipal holiday $400.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees 
  
Disinterment fee $600.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Preparation and closing of graves; fees: 
  
Reinterment fee $400.00 Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Columbarium fees: 
  
Two lower rows, per niche, includes opening and closing, and name, birth and death dates (rows C&D) $800.00 
per niche Part II Chapter 10 Sec 10-11 Cemeteries Columbarium fees: 
  
Two upper rows, per niche, includes opening and closing, and name, birth and death dates (rows A&B) $1,000.00 per niche CHAPTER 11:
CIVIL EMERGENCIES Part II Chapter 11 Art III Sec 11-133 Civil Emergencies 911 emergency number: false alarm, complaint, or information: 
  
Conviction maximum fine $500.00 CHAPTER 12:
COURT Part II Chapter 12 Art 1 Sec 12-26 Court $35.00 Part II Chapter 12 Art III Sec 12-55 Court Bond of clerk and judge; fees, fines, and forfeitures: 
  
Service of arrest warrant sheriffs' fee $20.00 Part II Chapter 12 Art III Sec 12-66 Court Bond of clerk and judge; fees, fines, and forfeitures: 
  
Maximum bail $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 12 Art III Sec 12-66 Court Bond of clerk and judge; fees, fines, and forfeitures: 
  
Maximum cash bond $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 12 Art III Sec 12-67 Court Bond of clerk and judge; fees, fines, and forfeitures: 
  
Release on personal recognizance 
  
Maximum bail $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 12 Art V Sec 12-118(a) Court Imprisonment; judgments and sentences. 
  
Enforcement of payments of fines or costs by imprisonment-persons unable to pay: 
  
Imprisonment rate per day for financially able defendant $25.00 Part II Chapter 12 Art V Sec 12-119 Court Imprisonment; judgments and sentences. 
  
Municipal court judgments and sentences 
  
Maximum fine for deferred sentence administrative fee $500.00 Part II Chapter 12 Art VI Sec 12-145 Court Court costs and fees 
  
Maximum court costs $30.00 Part II Chapter 12 Art VI Sec 12-149(b) Court Appeals. 
Upon conviction, the judge of the municipal court will enter an order on the docket fixing an amount in which bond may be given by the defendant, in cash or sureties for cash in an amount of not less than $100.00 nor more than twice the amount of such fine. $100.00 
or more Part II Chapter 12 Art VI Sec 12-152 Court Penalty for exceeding the posted speed limit 
  
Maximum fine, maximum court costs $10.00 
and 
$15.00 CHAPTER 13:
FIRE PREVENTION
AND PROTECTION Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)1 Fire Prevention and Protection Operating a special amusement building fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)2 Fire Prevention and Protection Conducting a carnival or fair fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)3 Fire Prevention and Protection Displays in covered malls of liquid- or gas-fired equipment, open-flame or flame-producing equipment, highly combustible goods and similar items fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)4 Fire Prevention and Protection Operating exhibits and trade shows fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)5 Fire Prevention and Protection Manufacture, storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of explosive, explosive material, fireworks, or pyrotechnic special effects fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)6 Fire Prevention and Protection Open burning for any purpose other than recreational fires fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)7 Fire Prevention and Protection Operating an air-supported temporary membrane structure or a tent having an area is excess of 200 square feet, or a canopy in excess of 400 square feet fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)8 Fire Prevention and Protection Installation of or modification to an automatic fire-extinguishing system fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)9 Fire Prevention and Protection Installation of or modification to fire alarm and detection systems fee $35.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)10 Fire Prevention and Protection Installation of or modification to fire pumps and related fuel tanks, jockey pumps, controllers, and generators fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)11 Fire Prevention and Protection Install, alter, remove, abandon or otherwise dispose of a flammable or combustible liquid tank fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-4(d)12 Fire Prevention and Protection Installation, modification, or removal from service of a standpipe system fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-9(b) Fire Prevention and Protection False alarm maximum fine if convicted $750.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art I Sec 13-10(a) Fire Prevention and Protection Installation fee for a woodburning (solid fuel) stove $15.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art II Sec 13-37 Sec 109.3 & Sec 111.4 Fire Prevention and Protection Fire Prevention Code: 
  
Amendments of Section 109.3: Violation penalties ($500.00); 
  
Amendments of Section 111.4: Failure to comply penalty ($100.00-$500.00) Amendments of Section 109.3: Violation penalties-$500.00 
  
Amendments of Section 111.4: Failure to comply penalty-between $100.00 and $500.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art IV Sec 13-139 Fire Prevention and Protection Fireworks display permit fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 13 Art IV Sec 13-139 Fire Prevention and Protection Fireworks display permit general liability insurance policy $1,000,000.00 CHAPTER 14:
FLOODS Part II Chapter 14 Art II Div 2 Sec 14-70(1) Floods Floodplain management fee schedule: 
  
Notice of intent fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 14 Art II Div 2 Sec 14-70(2) Floods Floodplain management fee schedule: 
  
Floodplain development permit application review $100.00 Part II Chapter 14 Art II Div 2 Sec 14-70(3) Floods Floodplain management fee schedule: 
  
Floodplain development permit fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 14 Art II Div 2 Sec 14-70(4) Floods Floodplain management fee schedule: 
  
Inspection fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 14 Art II Div 2 Sec 14-71 Floods Maximum penalty for each conviction of noncompliance $500.00 CHAPTER 15:
HEALTH &
SANITATION Part II Chapter 15 Art 1 Sec 15-2(b) Health & Sanitation Food service sanitation: 
  
Maximum penalty for violation and conviction $500.00 Part II Chapter 15 Art II Div 1 Sec 15-32 Health & Sanitation Ambulances: 
  
Maximum penalty for violation and conviction $500.00 Part II Chapter 15 Art II Div 1 Sec 15-37(b) Health & Sanitation Ambulances: 
  
Minimum insurance per vehicle $100,000.00 for injuries to or death of any one person arising out of any one accident; 
  
$300,000.00 for injuries to or death for more than one person arising out of any one accident; 
  
$100,000.00 for damages to property arising from any one accident Part II Chapter 15 Art II Div 1 Sec 15-58(b) Health & Sanitation Emergency calls: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 15 Art II Div 1 Sec 15-58(c) Health & Sanitation Emergency calls: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 15 Art II Div 2 Sec 15-90 Health & Sanitation Annual license fee to engage in ambulance business $25.00 Part II Chapter 15 Art III Sec 15-122(a) Health & Sanitation Sprayers and exterminators: 
  
Annual license fee $25.00 CHAPTER 16:
LAKES Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 4 Sec 16-117(a) Lakes Fishing: 
  
Annual license fee $15.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 4 Sec 16-117(a) Lakes Fishing: 
  
Daily license fee $3.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 4 Sec 16-117(g) Lakes Fishing: 
  
Portion of license fee may be kept by retail outfits other than the city $1.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 4 Sec 16-118(b) Lakes Fishing: 
  
Maximum penalty imposed on violation of kind of fish taken section $500.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 4 Sec 16-121(a) Lakes Fishing: 
  
Maximum penalty imposed on violation of fishing in connecting channel subsection $500.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 4 Sec 16-121(b) Lakes Fishing: 
  
Maximum penalty imposed on violation of number of fish taken subsection $500.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 5 SubDiv I Sec 16-151(c) Lakes Hunting: 
  
Penalty for use of motor-driven vehicle in game refuge $100.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 5 SubDiv I Sec 16-153(d) Lakes Hunting: 
  
Seasonal license fee dove, quail, squirrel, or rabbit hunting $8.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 5 SubDiv I Sec 16-153(d) Lakes Hunting: 
  
Daily license fee per dove, quail, squirrel, or rabbit hunting season $2.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 5 SubDiv II Sec 16-183(a) Lakes Hunting: 
  
Annual hunting license upon the waters or lands owned or controlled by city surrounding Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 $8.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 5 SubDiv II Sec 16-183(a) Lakes Hunting: 
  
Daily hunting license upon the waters or lands owned or controlled by city surrounding Twin Lakes Nos. 1 and 2 $2.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 6 SubDiv II Sec 16-253(a) Lakes Recreator's annual license to operate watercraft $26.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 6 SubDiv II Sec 16-253(a) Lakes Recreator's daily license to operate watercraft $7.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 6 SubDiv II Sec 16-253(b) Lakes Dealers' annual license to operate watercraft $25.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 7 Sec 16-288(a) Lakes Camping: 
  
Daily fee $5.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 8 Sec 16-321 Lakes Lot rentals: 
  
Annual rental/lease fee per lake lot $600.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 8 Sec 16-322(b) Lakes Lot rentals: 
  
Transfer fee $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 8 Sec 16-326 Lakes Lot rentals: 
  
Early cancellation of lease fee $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 8 Sec 16-327 Lakes Lot rentals: 
  
Renewal of lease after cancellation fee $75.00 Part II Chapter 16 Art II Div 8 Sec 16-328 Lakes Inspection fee of lake lot septic system $75.00 CHAPTER 18:
MANUFACTURED
HOMES Part II Chapter 18 Art 1 Sec 18-2 Manufactured Homes Maximum penalty for each offense of this chapter $500.00 Part II Chapter 18 Art V Div 2 Sec 18-154 Manufactured Homes Mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/RV park 
  
Maximum initial license fee for up to 30 spaces $30.00 Part II Chapter 18 Art V Div 2 Sec 18-154 Manufactured Homes Mobile/manufactured home or travel trailer/RV park 
  
Maximum initial license fee for each space over 30 spaces $3.00 CHAPTER 19:
MOTOR VEHICLES
AND TRAFFIC Part II Chapter 19 Art I Sec 19-4(a) (b) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Valid license required 
  
Maximum fine $100.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art I Sec 19-4(a) (b) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Valid license required 
  
Maximum fine for driving with suspended, cancelled, denied, or revoked license: 
  
Maximum fine-first offense $100.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art I Sec 19-4(a) (b) Motor Vehicles and Traffic valid license required 
  
Maximum fine for driving with suspended, cancelled, denied, or revoked license: 
  
Maximum fine-subsequent offense $500.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art II Div 1 Sec 19-42(a) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Administration and enforcement 
  
Maximum fine $100.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art II Div 1 Sec 19-51(a) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Motor vehicle impoundment fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art IV Sec 19-178(c) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art IV Sec 19-178.5 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Driving while impaired 
  
Maximum fine $200.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art IV Sec 19-182(e) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Use of safety belts: 
  
Fine and court cost $10.00; 
$15.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art IV Sec 19-183(f) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Child passenger restraint system: 
  
Fine and court cost $10.00; 
$15.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art VI Sec 19-251 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Accidents. 
  
Maximum fine $200.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art XI Div 2 Subdiv I Sec 19-451(b) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Parking on posted private property: 
  
Maximum fine $20.00 plus 
removal 
charges 
incurred Part II Chapter 19 Art XI Div 2 Subdiv I Sec 19-453(c) (d) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Central business district 
  
Illegal parking fine $5.00 Part II Chapter 19 Art XI Div 4 Sec 19-696(d) Motor Vehicles and Traffic Heavy vehicles 
  
Load limits on bridges: 
  
Maximum fine $200.00 CHAPTER 20:
OFFENSES AND
MISCELLANEOUS
PROVISIONS Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-7(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Maximum penalty for removing, destroying, or defacing decorations $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-8(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Assault, battery: 
  
Use of taser fee $30.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-9 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Blasphemy: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-10(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Fortunetelling: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-11(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Disorderly house: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-12(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Consuming or inhaling intoxicants in public places: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-13(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Abandoned refrigerators, iceboxes, or airtight containers: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-14(d) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Disturbing assemblies: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-15 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Disturbance by loud or unusual noise or abusive, violent, profane, or threatening language: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-16(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Insulting displays: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-17(a) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Fraud to obtain food, lodging, or services: 
  
Maximum penalty under this subsection $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-17(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Fraud to obtain food, lodging, or services: 
  
Maximum penalty under this subsection $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-18(d) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Petit larceny: 
  
Maximum penalty upon conviction $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-21(e) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Shoplifting: 
  
Range of fines $50.00 
to 
$200.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-22(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Malicious mischief: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-24(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Taking or withholding possession of city property: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-26(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Radio and television interference: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-27(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Trespassing: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art 1 Sec 20-30(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Barbed wire fence: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-31(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Electrical fences: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-32(d)(1) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Possession of marijuana: 
  
Maximum penalty for first violation $100.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-32(d)(2) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Possession of marijuana: 
  
Maximum penalty for second and subsequent violation $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-33(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Indecent exposure: 
  
Maximum penalty $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-34(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Abuse of city tennis courts: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-35(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Uses of airport trail: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-36(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Possession of laser pointing devices: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art I Sec 20-39(e) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Resisting a police officer: 
  
Use of taser fee $30.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art II Sec 20-68(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Discharging firearms in public place: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 1 Sec 20-98(e) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Unlawful curfew: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 1 Sec 20-99(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Leaving child in vehicle: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 1 Sec 20-100(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Allowing or encouraging minor to commit offenses: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 1 Sec 20-101(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Parental responsibility; failure to control: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 1 Sec 20-102(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Commission of crime in presence of minor: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 1 Sec 20-103(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Permitting crimes or disorderliness on premises: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 1 Sec 20-105(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Truancy: 
  
Maximum fine for parent $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 1 Sec 20-105(d) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Truancy: 
  
Maximum fine first offense; second offense; and subsequent offense $50.00; 
$100.00; 
$500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 2 Sec 20-133(e) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Tobacco products. Furnishing prohibited: 
  
Maximum fine first offense; and second and subsequent offense $100.00; 
$200.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 2 Sec 20-134(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Tobacco products. Falsifying proof of age: 
  
Maximum fine first offense; and second and subsequent offense $100.00; 
$200.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 2 Sec 20-135(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Tobacco products. Distribution of samples: 
  
Maximum fine first offense; and second and subsequent offense $100.00; 
$200.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 2 Sec 20-136(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Tobacco products. Sale of cigarettes in non-original, sealed, packaging: 
  
Maximum fine $200.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 2 Sec 20-137(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Tobacco products. Tobacco vending machines: 
  
Fine first offense; and second and subsequent offense $100.00; 
$200.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 2 Sec 20-138(b) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Tobacco products. Display of tobacco age restriction signage: 
  
Fine for each day of violation $100.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 2 Sec 20-139(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Tobacco products. Public access to tobacco products: 
  
Fine first offense; and second and subsequent offense $100.00; 
$200.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 2 Sec 20-140 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Tobacco products. Tobacco paraphernalia: 
  
Fine $100.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art III Div 3 Sec 20-162(f) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors. hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering or event where minors are consuming alcohol: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art IV Div 1 Sec 20-169 Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Nuisances. Maintaining or permitting nuisances: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art IV Div 1 Sec 20-172(d) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Nuisances. Loud sound from amplification systems in motor vehicle: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art IV Div 1 Sec 20-173(d) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Nuisances. Loud sound from amplification systems in private residences: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art IV Div 2 Sec 20-202(j) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Accumulation of trash and weeds. health nuisances: 
  
Maximum fine $200.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art V Sec 20-240(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Graffiti. Application prohibited: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art V Sec 20-242(e) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Graffiti. Sale of spray paint to minors: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 20 Art V Sec 20-243(c) Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions Prohibitions on spray paint containers and broad-tipped indelible markers: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 CHAPTER 21:
PARKS & RECREATION Part II Chapter 21 Art I Sec 21-1 Parks & Recreation Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 21 Art I Sec 21-9(c) Parks & Recreation Vendors in recreational areas: 
  
Daily fee $2.50 Part II Chapter 21 Art I Sec 21-9(c) Parks & Recreation Vendors in recreational areas: 
  
Specific event fee $7.50 Part II Chapter 21 Art I Sec 21-9(e) Parks & Recreation Vendors in recreational areas: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Youth/senior daily admission fee $5.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Adult daily admission fee $6.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Non-swimmer admission fee $2.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Youth/senior twilight admission fee $2.50 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Adult twilight admission fee $3.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Non-swimmer twilight fee $1.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Individual season pass $50.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Senior season pass $40.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Family season pass $130.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Per hour private rental $220.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Per hour private rental for season pass holder $175.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Shawnee Splash: 
  
Party space rental $100.00 
to 
$175.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Municipal gym rental fees: 
  
Per hour gym space $35.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Municipal gym rental fees: 
  
Admission open gym $3.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Community center rental fees: 
  
Per hour rental after 5:00 p.m. $35.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Community center rental fees: 
  
Per hour rental Monday thru Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. $25.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Community center rental fees: 
  
Daily rate (8 hours) + rate per each additional hour up to 9:00 p.m. $200.00 daily 
rate; $10.00 
per additional 
hour New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Community center rental fees: 
  
Refundable cleaning deposit $25.00 New Ordinance Parks & Recreation Park pavilion rental per 3-hour time slot $25.00 CHAPTER 23:
SOLID WASTE Part II Chapter 23 Art II Sec 23-38(a) Solid Waste Once a week residential curbside solid waste collection Type of Service Monthly Rate Small polycart (65 gallon) $14.39 Large polycart (95 gallon) $17.89 Additional polycart (95 gallon) $ 9.00 Solid waste service only $17.89 Part II Chapter 23 Art II Sec 23-38(c) Solid Waste Multifamily dwelling monthly rate/unit $5.00 Part II Chapter 23 Art II Sec 23-38(f) Solid Waste Minimum deposit for garbage service from city $20.00 Part II Chapter 23 Art II Sec 23-40 Solid Waste Disposal of household hazardous waste; rates Not included in this schedule; see Code sec 23-40 Part II Chapter 23 Art III Sec 23-67(b) Solid Waste City dump; sanitary landfill: 
  
Fee per cubic yard $0.75 CHAPTER 24:
STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS Part II Chapter 24 Art I Sec 24-1 Streets and Sidewalks Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art I Sec 24-2(a) Streets and Sidewalks Street paving or improvement work bond $5,000.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art I Sec 24-2(b) Streets and Sidewalks Street paving or improvement work liability $100,000.00, 
$300,000.00, 
$100,000.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art II Sec 24-46(a) Streets and Sidewalks Permit to construct or repair fee Part II Chapter 24 Art III Div 2 Sec 24-114(e) Streets and Sidewalks Administrative fee $10.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art III Div 2 Sec 24-114(e) Streets and Sidewalks If a curb is cut into, a fee for cutting or removing a curbing exceeding 20 feet shall be $1.00 per foot for each additional foot in excess of 20 feet $20.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art III Div 2 Sec 24-115 Streets and Sidewalks Permit renewal fee $1.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art IV Div 1 Sec 24-146 Streets and Sidewalks Excavations: 
  
Maximum fine $10.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art IV Div 1 Sec 24-147 Streets and Sidewalks Excavation: 
  
Bond $500.00 $2,000.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art IV Div 1 Sec 24-148(b) Streets and Sidewalks Excavations: 
  
Liability insurance coverage $5,000.00, 
$10,000.00, 
$5,000.00 Part II Chapter 24 Art IV Div 2 Sec 24-177(b) Streets and Sidewalks Streets: 
  
Cut fee $60.00 CHAPTER 25:
TAXATION Part II Chapter 25 Art II Div 1 Sec 25-35 Taxation Failure or refusal to pay or fraudulent returns under this section: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 25 Art III Div 1 Sec 25-162 Taxation Failure or refusal to pay or fraudulent returns under this section: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 CHAPTER 26:
UTILITIES CHAPTER 26 
ARTICLE I
GENERAL Part II Chapter 26 Art I Sec 26-1(c) and (d) Utilities Investor owned utilities Franchise tax 
+ current 
sales tax CHAPTER 26 
ARTICLE II
WATER AND SEWER Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-26(a) Utilities Water rates: The minimum charge for water used by consumers inside the city limits: 
  
RESIDENTIAL: Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $22.25 1,001-4,000 $ 4.18 4,001-1,000,000 $ 4.29 1,000,001-2,000,000 $ 4.40 More than 2,000,000 $ 4.50 Utilities Water rates: The minimum charge for water used by consumers inside city limits: 
  
COMMERCIAL: Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $ 27.82 1,001-4,000 $ 4.18 4,001-1,000,000 $ 4.29 1,000,001-2,000,000 $ 4.40 More than 2,000,000 $ 4.50 Water rates: The minimum charge for water used by consumers inside city limits: 
  
INSIDE COMPOUND METER: Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $27.82 1,001-4,000 $ 4.18 4,001-1,000,000 $ 4.18 1,000,001-2,000,000 $ 4.40 More than 2,000,000 $ 4.50 Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-26(b) Utilities Water rates: The rate to be charged for furnishing water for consumption outside the city limits: 
  
RESIDENTIAL Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $25.86 1,001-4,000 $ 6.28 4,001-1,000,000 $ 6.44 1,000,001-2,000,000 $ 6.60 More than 2,000,000 $ 6.76 Water rates: The rate to be charged for furnishing water for consumption outside the limits: 
  
COMMERCIAL Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $32.34 1,001-4,000 $ 6.28 4,001-1,000,000 $ 6.44 1,000,001-2,000,000 $ 6.60 More than 2,000,000 $ 6.76 Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-27(b) Utilities Sewer rates: The charge for sanitary sewer use by consumers inside the city limits: 
  
RESIDENTIAL Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $14.51 Over 1,000 $ 3.21 Sewer rates: The charge for sanitary sewer use by consumers inside the city limits: 
  
COMMERCIAL Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $18.15 Over 1,000 $ 3.12 Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-27(c) Utilities The rate for furnishing water for consumption outside the city limits: 
  
RESIDENTIAL Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $21.77 Over 1,000 $ 4.68 The rate for furnishing water for consumption outside the city limits: 
  
COMMERCIAL Number of Gallons Monthly
Rate Per
Thousand
Gallons 0-1,000 $27.21 Over 1,000 $ 4.68 No Ordinance Utilities Septic hauler permit fee $100.00/ 
truck Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-28(a), (b)1 Utilities Industrial pretreatment fees RESERVED Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-28(a), (b)2 Utilities Industrial pretreatment fees RESERVED Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-28(a), (b)3 Utilities Industrial pretreatment fees RESERVED Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-28(a), (b)4 Utilities Industrial pretreatment fees RESERVED Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-28(a), (b)5 Utilities Industrial pretreatment fees RESERVED Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-28(a), (b)6 Utilities Industrial pretreatment fees RESERVED Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-28(a), (b)7 Utilities Industrial pretreatment fees RESERVED Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-29(a) (b) Utilities (Metered users) user charge-treatment of domestic wastewater Refer to Code Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-29(a) (b) Utilities (Non-metered users) user charge-treatment of domestic wastewater Refer to Code Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-29(c) Utilities Excessive strength charges Refer to Code Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-29(e) Utilities Toxic pollutant charges Refer to Code Part II Chapter 26 Art II Sec 26-29(g) Utilities Charges for extraneous flows Refer to Code CHAPTER 26 
ARTICLE III
WATER Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-59 Utilities Furnishing to other premises: 
  
Resetting the meter fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-67(d) (1) Utilities Water-drought management plans: 
  
Fines: 1st violation Warning Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-67(d) (2) Utilities Water-drought management plans: 
  
Fines: 2nd violation $150.00 
plus costs Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-67(d) (3) Utilities Water-drought management plans: 
  
Fines: 3rd violation $250.00 
plus costs Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-67(d) (4) Utilities Water-drought management plans: 
  
Fines: 4th and subsequent violations $500.00 
plus costs Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-70(a) Utilities Failure to repair water leak: 
  
Maximum fine $150.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-70(a) Utilities Failure to repair water leak: 
  
Subsequent fine for each day $25.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-71(a)(2) Utilities Individual water well: 
  
Permit fee $100.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-72 Utilities Fire hydrant meter for bulk water purchase: 
  
Refundable deposit $1,100.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-97 Utilities Water service tapping fee: 
  
Meter size of ?" or 3/4" $300.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-97 Utilities Water service tapping fee: 
  
Meter size of 1/2" or 3/4" $350.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-97 Utilities Water service tapping fee: 
  
Meter size of 1.0" and over $450.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-104 Utilities Filling swimming pools Refer to Code Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 2 Sec 26-132(a) Utilities Water service cash deposit-residential $75.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 2 Sec 26-132(c) Utilities Processing fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-133(a) Utilities Water service cash deposit-commercial Refer to Code Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-134 Utilities Water meter deposit $200.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-135(b) Utilities Temporary service charge $25.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-137 Utilities Utility deposit amount increase Refer to Code Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-171 Utilities Water meter testing Refer to Code Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 1 Sec 26-202 Utilities Late payment penalty 10% of bill, 
minimum 
$1.25 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 2 Sec 26-101(c) Utilities Transfer of service fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 2 Sec 26-173 Utilities Meter maintenance fees Residential $6.00 
per month Commercial Meter Size Rate
Per Month 3/4" meter $ 6.00 ?" meter $ 6.00 1" meter $ 6.00 11/2" meter $ 7.00 2" meter $ 9.00 3" meter $13.00 4" meter $17.00 5" meter $21.00 6" meter $25.00 8" meter $34.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 4 Sec 26-231(c) Utilities Resetting meter after discontinuance of service: 
  
Fee $75.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 4 Sec 26-231(d) Utilities Administration fee for process of disconnecting $50.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 4 Sec 26-231(e) Utilities Rescheduling fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 4 Sec 26-231(f) Utilities Cutoff notice fee $5.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 4 Sec 26-231(g) Utilities After-hours connection service fee $50.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art III Div 4 Sec 26-233 Utilities Dishonored check fee $35.00 CHAPTER 26 
ARTICLE IV
SEWERS Part II Chapter 26 Art IV Div 1 Sec 26-264 Utilities Sewers: 
  
Maximum fine $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art IV Div 1 Sec 26-265 Utilities Falsifying information: 
  
Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art IV Div 1 Sec 26-266(h) Utilities Sewers: 
  
Maximum fine $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art IV Div 1 Sec 26-271(c) Utilities Fees for dumping septage (section 26-28) RESERVED Part II Chapter 26 Art IV Div 1 Sec 26-272(f) Utilities Sewer connection. Wastewater tap fee: 
  
4 inch pipe $375.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art IV Div 1 Sec 26-272 (f) Utilities Sewer connection. Wastewater tap fee: 
  
6 inch pipe $500.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art IV Div 1 Sec 26-272(f) Utilities Sewer connection. Wastewater tap fee: 
  
8 inch pipe $1,000.00 CHAPTER 26 
ARTICLE V
PRIVATE SEWAGE
DISPOSAL CODE Part II Chapter 26 Art V Sec 26-437(3) Utilities Change of existing service fee: $20.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art V Sec 26-437(4) Utilities Reinspection fee: 
  
First occurrence $25.00 Part II Chapter 26 Art V Sec 26-437(4) Utilities Reinspection fee: 
  
Subsequent occurrences $50.00 Ordinance Pending Utilities Fee: 
  
Field charge to turn on domestic water and no adult present $25.00 Ordinance Pending Utilities Fee: 
  
Field charge for seconds trip to turn on domestic water and no adult present $25.00 CHAPTER 27:
VEGETATION Part II Chapter 27 Art II Div 2 Sec 27-56 Vegetation License to trim, prune, or remove: 
  
License fee $25.00 Part II Chapter 27 Art II Div 2 Sec 27-57 Vegetation License to trim, prune, or remove: 
  
Bond $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 27 Art II Div 2 Sec 27-58 Vegetation License to trim, prune, or remove: 
  
Liability insurance $5,000.00, 
$10,000.00, 
$5,000.00 Part II Chapter 27 Art II Div 3 Sec 27-92 Vegetation Arborists license fee; bond; and liability insurance $1,000.00 $50,000.00, $100,000.00 Part II Chapter 27 Art II Div 3 Sec 27-94 Vegetation Maximum fine $100.00 CHAPTER 28:
WELLS, OIL AND GAS Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 1 Sec 28-33(b) Wells, Oil and Gas Maximum fine $500.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 1 Sec 28-37 Wells, Oil and Gas Release of bonds and insurance on sale of well: 
  
Flat fee per well under 10 wells $50.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 1 Sec 28-37 Wells, Oil and Gas Release of bonds and insurance on sale of well: 
  
Release of 10 or more wells $500.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-67(b) Wells, Oil and Gas Application and permit fee and first year of operation fee $3,500.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-69(a) Wells, Oil and Gas Surety bond $50,000.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-69(c) Wells, Oil and Gas Blanket corporate surety bond $500,000.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-69(d) Wells, Oil and Gas Continuing irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of corporate surety bond $50,000.00.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-70(b) Wells, Oil and Gas Liability insurance minimum $500,000.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-72 Wells, Oil and Gas Denial; cancellation of application processing fee $250.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-73(a) Wells, Oil and Gas Annual permit fee $250.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-73(b) (1-2) Wells, Oil and Gas Annual permit fee: 
  
If the price per barrel of Oklahoma Sweet has averaged less than $15.00 per barrel for the 12 months preceding the anniversary date $150.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-73(b) (1-2) Wells, Oil and Gas Annual permit fee: 
  
If the price per barrel of Oklahoma Sweet has averaged more than $15.00 per barrel for the 12 months preceding the anniversary date $250.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art II Div 2 Sec 28-74 Wells, Oil and Gas Prior nonpermitted wells $250.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art III Sec 28-131(c) Wells, Oil and Gas Abandonment and plugging permit fee $350.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art V Sec 28-194(a) Wells, Oil and Gas Enhanced recovery system and disposal wells 
  
Enhanced recovery project or disposal well application fee $5,000.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art V Sec 28-194(b) Wells, Oil and Gas Enhanced recovery system and disposal wells 
  
Enhanced recovery project: 
  
Annual inspection fee $250.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art V Sec 28-194(c) Wells, Oil and Gas Enhanced recovery system and disposal wells 
  
Disposal well: 
  
Annual inspection fee $1,000.00 Part II Chapter 28 Art V Sec 28-196(2)(d) Wells, Oil and Gas Enhanced recovery system and disposal wells 
  
Additional bond and insurance coverage: 
  
Minimum insurance coverage $1,000,000.00  
(Res. No. 6560, §§ 1-4, 4-2-2018; Ord. No. 2640NS, § 8, 9-4-2018; Ord. No. 2646NS, § 1(App.), 12-17-2018; Res. No. 6580, §§ 1-4, 12-17-2018) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1986 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1986 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1986 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1986 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-6 1-5 1-7 1-6(a) 1-13 1-6(b) 1-14 1-7 1-10 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 2-2 2-1 2-3 2-2 2-4 2-3 2-5 2-4 2-21 2-29 2-21.1 2-30 2-22 2-31 2-23 2-32 2-24 2-33 2-25 2-34 2-26 2-35 2-27 2-36 2-28 2-37 2-29 2-38 2-30 2-39 2-31 2-40 2-46 2-71 2-47 2-72 2-48 2-73 2-49 2-74 2-66 2-92 2-67 2-93 2-68 2-94 2-69 2-95 2-70 2-96 2-71 2-97 2-72 2-98 2-73 2-99 2-74 2-100 2-75 2-101 2-76 2-102 2-77 2-103 2-78 2-104 2-91 2-122 2-93 2-123 2-94 2-124 2-106 2-147 2-107 2-148 2-108 2-149 2-109 2-150 2-110 2-151 2-111 2-152 2-112 2-153 2-113 2-154 2-114 2-155 2-115 2-156 2-126 2-181 2-126(6) 10-3 2-126(16) 2-1 2-127 2-182 2-141 2-204 2-142 2-205 2-143 2-206 2-144 2-207 2-145 2-208 2-161 2-227 2-163 2-228 2-164 2-229 2-165 2-230 2-166 2-231 2-167 2-232 2-168 2-233 2-169 2-234 2-170 2-235 2-171 2-236 2-172 2-237 2-173 2-238 2-174 2-239 2-175 2-240 2-176 2-241 2-178 2-242 2-179 2-243 2-180 2-244 2-181 2-245 2-182 2-246 2-183 2-247 2-184 2-248 2-186 2-275 2-187 2-276 2-188 2-277 2-189 2-278 2-190 2-279 2-191 2-280 2-192 2-281 2-193 2-282 2-194 2-283 2-206 2-315 2-207 2-316 2-210 2-340 2-211 2-341 2-212 2-345 2-213 2-344 2-214 2-318 2-217 2-346 2-218 2-317 2-219 2-343 2-220 2-342 2-236 2-366 2-238 2-367 2-239 2-368 2-240 2-369 2-241 2-370 2-242 2-371 2-251 2-401 2-252 2-402 2-253 2-403 2-254 2-404 2-255 2-405 2-256 2-407 2-257 2-406 2-261 2-432 2-262 2-433 2-263 2-434 2-264 2-435 2-265 2-436 2-266 2-437 2-267 2-438 3-1 3-1 3-55 3-2 3-56 3-3 3-57 3-66 3-58 3-67 3-59 3-70 3-60 3-71 3-61 3-68 3-62 3-69 3-63 3-96 3-65 3-97 3-66 3-98 3-67 3-33 3-68 3-99 3-69 3-35 3-70 3-100 3-71 3-36 3-72 3-38 3-73 3-39 3-74 3-37 3-75 3-32 3-76 3-31 3-77 3-34 3-78 3-4 3-79(a) 3-126 3-79(b) 3-127 3-79(c)(4) 3-129 3-80 3-157 3-81 3-156 3-82 3-158 3-82 3-186 3-83 3-187 3-83(4) 3-4 3-83(5) 3-4 3-84 3-188 3-85 3-189 3-86 3-190 3-88 3-217 3-89(1) 3-247 3-89(2) 3-248 3-89(3) 3-249 3-89(4) 3-250 3-89 3-246 4-1 4-1 4-2 4-3 4-3 4-4 4-4 4-5 4-7 4-7 4-8 4-8 4-8.1 4-9 4-9 4-10 4-10 4-11 4-11 4-6 4-72 4-42 4-73 4-43 4-74 4-44 4-75 4-45 4-76 4-46 4-77 4-47 4-78 4-48 4-79 4-49 5-1 5-1 5-2 5-4 5-4 5-5 5-5 5-6 5-5.1 5-3 5-6 5-11 5-7 5-7 5-8 5-8 5-9 5-12 5-10 5-13 5-11 5-14 5-12 5-2 5-13 5-15 5-14 5-9 5-15 5-10 5-31 5-46 5-32 5-48 5-33 5-50 5-34 5-51 5-35 5-47 5-36 5-49 5-51 5-83 5-52 5-84 5-53 5-85 5-54 5-148 5-56 5-82 5-57 5-81 5-58 5-86 5-71 5-113 5-72 5-111 5-73 5-114 5-74 5-115 5-75 5-117 5-77 5-116 5-78 5-112 5-79 5-118 5-80 5-119 5-91 5-146 5-92 5-147 5-106 5-176 5-107 5-177 5-108 5-178 5-109 5-179 5-121(a) 5-206 5-121 5-207 5-122 5-208 5-123 5-210 5-124 5-211 5-125 5-209 5-131 5-241 - 5-242 5-132 5-245 5-133 5-244 5-134(a) 5-276 5-134(b) 5-278 5-134(c) 5-280 5-134(d) 5-279 5-134(e) 5-281 5-134(f) 5-277 5-135 5-243 5-136 5-246 5-137 5-247 5-139(a) 5-306 5-139(b) 5-307 5-139(c) 5-308 5-140 5-248 5-143 5-336 5-143 5-337 5-144 5-338 5-145 5-340 5-146 5-341 5-147 5-339 5-156 5-371 5-157 5-372 5-158 5-373 5-159 5-374 5-160 5-375 5-161 5-376 5-162 5-377 5-163 5-378 5-164 5-379 6-16 6-26 6-17 6-27 6-18 6-28 6-18 6-29 6-19 6-30 6-20 6-57 6-21 6-61 6-38 6-59 6-39 6-60 6-40 6-58 7-1 7-1 7-2 7-31 7-3 7-32 7-4 13-1 7-21 7-676 7-22 7-711 7-23 7-713 7-24 7-712 7-25 7-714 7-26 7-715 7-27 7-716 7-28 7-717 7-29 7-718 7-30 7-678 7-31 7-679 7-32 7-680 7-33 7-681 7-34 7-682 7-35 7-677 7-51 7-612 7-52 7-614 7-53 7-614 7-54 7-611 7-55 7-613 7-56 7-615 7-57 7-616 7-71 7-646 7-72 7-647 7-73 7-648 7-86 7-361 7-87 7-362 7-88(a) 7-396 7-88(b) 7-397 7-88(c) 7-398 7-88(e) 7-399 7-94 7-401 7-95 7-400 7-106 7-266 7-107 7-267 7-108 7-267 7-109 7-267 7-110 7-267 7-111 7-267 7-112 7-267 7-113 7-267 7-126 7-296 7-127 7-301 7-128 7-300 7-129 7-302 7-131 7-299 7-132 7-297 7-166 7-331 7-167 7-332 7-232 7-2 7-237 7-126 7-240 7-127 7-243 7-128 7-244 7-129 7-245 7-61 7-256 7-156 7-257 7-157 7-258 7-158 7-259 7-158 7-260 7-159 7-261 7-161 7-262 7-162 7-263 7-163 7-264 7-160 7-306 7-551 7-307 7-552 7-308 7-553 7-309 7-554 7-321(1) 7-582 7-321(2) 7-582 7-321(3) 7-582 7-321(4) 7-582 7-321(5) 7-582 7-321(6) 7-582 7-321(8) 7-582 7-321(9) 7-582 7-321(10) 7-582 7-321(7) 7-581 7-322 7-583 7-330 20-202 7-340 7-461 7-400 26-436 7-431 7-431 7.5-1 9-1 8-1 10-1 8-2 10-2 8-3 10-7 8-4 10-4 8-5 10-8 8-6 10-9 8-7 10-10 8-8 10-11 8-9 10-12 8-13 10-13 8-14 10-5 8-15 10-6 10-16 13-36 10-17 13-37 10-18 13-39 10-19 13-40 10-20 13-38 10-21 13-3 10-22 13-2 10-23 13-136 10-24 13-137 10-25 13-138 10-26 13-139 10-27 13-9 10-41 13-66 10-42 13-71 10-43(a) 13-102 10-43(b) 13-103 10-43(d) 13-104 10-43(e) 13-105 10-44 13-67 10-45 13-106 10-46 13-68 10-47 13-70 10-48 13-107 10-49 13-108 10-50 13-4 10-51 13-109 10-52 13-5 10-53 13-6 10-54 13-72 10-55 13-7 10-56 13-8 10-57 13-110 10-58 13-69 10-91(a) 13-202 10-91(b) 13-201 10-92 13-203 10-93 13-204 11-1 15-1 11-2 15-2 11-3 15-3 11-4 15-4 11-5 15-5 11-21 15-31 11-22 15-32 11-23 15-36 11-24 15-37 11-25 15-35 11-26 15-34 11-27 15-38 11-28 15-39 11-29 15-40 11-30 15-41 11-31 15-42 11-32 15-43 11-33 15-44 11-34 15-45 11-35 15-46 11-36 15-47 11-37 15-48 11-38 15-49 11-39 15-50 11-40 15-51 11-41 15-52 11-42 15-53 11-43 15-54 11-44 15-55 11-45 15-56 11-46 15-57 11-47 15-58 11-48 15-59 11-49 15-33 11-61 15-86 11-62 15-87 11-63 15-88 11-64 15-89 11-66 15-90 11-67 15-91 11-68 15-92 11-101 15-121 11-102 15-122 11-105 15-123 12-31 7-521 12-32 7-522 12-33 7-523 12-34 7-524 13-1 16-26 13-2 16-56 13-3 16-57 13-4 16-58 13-5 16-59 13-6 16-86 13-7 16-87 13-21 16-216 13-21(b) 16-216 13-21(c) 16-216 13-21(f) 16-217 13-21(g) 16-216 13-21(h) 16-216 13-22 16-218 13-23 16-219 13-24 16-220 13-26 16-221 13-27 16-222 13-28 16-223 13-29 16-224 13-30 16-225 13-36 16-251 13-37 16-252 13-38 16-253 13-39 16-254 13-40 16-255 13-41 16-256 13-56 16-116 13-57 16-118 13-58 16-119 13-59 16-120 13-60 16-121 13-61 16-122 13-62 16-123 13-63 16-117 13-76 16-151 13-77 16-152 13-78 16-153 13-79 16-154 13-80 16-155 13-91 16-181 13-92 16-182 13-93 16-183 13-94 16-184 13-95 16-185 13-96 16-186 13-97 16-187 13-130 16-286 13-131 16-287 13-132 16-288 13-133 16-290 13-134 16-291 13-135(a) 16-292 13-135(c) 16-292 13-135(b) 16-289 13-136 16-293 13-137 16-289 13-138 16-294 14-1 8-1 14-2 8-2 14-9 8-3 14-61 8-191 14-62 8-193 14-63 8-194 14-64 8-221 14-65 8-223 14-66 8-226 14-67 8-224 14-68 8-225 14-69 8-230 14-70 8-227 14-71 8-228 14-72 8-229 14-74 8-192 14-75(a) 8-257 14-75(b) 8-258 14-75(c) 8-259 14-75(d) 8-260 14-75(e) 8-261 14-75(f) 8-262 14-75(g) 8-256 14-81 8-291 14-82 8-292 14-83 8-293 14-84 8-294 14-85 8-295 14-86 8-296 14-101 8-326 14-102 8-327 14-103 8-328 14-104 8-329 14-105 8-330 14-106 8-331 14-107 8-332 14-108 8-333 14-126 8-361 14-127 8-362 14-128 8-363 14-129 8-364 14-130 8-365 14-131 8-366 14-166 8-396 14-167 8-398 14-168 8-399 14-169 8-400 14-170 8-401 14-171 8-402 14-172 8-397 14-186 8-431 14-187 8-432 14-188 8-433 14-189 8-434 14-190 8-435 15-1 18-1 15-2 18-2 15-3 18-3 15-4 18-3 15-5 18-3 15-21 18-31 15-22 18-32 15-23 18-33 15-24 18-34 15-25 18-35 15-41 18-91 15-42 18-92 15-43 18-93 15-44 18-94 15-61 18-121 15-62 18-123 15-76 18-122 15-77 18-151 15-78 18-152 15-79 18-153 15-80 18-156 15-81 18-157 15-82 18-154 15-83 18-155 15-96 18-186 15-97 18-187 15-98 18-188 15-99 18-189 15-111 18-216 15-112 18-217 15-126 18-246 15-127 18-247 15-128 18-248 15-129 18-249 15-130 18-250 15-131 18-251 15-132 18-252 15-133 18-253 15-134 18-254 15-135 18-255 15-136 18-256 15-137 18-257 15-138 18-258 15-151 18-286 15-152 18-288 15-153 18-289 15-154 18-287 15-155 18-290 15-156 18-291 15-171 18-321 15-172 18-322 15-173 18-323 15-174 18-324 15-175 18-325 15-176 18-326 15-177 18-327 15-178 18-328 15-191 18-356 15-192 18-357 15-193 18-358 15-194 18-359 15-195 18-360 15-196 18-361 15-197 18-362 15-198 18-363 15-199 18-364 15-201 18-366 15-226 18-396 15-227 18-397 15-228 18-398 15-229 18-399 15-230 18-400 15-231 18-401 15-246(a) 18-431 15-246(b) 18-432 15-246(c) 18-431 15-247 18-433 15-248 18-434 15-261 18-461 15-262 18-462 15-276 18-491 15-277 18-492 15-278 18-493 15-291 18-521 15-292 18-522 15-293 18-523 15-294 18-524 15-306 18-551 15-307 18-552 15-308 18-553 15-309 18-554 15-310 18-555 15-311 18-556 15-326 18-586 15-327 18-587 15-328 18-588 15-329 18-589 15-330 18-590 15-331 18-591 15-332 18-592 15-346 18-61 15-347 18-62 15-348 18-63 15-349 18-64 15-350 18-65 16-1 19-2 16-2 19-42 16-3 19-4 16-4 19-43 16-5 19-44 16-6 19-141 16-7 19-8 16-9 19-666 16-10 19-5 16-11 19-6 16-12.1 19-7 16-13 19-329 16-14 19-330 16-15 19-9 16-16 19-50 16-17 19-328 16-18 19-144 16-19 19-10 16-20 19-142 16-21 19-143 16-22 19-11 16-23 19-48 16-24 19-3 16-25 19-180 16-26 19-181 16-41(a) 19-76 16-41(b) 19-76 16-41(c) 19-78 16-41(d) 19-77 16-42(a) 19-80 16-42(b) 19-80 16-42(c) 19-80 16-42(d) 19-80 16-42(e) 19-79 16-43 19-41 16-44 19-49 16-61 19-107 16-62 19-108 16-63 19-109 16-64 19-110 16-65 19-111 16-66 19-112 16-67 19-113 16-68 19-114 16-69 19-115 16-80 19-726 16-81 19-145 16-82 19-146 16-83 19-727 16-84 19-147 16-85 19-148 16-86 19-149 16-87 19-150 16-88 19-151 16-89 19-152 16-90 19-153 16-91 19-154 16-92 19-155 16-93 19-156 16-94 19-157 16-95 19-158 16-96 19-159 16-97 19-160 16-98 19-161 16-99 19-162 16-100 19-163 16-101 19-164 16-102 19-165 16-103 19-166 16-104 19-167 16-105 19-168 16-106 19-169 16-107 19-170 16-108 19-171 16-109 19-172 16-110 19-173 16-111 19-174 16-112 19-174 16-113 19-175 16-114 19-696 16-115 19-176 16-116 19-177 16-119 19-179 16-120 19-182 16-121 19-183 16-131 19-441 16-132 19-546 16-133 19-444 16-134(a) 19-487 16-134(b) 19-667 16-134(c) 19-487 16-234(d) 19-487 16-234(e) 19-487 16-234(e) 19-667 16-135 19-450 16-136 19-446 16-137 19-486 16-138 19-571 16-139 19-572 16-141(1) 19-602 16-141(2) 19-603 16-141(3) 19-604 16-141(4) 19-605 16-141(5) 19-606 16-141 19-601 16-142 19-516 16-147 19-449 16-148 19-453 16-149 19-454 16-150 19-447 16-151 19-442 16-152 19-443 16-153 19-445 16-154 19-452 16-155 19-45 16-156 19-46 16-157 19-47 16-158 19-451 16-171 19-482 16-172 19-483 16-173 19-484 16-174 19-485 16-175 19-448 16-176(a) 19-636 16-176(b) 19-481 16-176(c) 19-481 16-191 19-321 16-192 19-322 16-193 19-323 16-194 19-324 16-195 19-325 16-196 19-326 16-197 19-327 16-211 19-286 16-212 19-287 16-213 19-288 16-214 19-289 16-215 19-290 16-216 19-291 16-217 19-292 16-231 19-211 16-232 19-212 16-233 19-213 16-234(a) 19-214 16-234(b) 19-330 16-234(c) 19-214 16-234(c) 19-330 16-235 19-215 16-236 19-216 16-237(a) 19-217 16-237(c) 19-217 16-237(d) 19-217 16-237(d) 19-330 16-238 19-218 16-239 19-219 16-240 19-220 16-241 19-221 16-256 19-251 16-257 19-252 16-258 19-253 16-259 19-254 16-260 19-255 16-261 19-256 16-262(a) 19-257 16-262(b) 19-258 16-276 19-356 16-277 19-357 16-278 19-358 16-279 19-358 16-280 19-359 16-281 19-360 16-296 19-386 16-297 19-387 16-298) 19-388 16-299 19-389 16-300 19-390 18-1 20-1 18-2 20-2 18-3 20-3 18-4 20-4 18-6 20-5 18-7 20-6 18-8 20-7 18-9 20-8 18-10 20-9 18-11 20-10 18-13 20-11 18-14 20-12 18-15 20-13 18-16 20-14 18-18 20-15 18-19 20-16 18-20 20-17 18-21 20-18 18-22 20-19 18-24 20-20 18-25 20-21 18-26 20-22 18-27 20-23 18-28 20-24 18-29 20-25 18-30 20-26 18-31 20-27 18-32 20-28 18-33 20-29 18-34 20-30 18-35 20-31 18-36 20-32 18-37 20-33 18-38 20-34 18-39 20-35 18-46 20-66 18-48 20-67 18-49 20-68 18-66(a) 20-97 18-66(b) 20-96 18-67 20-98 18-68 20-99 18-69 20-100 18-70 20-101 18-71 20-102 18-72 20-103 18-73 20-104 18-74 20-105 18-75.1 20-133 18-75.2 20-134 18-75.3 20-135 18-75.4 20-136 18-75(a) 20-132 18-75(b) 20-131 18-81 20-166 18-82 20-167 18-83 20-168 18-84 20-169 18-85 20-170 18-86 20-171 18-87(a)(1) 20-202 18-87(a)(2) 20-202 18-87(a)(3) 20-202 18-87(a)(4) 20-202 18-87(a)(5) 20-202 18-87(a)(6) 20-202 18-87(a)(7) 20-202 18-87(a)(8) 20-202 18-87(c) 20-202 18-88(a) 20-202 18-89 20-172 18-90 20-173 18-102 20-201 18-103 20-203 18-104 20-202 18-109 20-204 18-111 8-31 18-121 11-127 18-123 11-128 18-124 11-126 18-125 11-130 18-126 11-131 18-127 11-132 18-128 11-133 18-129 11-129 18-130 20-236 18-131 20-238 18-132 20-237 18-133 20-239 18-134 20-240 18-135 20-241 18-136 20-242 19-1 21-1 19-2 21-2 19-3 21-3 19-4 21-4 19-5 21-5 19-6 21-9 19-7 21-10 19-8 21-11 19-9 21-12 19-10 21-13 19-11 21-14 19-12 21-15 19-13 21-16 19-14 21-17 19-15 21-18 19-16 21-19 19-17 21-20 19-18 21-21 19-19 21-22 19-20 21-23 19-21 21-6 19-22 21-7 19-23 21-8 20-1 22-1 20-16 22-21 20-17 22-22 20-18 22-23 20-19 22-24 21-1 20-41 21-2 20-42 21-3 20-43 21-4 20-44 21-5 20-45 21-21 17-31 21-22 17-33 21-23 17-34 21-24 17-35 21-25 17-36 21-26 17-32 22-1 23-1 22-2 23-2 22-3 23-3 22-4 23-4 22-5 23-5 22-6 23-6 22-21 23-36 22-22 23-39 22-23 23-37 22-24 23-38 22-41 23-66 22-42 23-67 22-43 23-67 22-44 23-68 23-1 24-1 23-2 24-2 23-3 24-2 23-4 24-2 23-5 24-3 23-6 24-4 23-7 24-149 23-8 24-5 23-9 24-6 23-10 24-7 23-11 24-8 23-12 24-9 23-13 24-10 23-14 24-11 23-15 24-12 23-31 24-41 23-32 24-42 23-33 24-43 23-34 24-44 23-35 24-45 23-36 24-46 23-37 24-46 23-38 24-46 23-39 24-47 23-40 24-48 23-41 24-49 23-42 24-50 23-43 24-51 23-56 24-81 23-57 24-82 23-58 24-83 23-59 24-84 23-71 24-111 23-72 24-112 23-73 24-113 23-74 24-114 23-75 24-116 23-76 24-117 23-77 24-118 23-78 24-118 23-79 24-119 23-80 24-120 23-81 24-115 23-96 24-146 23-97 24-147 23-98 24-148 23-111 24-176 23-112 24-177 23-113 24-177 23-114 24-178 23-115 24-179 23-131 24-206 23-132 24-211 23-133 24-207 23-134 24-208 23-135 24-209 23-136 24-210 23-151 24-241 23-152 24-242 23-153 24-243 23-154 24-244 24-16 25-26 24-17 25-28 24-18 25-27 24-19 25-27 24-21 25-29 24-22 25-31 24-23 25-32 24-24 25-33 24-25 25-34 24-26 25-35 24-27 25-36 24-41 25-66 24-42 25-67 24-43 25-68 24-44 25-69 24-45 25-70 24-46 25-71 24-61 25-96 24-62 25-97 24-63 25-98 24-64 25-99 24-76 25-126 24-77 25-127 24-81 25-156 24-82 25-158 24-83(b) 25-30 24-83 25-159 24-84 25-157 24-85 25-160 24-86 25-161 24-87 25-162 24-88 25-163 24-91 25-191 24-92 25-192 24-93 25-193 24-94 25-195 24-95 25-194 24-96 25-196 24-97 25-196 24-98 25-197 24-99 25-198 24-100 25-199 24-101 25-200 24-120 25-226 24-121 25-232 24-122 25-228 24-123 25-227 24-124 25-235 24-125 25-266 24-126 25-269 24-127 25-270 24-128 25-271 24-129 25-272 24-131 25-273 24-132 25-274 24-133 25-275 24-134 25-276 24-135 25-267 24-136 25-277 24-137 25-236 24-138 25-238 24-139 25-233 24-140 25-268 24-141 25-237 24-142 25-278 24-143 25-240 24-144 25-279 24-145 25-229 24-146 25-230 24-147 25-231 24-148 25-239 25-16 26-56 25-17 26-61 25-18 26-62 25-19 26-63 25-20 26-64 25-21 26-65 25-22 26-66 25-24 26-68 25-25 26-69 25-26 26-58 25-27 26-57 25-35 26-96 25-36 26-132 25-37 26-133 25-38 26-134 25-39 26-135 25-40 26-97 25-41 26-98 25-42 26-99 25-43 26-100 25-44 26-136 25-45 26-137 25-46 26-138 25-47 26-131 25-48 26-101 25-49 26-102 25-50 26-59 25-51 26-104 25-52 26-103 25-60 26-201 25-61 26-202 25-61.1 26-203 25-62 26-26 25-63 26-27 25-65 26-231 25-66 26-232 25-67 26-233 25-68 26-234 25-69 26-235 25-75 26-60 25-80 26-166 25-81 26-167 25-82 26-168 25-83 26-169 25-84 26-170 25-85 26-171 25-86 26-172 25-96(a) 26-261 25-97 26-262 25-98 26-264 25-99 26-265 25-100 26-263 25-101 26-266 25-102 26-267 25-103(a) 26-326 25-103(b) 26-327 25-103(c) 26-328 25-103(d) 26-329 25-103(e) 26-330 25-103(f) 26-331 25-103(g) 26-332 25-103(h) 26-333 25-103(i) 26-334 25-103(j) 26-335 25-103(k) 26-336 25-103(l) 26-337 25-104(a) 26-362 25-104(b) 26-363 25-104(c) 26-364 25-104(d) 26-365 25-104(e) 26-366 25-104(f) 26-367 25-104(g) 26-368 25-104(h) 26-369 25-104(i) 26-370 25-104(j) 26-371 25-104(k) 26-372 25-104(l) 26-373 25-104(m) 26-374 25-104 26-361 25-105 26-269 25-106 26-270 25-107 26-410 25-108 26-301 25-109 26-404 25-110 26-405 25-111 26-406 25-112 26-407 25-113 26-402 25-114 26-401 25-115 26-403 25-116 26-408 25-117 26-409 25-118 26-28 25-119 26-268 25-120 26-29 25-121 26-271 26-1 27-26 26-2 27-27 26-3 27-28 26-4 27-29 26-5 27-56 26-6 27-57 26-7 27-58 26-9 27-59 27-1 28-2 27-2 28-1 27-10 28-31 27-11 28-32 27-16 28-66 27-17 28-67 27-18 28-68 27-19 28-69 27-20 28-70 27-21 28-71 27-22 28-72 27-23 28-73 27-24 28-74 27-25 28-37 27-31 28-31 27-32 28-34 27-33 28-36 27-34 28-33 27-35 28-35 27-40 28-102 27-41 28-103 27-42 28-104 27-43 28-111 27-44 28-101 27-45 28-112 27-46 28-113 27-47 28-109 27-48 28-110 27-49 28-114 27-50 28-105 27-51 28-115 27-52 28-116 27-53 28-117 27-54 28-118 27-56 28-119 27-57 28-120 27-58 28-106 27-59 28-108 27-60 28-121 27-61 28-122 27-62 28-123 27-66 28-124 27-67 28-125 27-68 28-126 27-69 28-127 27-70 28-128 27-71 28-129 27-72 28-130 27-73 28-107 27-75 28-131 27-80 28-161 27-81 28-162 27-82 28-163 27-83 28-164 27-86 28-192 27-87 28-193 27-88 28-194 27-89 28-195 27-90 28-196 27-91 28-197 27-92 28-198 27-93 28-199 27-94 28-200 27-95 28-201 27-96 28-202 27-97 28-203 27-98 28-191 27-106 28-231 27-107 28-232 27-108 28-233 27-109 28-238 27-110 28-239 27-111 28-240 27-112 28-241 27-113 28-242 27-114 28-243 27-115 28-244 27-116 28-245 27-117 28-246 27-118 28-247 27-119 28-236 27-120 28-237 27-121 28-235 27-122 28-234 27-127 28-276 27-128 28-277 27-129 28-278 27-137 28-306 27-138 28-307 27-139 28-308 27-140 28-309  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2002 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2002 Code, as supplemented through September 7, 2015, which are included herein. Sections of the 2002 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
2002 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 1-12 1-13 1-13 1-14 1-14 1-15 1-15 1-16 1-16 2-2 2-1 2-3 2-2 2-4 2-3 2-5 2-4 2-6 2-5 2-31 2-29 2-32 2-30 2-33 2-31 2-34 2-32 2-35 2-33 2-36 2-34 2-37 2-35 2-38 2-36 2-39 2-37 2-40 2-38 2-41 2-39 2-42 2-40 2-43 2-41 2-71 2-71 2-72 2-72 2-73 2-73 2-74 2-74 2-101 2-92 2-102 2-93 2-103 2-94 2-104 2-95 2-105 2-96 2-106 2-97 2-107 2-98 2-108 2-99 2-109 2-100 2-110 2-101 2-111 2-102 2-112 2-103 2-113 2-104 2-141 2-122 2-143 2-123 2-144 2-124 2-171 2-147 2-172 2-148 2-173 2-149 2-174 2-150 2-175 2-151 2-176 2-152 2-177 2-153 2-178 2-154 2-179 2-155 2-180 2-156 2-206 2-181 2-207 2-182 2-236 2-203 2-237 2-204 2-238 2-205 2-239 2-206 2-240 2-207 2-241 2-208 2-242 2-209 2-271 2-227 2-273 2-228 2-274 2-229 2-275 2-230 2-276 2-231 2-277 2-232 2-278 2-233 2-279 2-234 2-280 2-235 2-281 2-236 2-282 2-237 2-283 2-238 2-284 2-239 2-285 2-240 2-286 2-241 2-288 2-242 2-289 2-243 2-290 2-244 2-291 2-245 2-292 2-246 2-293 2-247 2-294 2-248 2-321 2-275 2-322 2-276 2-323 2-277 2-324 2-278 2-325 2-279 2-326 2-280 2-327 2-281 2-328 2-282 2-329 2-283 2-356 2-315 2-358 2-316 2-360 2-317 2-362 2-318 2-391 2-340 2-392 2-341 2-393 2-342 2-394 2-343 2-395 2-344 2-396 2-345 2-397 2-346 2-426 2-366 2-427 2-367 2-428 2-368 2-429 2-369 2-430 2-370 2-431 2-371 2-461 2-401 2-462 2-402 2-463 2-403 2-464 2-404 2-465 2-405 2-466 2-406 2-467 2-407 2-468 2-408 2-469 2-469 2-496 2-432 2-497 2-433 2-498 2-434 2-499 2-435 2-500 2-436 2-501 2-437 2-502 2-438 3-1 3-1 3-2 3-2 3-3 3-3 3-4 3-4 3-31 3-31 3-32 3-32 3-33 3-33 3-34 3-34 3-35 3-35 3-36 3-36 3-37 3-37 3-38 3-38 3-39 3-39 3-66 3-66 3-67 3-67 3-68 3-68 3-69 3-69 3-70 3-70 3-71 3-71 3-96 3-96 3-97 3-97 3-98 3-98 3-99 3-99 3-100 3-100 3-126 3-126 3-127 3-127 3-128 3-128 3-129 3-129 3-156 3-156 3-157 3-157 3-158 3-158 3-186 3-186 3-187 3-187 3-188 3-188 3-189 3-189 3-190 3-190 3-191 3-191 3-217 3-217 3-246 3-246 3-247 3-247 3-248 3-248 3-249 3-249 3-250 3-250 4-1 4-1 4-2 4-2 4-3 4-3 4-4 4-4 4-5 4-5 4-6 4-6 4-7 4-7 4-8 4-8 4-9 4-9 4-10 4-10 4-11 4-11 4-42 4-42 4-43 4-43 4-44 4-44 4-45 4-45 4-46 4-46 4-47 4-47 4-48 4-48 4-49 4-49 5-1 5-1 5-2 5-2 5-3 5-3 5-4 5-4 5-5 5-5 5-6 5-6 5-7 5-7 5-8 5-8 5-9 5-9 5-10 5-10 5-11 5-11 5-12 5-12 5-13 5-13 5-14 5-14 5-16 5-15 5-17 5-16 5-18 5-17 5-19 5-18 5-20 5-19 5-46 5-46 5-47 5-47 5-48 5-48 5-49 5-49 5-50 5-50 5-51 5-51 5-52 5-52 5-81 5-81 5-82 5-82 5-83 5-83 5-84 5-84 5-85 5-85 5-86 5-86 5-87 5-87 5-88 5-88 5-89 5-89 5-111 5-111 5-112 5-112 5-113 5-113 5-114 5-114 5-115 5-115 5-116 5-116 5-117 5-117 5-118 5-118 5-119 5-119 5-146 5-146 5-147 5-147 5-148 5-148 5-176 5-176 5-177 5-177 5-178 5-178 5-179 5-179 5-206 5-206 5-207 5-207 5-208 5-208 5-209 5-209 5-210 5-210 5-211 5-211 5-241 5-241 5-242 5-242 5-242 5-242 5-243 5-243 5-244 5-244 5-245 5-245 5-246 5-246 5-247 5-247 5-248 5-248 5-276 5-276 5-277 5-277 5-278 5-278 5-279 5-279 5-280 5-280 5-281 5-281 5-306 5-306 5-307 5-307 5-308 5-308 5-336 5-336 5-337 5-337 5-338 5-338 5-339 5-339 5-340 5-340 5-341 5-341 5-371 5-371 5-372 5-372 5-373 5-373 5-374 5-374 5-375 5-375 5-376 5-376 5-377 5-377 5-378 5-378 5-379 5-379 6-26 6-26 6-27 6-27 6-28 6-28 6-29 6-29 6-56 6-56 6-57 6-57 6-58 6-58 6-59 6-59 6-60 6-60 6-61 6-61 7-1 7-1 7-2 7-2 7-3 7-3 7-31 7-31 7-32 7-32 7-61 7-61 7-126 7-126 7-127 7-127 7-128 7-128 7-129 7-129 7-156 7-156 7-157 7-157 7-158 7-158 7-159 7-159 7-160 7-160 7-161 7-161 7-162 7-162 7-163 7-163 7-266 7-266 7-267 7-267 7-296 7-296 7-297 7-297 7-298 7-298 7-299 7-299 7-300 7-300 7-301 7-301 7-302 7-302 7-331 7-331 7-332 7-332 7-361 7-361 7-362 7-362 7-396 7-396 7-397 7-397 7-398 7-398 7-400 7-399 7-401 7-400 7-402 7-401 7-431 7-431 7-432 7-432 7-461 7-461 7-462 7-462 7-491 7-491 7-521 7-521 7-522 7-522 7-523 7-523 7-524 7-524 7-551 7-551 7-552 7-552 7-553 7-553 7-554 7-554 7-581 7-581 7-582 7-582 7-583 7-583 7-584 7-584 7-585 7-585 7-611 7-611 7-612 7-612 7-613 7-613 7-614 7-614 7-615 7-615 7-616 7-616 7-646 7-646 7-647 7-647 7-648 7-648 7-676 7-676 7-677 7-677 7-678 7-678 7-679 7-679 7-680 7-680 7-681 7-681 7-682 7-682 7-711 7-711 7-712 7-712 7-713 7-713 7-714 7-714 7-715 7-715 7-716 7-716 7-717 7-717 7-718 7-718 7-750 7-750 7-751 7-751 7-752 7-752 7-753 7-753 7-754 7-754 7-755 7-755 8-1 8-1 8-2 8-2 8-3 8-3 8-31 8-31 8-32 8-32 8-33 8-33 8-34 8-34 8-35 8-35 8-36 8-36 8-37 8-37 8-38 8-38 8-39 8-39 8-40 8-40 8-41 8-41 8-191 8-191 8-192 8-192 8-193 8-193 8-194 8-194 8-221 8-221 8-223 8-223 8-224 8-224 8-225 8-225 8-226 8-226 8-227 8-227 8-228 8-228 8-229 8-229 8-230 8-230 8-256 8-256 8-257 8-257 8-258 8-258 8-259 8-259 8-260 8-260 8-261 8-261 8-262 8-262 8-291 8-291 8-292 8-292 8-293 8-293 8-294 8-294 8-295 8-295 8-296 8-296 8-325 8-325 8-326 8-326 8-327 8-327 8-328 8-328 8-329 8-329 8-330 8-330 8-331 8-331 8-332 8-332 8-334 8-334 8-335 8-335 8-336 8-336 8-337 8-337 8-338 8-338 8-339 8-339 8-361 8-361 8-362 8-362 8-363 8-363 8-364 8-364 8-365 8-365 8-366 8-366 8-397 8-397 8-398 8-398 8-399 8-399 8-400 8-400 8-401 8-401 8-402 8-402 8-431 8-431 8-432 8-432 8-433 8-433 8-434 8-434 8-435 8-435 8-461 8-461 8-462 8-462 8-463 8-463 8-464 8-464 8-465 8-465 8-466 8-466 8-467 8-467 8-468 8-468 8-469 8-469 8-470 8-470 8-471 8-471 8-472 8-472 8-473 8-473 8-501 8-501 8-502 8-502 8-503 8-503 8-504 8-504 8-505 8-505 8-506 8-506 8-507 8-507 8-508 8-508 8-509 8-509 8-510 8-510 8-511 8-511 8-512 8-512 8-513 8-513 9-1 9-1 9-31 9-31 9-32 9-32 9-33 9-33 9-34 9-34 9-35 9-35 9-36 9-36 9-38 9-38 9-66 9-66 9-67 9-67 9-68 9-68 9-69 9-69 9-70 9-70 9-71 9-71 9-72 9-72 9-73 9-73 9-74 9-74 9-75 9-75 9-76 9-76 9-106 9-106 9-107 9-107 9-108 9-108 9-109 9-109 9-110 9-110 9-111 9-111 9-112 9-112 9-113 9-113 9-114 9-114 9-115 9-115 9-116 9-116 9-117 9-117 9-118 9-118 9-119 9-119 9-120 9-120 9-121 9-121 10-1 10-1 10-2 10-2 10-3 10-3 10-4 10-4 10-5 10-5 10-6 10-6 10-7 10-7 10-8 10-8 10-9 10-9 10-10 10-10 10-11 10-11 10-12 10-12 10-13 10-13 11-26 11-26 11-27 11-27 11-28 11-28 11-29.1 11-30 11-29 11-29 11-30 11-31 11-31 11-32 11-32 11-33 11-33 11-34 11-34 11-35 11-35 11-36 11-36 11-37 11-37 11-38 11-38 11-39 11-39 11-40 11-126 11-126 11-127 11-127 11-128 11-128 11-129 11-129 11-130 11-130 11-131 11-131 11-132 11-132 11-133 11-133 12-1 12-1 12-2 12-2 12-3 12-3 12-25 12-25 12-26 12-26 12-27 12-27 12-28 12-28 12-29 12-29 12-30 12-30 12-31 12-31 12-32 12-32 12-53 12-53 12-54 12-54 12-55 12-55 12-56 12-56 12-57 12-57 12-58 12-58 12-59 12-59 12-60 12-60 12-61 12-61 12-62 12-62 12-63 12-63 12-64 12-64 12-65 12-65 12-66 12-66 12-67 12-67 12-68 12-68 12-89 12-89 12-90 12-90 12-91 12-91 12-92 12-92 12-93 12-93 12-94 12-94 12-95 12-95 12-96 12-96 12-117 12-117 12-118 12-118 12-119 12-119 12-120 12-120 12-121 12-121 12-142 12-142 12-143 12-143 12-144 12-144 12-145 12-145 12-146 12-146 12-147 12-147 12-148 12-148 12-149 12-149 12-150 12-150 12-151 12-151 12-152 12-152 12-153 12-153 12-154 12-154 13-2 13-1 13-3 13-2 13-4 13-3 13-5 13-4 13-6 13-5 13-7 13-6 13-8 13-7 13-9 13-8 13-10 13-9 13-36 13-36 13-37 13-37 13-38 13-38 13-39 13-39 13-40 13-40 13-66 13-66 13-67 13-67 13-68 13-68 13-69 13-69 13-70 13-70 13-71 13-71 13-72 13-72 13-101 13-102 13-102 13-103 13-104 13-104 13-105 13-105 13-106 13-106 13-107 13-107 13-108 13-108 13-109 13-109 13-110 13-110 13-136 13-136 13-137 13-137 13-138 13-138 13-139 13-139 13-201 13-201 13-202 13-202 13-203 13-203 13-204 13-204 14-26 14-26 14-27 14-27 14-28 14-28 14-29 14-29 14-30 14-30 14-31 14-31 14-32 14-32 14-33 14-33 14-34 14-34 14-35 14-35 14-36 14-36 14-37 14-37 14-66 14-66 14-67 14-67 14-68 14-68 14-69 14-69 14-70 14-70 14-71 14-71 14-72 14-72 14-96 14-96 14-97 14-97 14-98 14-98 14-99 14-99 14-100 14-100 15-1 15-1 15-2 15-2 15-3 15-3 15-4 15-4 15-5 15-5 15-31 15-31 15-32 15-32 15-33 15-33 15-34 15-34 15-35 15-35 15-36 15-36 15-37 15-37 15-38 15-38 15-39 15-39 15-40 15-40 15-41 15-41 15-42 15-42 15-43 15-43 15-44 15-44 15-45 15-45 15-46 15-46 15-47 15-47 15-48 15-48 15-49 15-49 15-50 15-50 15-51 15-51 15-52 15-52 15-53 15-53 15-54 15-54 15-55 15-55 15-56 15-56 15-57 15-57 15-58 15-58 15-59 15-59 15-86 15-86 15-87 15-87 15-88 15-88 15-89 15-89 15-90 15-90 15-91 15-91 15-92 15-92 15-121 15-121 15-122 15-122 15-123 15-123 15-146 15-146 15-147 15-147 15-148 15-148 15-149 15-149 15-150 15-150 15-151 15-151 15-152 15-152 16-26 16-26 16-56 16-56 16-57 16-57 16-58 16-58 16-59 16-59 16-86 16-86 16-87 16-87 16-116 16-116 16-117 16-117 16-118 16-118 16-119 16-119 16-120 16-120 16-121 16-121 16-122 16-122 16-123 16-123 16-151 16-151 16-152 16-152 16-153 16-153 16-154 16-154 16-155 16-155 16-181 16-181 16-182 16-182 16-183 16-183 16-184 16-184 16-185 16-185 16-186 16-186 16-187 16-187 16-216 16-216 16-217 16-217 16-218 16-218 16-219 16-219 16-220 16-220 16-221 16-221 16-222 16-222 16-223 16-223 16-224 16-224 16-225 16-225 16-251 16-251 16-252 16-252 16-253 16-253 16-254 16-254 16-255 16-255 16-256 16-256 16-286 16-286 16-287 16-287 16-288 16-288 16-289 16-289 16-290 16-290 16-291 16-291 16-292 16-292 16-293 16-293 16-294 16-294 16-321 16-321 16-322 16-322 16-323 16-323 16-324 16-324 16-325 16-325 16-326 16-326 16-327 16-327 16-328 16-328 17-31 17-31 17-32 17-32 17-33 17-33 17-34 17-34 17-35 17-35 17-36 17-36 18-1 18-1 18-2 18-2 18-3 18-3 18-31 18-31 18-32 18-32 18-33 18-33 18-34 18-34 18-35 18-35 18-61 18-61 18-62 18-62 18-63 18-63 18-64 18-64 18-65 18-65 18-91 18-91 18-92 18-92 18-93 18-93 18-94 18-94 18-121 18-121 18-122 18-122 18-123 18-123 18-151 18-151 18-152 18-152 18-153 18-153 18-154 18-154 18-155 18-155 18-156 18-156 18-157 18-157 18-186 18-186 18-187 18-187 18-188 18-188 18-189 18-189 18-216 18-216 18-217 18-217 18-246 18-246 18-247 18-247 18-248 18-248 18-249 18-249 18-250 18-250 18-251 18-251 18-252 18-252 18-253 18-253 18-254 18-254 18-255 18-255 18-256 18-256 18-257 18-257 18-258 18-258 18-286 18-286 18-287 18-287 18-288 18-288 18-289 18-289 18-290 18-290 18-291 18-291 18-321 18-321 18-322 18-322 18-323 18-323 18-324 18-324 18-325 18-325 18-326 18-326 18-327 18-327 18-328 18-328 18-356 18-356 18-357 18-357 18-358 18-358 18-359 18-359 18-360 18-360 18-361 18-361 18-362 18-362 18-363 18-363 18-364 18-364 18-366 18-366 18-396 18-396 18-397 18-397 18-398 18-398 18-399 18-399 18-400 18-400 18-401 18-401 18-431 18-431 18-432 18-432 18-433 18-433 18-434 18-434 18-461 18-461 18-462 18-462 18-491 18-491 18-492 18-492 18-493 18-493 18-521 18-521 18-522 18-522 18-523 18-523 18-524 18-524 18-551 18-551 18-552 18-552 18-553 18-553 18-554 18-554 18-555 18-555 18-556 18-556 18-586 18-586 18-587 18-587 18-588 18-588 18-589 18-589 18-590 18-590 18-591 18-591 18-592 18-592 19-1 19-1 19-1 19-2 19-2 19-2 19-2 19-3 19-3 19-4 19-4 19-5 19-5 19-6 19-7 19-7 19-8 19-8 19-9 19-9 19-10 19-10 19-11 19-11 19-41 19-41 19-42 19-42 19-43 19-43 19-44 19-44 19-45 19-45 19-46 19-46 19-47 19-47 19-48 19-48 19-49 19-49 19-50 19-50 19-51 19-51 19-76 19-76 19-77 19-77 19-78 19-78 19-79 19-79 19-80 19-80 19-106 19-106 19-107 19-107 19-108 19-108 19-109 19-109 19-110 19-110 19-111 19-111 19-112 19-112 19-113 19-113 19-114 19-114 19-115 19-115 19-141 19-141 19-142 19-142 19-143 19-143 19-144 19-144 19-145 19-145 19-146 19-146 19-147 19-147 19-148 19-148 19-149 19-149 19-150 19-150 19-151 19-151 19-152 19-152 19-153 19-153 19-154 19-154 19-155 19-155 19-156 19-156 19-157 19-157 19-158 19-158 19-159 19-159 19-160 19-160 19-161 19-161 19-162 19-162 19-163 19-163 19-164 19-164 19-165 19-165 19-166 19-166 19-167 19-167 19-168 19-168 19-169 19-169 19-170 19-170 19-171 19-171 19-172 19-172 19-173 19-173 19-174 19-174 19-175 19-175 19-176 19-176 19-177 19-177 19-178 19-178 19-178.5 19-178.5 19-179 19-179 19-180 19-180 19-181 19-181 19-182 19-182 19-183 19-183 19-184 19-184 19-185 19-185 19-211 19-211 19-212 19-212 19-213 19-213 19-214 19-214 19-215 19-215 19-216 19-216 19-217 19-217 19-218 19-218 19-219 19-219 19-220 19-220 19-221 19-221 19-251 19-251 19-252 19-252 19-253 19-253 19-254 19-254 19-255 19-255 19-256 19-256 19-257 19-257 19-258 19-258 19-286 19-286 19-287 19-287 19-288 19-288 19-289 19-289 19-290 19-290 19-291 19-291 19-292 19-292 19-321 19-321 19-322 19-322 19-323 19-323 19-324 19-324 19-325 19-325 19-326 19-326 19-327 19-327 19-328 19-328 19-329 19-329 19-330 19-330 19-356 19-356 19-357 19-357 19-358 19-358 19-359 19-359 19-360 19-360 19-386 19-386 19-387 19-387 19-388 19-388 19-389 19-389 19-390 19-390 19-441 19-441 19-442 19-442 19-443 19-443 19-444 19-444 19-445 19-445 19-446 19-446 19-447 19-447 19-448 19-448 19-449 19-449 19-450 19-450 19-451 19-451 19-452 19-452 19-453 19-453 19-454 19-454 19-481 19-481 19-482 19-482 19-483 19-483 19-484 19-484 19-485 19-485 19-486 19-486 19-487 19-487 19-516 19-516 19-546 19-546 19-571 19-571 19-572 19-572 19-601 19-601 19-602 19-602 19-603 19-603 19-604 19-604 19-605 19-605 19-606 19-606 19-636 19-636 19-666 19-666 19-667 19-667 19-696 19-696 19-726 19-726 19-727 19-727 20-1 20-1 20-2 20-2 20-3 20-3 20-4 20-4 20-6 20-5 20-7 20-6 20-8 20-7 20-9 20-8 20-10 20-9 20-11 20-10 20-12 20-11 20-13 20-12 20-14 20-13 20-15 20-14 20-16 20-15 20-17 20-16 20-18 20-17 20-19 20-18 20-20 20-19 20-21 20-20 20-22 20-21 20-23 20-22 20-24 20-23 20-25 20-24 20-26 20-25 20-27 20-26 20-28 20-27 20-28 20-37 20-29 20-28 20-30 20-29 20-31 20-30 20-32 20-31 20-33 20-32 20-34 20-33 20-35 20-34 20-36 20-35 20-37 20-36 20-39 20-38 20-40 20-39 20-41 20-40 20-42 20-41 20-43 20-42 20-44 20-43 20-45 20-44 20-46 20-45 20-66 20-66 20-67 20-67 20-68 20-68 20-96 20-96 20-97 20-97 20-98 20-98 20-99 20-99 20-100 20-100 20-101 20-101 20-102 20-102 20-103 20-103 20-104 20-104 20-105 20-105 20-131 20-131 20-132 20-132 20-133 20-133 20-134 20-134 20-135 20-135 20-136 20-136 20-137 20-137 20-138 20-138 20-139 20-139 20-140 20-140 20-160 20-160 20-161 20-161 20-162 20-162 20-163 20-163 20-166 20-166 20-167 20-167 20-168 20-168 20-169 20-169 20-170 20-170 20-171 20-171 20-172 20-172 20-173 20-173 20-201 20-201 20-202 20-202 20-203 20-203 20-204 20-204 20-236 20-236 20-237 20-237 20-238 20-238 20-239 20-239 20-240 20-240 20-241 20-241 20-242 20-242 20-243 20-243 21-1 21-1 21-2 21-2 21-3 21-3 21-4 21-4 21-5 21-5 21-6 21-6 21-7 21-7 21-8 21-8 21-9 21-9 21-10 21-10 21-11 21-11 21-12 21-12 21-13 21-13 21-14 21-14 21-15 21-15 21-16 21-16 21-17 21-17 21-18 21-18 21-19 21-19 21-20 21-20 21-21 21-21 21-22 21-22 21-23 21-23 21-24 21-24 21-25 21-25 22-1 22-1 22-31 22-21 22-32 22-22 22-33 22-23 22-34 22-24 22-45 22-52 22-46 22-53 22-47 22-54 22-48 22-55 22-49 22-56 22-50 22-57 22-71 22-88 22-72 22-89 22-73 22-90 22-74 22-91 22-75 22-92 22-76 22-93 22-77 22-94 22-101 22-117 22-102 22-118 22-103 22-119 22-104 22-120 22-105 22-121 22-106 22-122 22-131 22-143 22-140.1 22-170 22-140.2 22-171 22-140.3 22-172 22-140.4 22-173 22-140.5 22-174 22-140.6 22-175 22-145.1 22-204 22-145.2 22-205 22-145.3 22-206 22-150.1 22-236 22-150.2 22-237 22-150.3 22-238 22-150.4 22-239 22-150.5 22-240 22-155.1 22-259 22-155.2 22-260 22-155.3 22-261 22-155.4 22-262 22-155.5 22-263 22-160.1 22-290 22-160.2 22-291 22-160.3 22-292 22-160.4 22-293 22-160.5 22-294 22-160.6 22-295 22-160.7 22-296 22-160.8 22-297 22-160.9 22-298 22-165.1 22-330 22-165.2 22-331 22-165.3 22-332 22-165.4 22-333 22-165.5 22-334 22-165.6 22-335 22-165.7 22-336 22-165.8 22-337 22-170.1 22-363 22-170.2 22-364 22-170.3 22-365 22-170.4 22-366 22-170.5 22-367 22-175.1 22-393 22-175.2 22-394 22-175.3 22-395 22-175.4 22-396 22-175.5 22-397 22-175.6 22-398 22-175.7 22-399 22-175.8 22-400 22-175.9 22-401 22-175.10 22-402 22-175.11 22-403 22-175.12 22-404 22-175.13 22-405 22-175.14 22-406 22-175.15 22-407 22-175.16 22-408 22-175.17 22-409 22-175.18 22-410 22-175.19 22-411 22-175.20 22-412 22-180.1 22-438 22-180.2 22-439 22-180.3 22-440 22-180.4 22-441 22-185.1 22-466 22-185.2 22-467 22-185.3 22-468 22-185.4 22-469 22-185.5 22-470 22-185.6 22-471 22-185.7 22-472 22-185.8 22-473 22-185.9 22-474 22-185.10 22-475 22-185.11 22-476 22-185.12 22-477 22-185.13 22-478 22-185.14 22-479 22-185.15 22-480 22-190.1 22-499 22-190.2 22-500 22-190.3 22-501 22-190.4 22-502 22-190.5 22-503 22-190.6 22-504 22-190.7 22-505 22-190.8 22-506 22-190.9 22-507 22-190.10 22-508 22-190.11 22-509 22-190.12 22-510 22-190.13 22-511 22-190.14 22-512 22-195.1 22-533 22-195.2 22-534 22-195.3 22-535 22-195.4 22-536 22-195.5 22-537 22-195.6 22-538 22-195.7 22-539 22-195.8 22-540 22-195.9 22-541 22-195.10 22-542 22-195.11 22-543 22-200.1 22-565 22-200.2 22-566 22-200.3 22-567 22-200.4 22-568 22-200.5 22-569 22-200.6 22-570 22-200.7 22-571 22-200.8 22-572 22-200.9 22-573 22-200.10 22-574 22-200.11 22-575 22-205.1 22-599 22-205.2 22-600 22-205.3 22-601 22-205.4 22-602 22-205.5 22-603 22-205.6 22-604 22-205.7 22-605 22-205.8 22-606 22-205.9 22-607 22-205.10 22-608 22-205.11 22-609 22-205.12 22-610 22-205.13 22-611 22-205.14 22-612 22-205.15 22-613 22-210.1 22-645 22-210.2 22-646 22-210.3 22-647 22-210.4 22-648 22-210.5 22-649 22-210.6 22-650 22-210.7 22-651 22-210.8 22-652 22-210.9 22-653 22-210.10 22-654 22-215.1 22-682 22-215.2 22-683 22-215.3 22-684 22-215.4 22-685 22-215.5 22-686 22-215.6 22-687 22-215.7 22-688 22-215.8 22-689 22-215.9 22-690 22-215.10 22-691 22-215.11 22-692 22-220 22-713 23-1 23-1 23-2 23-2 23-3 23-3 23-4 23-4 23-5 23-5 23-6 23-6 23-36 23-36 23-37 23-37 23-38 23-38 23-39 23-39 23-40 23-40 23-66 23-66 23-67 23-67 23-68 23-68 24-1 24-1 24-2 24-2 24-3 24-3 24-4 24-4 24-5 24-5 24-6 24-6 24-7 24-7 24-8 24-8 24-9 24-9 24-10 24-10 24-11 24-11 24-12 24-12 24-41 24-41 24-42 24-42 24-43 24-43 24-44 24-44 24-45 24-45 24-46 24-46  
2002 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 24-47 24-47 24-48 24-48 24-49 24-49 24-50 24-50 24-51 24-51 24-81 24-81 24-82 24-82 24-83 24-83 24-84 24-84 24-111 24-111 24-112 24-112 24-113 24-113 24-114 24-114 24-115 24-115 24-116 24-116 24-117 24-117 24-118 24-118 24-119 24-119 24-120 24-120 24-146 24-146 24-147 24-147 24-148 24-148 24-149 24-149 24-176 24-176 24-177 24-177 24-178 24-178 24-179 24-179 24-206 24-206 24-207 24-207 24-208 24-208 24-209 24-209 24-210 24-210 24-211 24-211 24-241 24-241 24-242 24-242 24-243 24-243 24-244 24-244 25-26 25-26 25-27 25-27 25-28 25-28 25-29 25-29 25-30 25-30 25-31 25-31 25-32 25-32 25-33 25-33 25-34 25-34 25-35 25-35 25-36 25-36 25-66 25-66 25-67 25-67 25-68 25-68 25-69 25-69 25-70 25-70 25-71 25-71 25-96 25-96 25-97 25-97 25-98 25-98 25-99 25-99 25-126 25-126 25-127 25-127 25-128 25-128 25-156 25-156 25-157 25-157 25-158 25-158 25-159 25-159 25-160 25-160 25-161 25-161 25-162 25-162 25-163 25-163 25-191 25-191 25-192 25-192 25-193 25-193 25-194 25-194 25-195 25-195 25-196 25-196 25-197 25-197 25-198 25-198 25-199 25-199 25-200 25-200 25-227 25-227 25-230 25-230 25-231 25-231 25-232 25-232 25-233 25-233 25-234 25-235 25-235 25-236 25-236 25-237 25-237 25-238 25-238 25-239 25-239 25-240 25-267 25-267 25-268 25-268 25-269 25-269 25-270 25-270 25-271 25-271 25-272 25-272 25-274 25-273 25-275 25-274 25-276 25-275 25-277 25-276 25-278 25-277 25-279 25-278 25-280 25-279 25-281 25-280 25-282 25-281 26-1 26-1 26-26 26-26 26-27 26-27 26-28 26-28 26-29 26-29 26-56 26-56 26-57 26-57 26-58 26-58 26-59 26-59 26-60 26-60 26-61 26-61 26-62 26-62 26-63 26-63 26-64 26-64 26-65 26-65 26-66 26-66 26-67 26-67 26-68 26-68 26-69 26-69 26-70 26-70 26-71 26-71 26-72 26-72 26-73 26-73 26-96 26-96 26-97 26-97 26-98 26-98 26-99 26-99 26-100 26-100 26-101 26-101 26-102 26-102 26-103 26-103 26-104 26-104 26-131 26-131 26-132 26-132 26-133 26-133 26-134 26-134 26-135 26-135 26-136 26-136 26-137 26-137 26-138 26-138 26-166 26-166 26-167 26-167 26-168 26-168 26-169 26-169 26-170 26-170 26-171 26-171 26-172 26-172 26-201 26-201 26-202 26-202 26-203 26-203 26-231 26-231 26-232 26-232 26-233 26-233 26-234 26-234 26-235 26-235 26-261 26-261 26-262 26-262 26-263 26-263 26-264 26-264 26-265 26-265 26-266 26-266 26-267 26-267 26-268 26-268 26-269 26-269 26-270 26-270 26-271 26-271 26-272 26-272 26-273 26-273 26-274 26-274 26-301 26-301 26-326 26-326 26-327 26-327 26-328 26-328 26-329 26-329 26-330 26-330 26-331 26-331 26-332 26-332 26-333 26-333 26-334 26-334 26-335 26-335 26-336 26-336 26-337 26-337 26-361 26-361 26-362 26-362 26-363 26-363 26-364 26-364 26-365 26-365 26-366 26-366 26-367 26-367 26-368 26-368 26-369 26-369 26-370 26-370 26-371 26-371 26-372 26-372 26-373 26-373 26-374 26-374 26-401 26-401 26-402 26-402 26-403 26-403 26-404 26-404 26-405 26-405 26-406 26-406 26-407 26-407 26-408 26-408 26-409 26-409 26-410 26-410 26-436 26-436 26-437 26-437 27-26 27-26 27-27 27-27 27-28 27-28 27-29 27-29 27-56 27-56 27-57 27-57 27-58 27-58 27-59 27-59 27-75 27-75 27-76 27-76 27-77 27-77 27-78 27-78 27-79 27-79 27-80 27-80 27-81 27-81 27-82 27-82 27-83 27-83 27-84 27-84 27-85 27-85 27-86 27-86 27-87 27-87 27-88 27-88 27-89 27-89 27-90 27-90 27-91 27-91 27-92 27-92 27-93 27-93 27-94 27-94 28-1 28-1 28-2 28-2 28-31 28-31 28-32 28-32 28-33 28-33 28-34 28-34 28-35 28-35 28-36 28-36 28-37 28-37 28-37 28-67 28-66 28-66 28-68 28-68 28-69 28-69 28-70 28-70 28-71 28-71 28-72 28-72 28-73 28-73 28-74 28-74 28-101 28-101 28-102 28-102 28-103 28-103 28-104 28-104 28-105 28-105 28-106 28-106 28-107 28-107 28-108 28-108 28-109 28-109 28-110 28-110 28-111 28-111 28-112 28-112 28-113 28-113 28-114 28-114 28-115 28-115 28-116 28-116 28-117 28-117 28-118 28-118 28-119 28-119 28-120 28-120 28-121 28-121 28-122 28-122 28-123 28-123 28-124 28-124 28-125 28-125 28-126 28-126 28-127 28-127 28-128 28-128 28-129 28-129 28-130 28-130 28-131 28-131 28-161 28-161 28-162 28-162 28-163 28-163 28-164 28-164 28-191 28-191 28-192 28-192 28-193 28-193 28-194 28-194 28-195 28-195 28-196 28-196 28-197 28-197 28-198 28-198 28-199 28-199 28-200 28-200 28-201 28-201 28-202 28-202 28-203 28-203 28-231 28-231 28-232 28-232 28-233 28-233 28-234 28-234 28-235 28-235 28-236 28-236 28-237 28-237 28-238 28-238 28-239 28-239 28-240 28-240 28-241 28-241 28-242 28-242 28-243 28-243 28-244 28-244 28-245 28-245 28-246 28-246 28-247 28-247 28-276 28-276 28-277 28-277 28-278 28-278 28-306 28-306 28-307 28-307 28-308 28-308 28-309 28-309  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and other legislation which are included herein. Ordinances and other legislation not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 1327NS 2-3-1986 3 7-32 Ord. No. 1341NS 3-17-1986 3 7-32 Ord. No. 1385NS 4-6-1987 2 7-32 Ord. No. 1540NS 3-19-1990 2 7-32 Ord. No. 1654NS 10-4-1993 2 7-32 Ord. No. 1708NS 12-19-1994 2 9-31 3 9-32 4 9-33 5 9-34 6 9-35 7 9-36 8 9-37 9 9-38 10 9-66 11 9-67 12 9-68 13 9-69 14 9-70 15 9-71 16 9-72 17 9-73 18 9-74 19 9-75 20 9-76 21 9-106 22 9-107 23 9-108 24 9-109 25 9-110 26 9-111 27 9-112 28 9-113 29 9-114 30 9-115 31 9-116 32 9-117 33 9-118 34 9-119 35 9-120 36 9-121 Ord. No. 1881NS 5-18-1998 2 7-32 Ord. No. 1941NS 7-19-1999 1 7-581 Ord. No. 1943NS 8-16-1999 1 19-487 Ord. No. 1944NS 9-7-1999 1 20-203 2 20-203 Ord. No. 1945NS 10-18-1999 1 26-99 2 26-166 3 26-168 Ord. No. 1946NS 10-18-1999 1 19-571 Ord. No. 1948NS 11-1-1999 1 1-10 Ord. No. 1952NS 12-20-1999 - 19-179 Ord. No. 1964NS 2-22-2000 1 20-36 Ord. No. 1975NS 7-17-2000 1 19-571 Ord. No. 1976NS 8-7-2000 1 26-272 2 26-272 3 26-272 4 26-272 5 26-272 6 26-273 7 26-274 Ord. No. 1977NS 8-7-2000 1 26-261 Ord. No. 1984NS 10-16-2000 1 6-58 - 6-61 Ord. No. 1989NS 11-20-2000 1 19-357 Ord. No. 1997NS 2-20-2001 1 1-10 Ord. No. 1999NS 3-5-2001 1 4-45 Ord. No. 2000NS 3-19-2001 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2006NS 6-4-2001 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2013NS 7-16-2001 1 16-225 Ord. No. 2018NS 8-6-2001 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2021NS 9-17-2001 1 20-17 2 20-18 Ord. No. 2022NS 9-17-2001 1 19-178 2 19-178 3 19-179 Ord. No. 2026NS 10-15-2001 1 19-155 Ord. No. 2029NS 11-19-2001 1 19-453 Ord. No. 2030NS 12-3-2001 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2043NS 3-4-2002 1 5-3 2 5-3 3 5-148 Ord. No. 2048NS 4-1-2002 1 5-148 Ord. No. 2055NS 5-20-2002 1 6-57 - 6-61 Ord. No. 2056NS 5-20-2002 1 20-202 Ord. No. 2057NS 5-20-2002 1 7-582 Ord. No. 2058NS 5-20-2002 1 19-357 Ord. No. 2064NS 7-15-2002 1 7-584 2 7-585 Ord. No. 2066NS 8-5-2002 1 5-179 2 5-308 Ord. No. 2074NS 11-4-2002 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2077NS 11-18-2002 1 27-75 2 27-76 3 27-77 4 27-78 5 27-79 6 27-80 7 27-81 8 27-82 9 27-83 10 27-84 11 27-85 12 27-86 13 27-87 14 27-88 15 27-89 16 27-90 17 27-91 18 27-92 19 27-93 20 27-94 Ord. No. 2086NS 3-3-2003 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2090NS 4-7-2003 1 26-231 2 26-231 Ord. No. 2091NS 4-7-2003 1 19-546 Ord. No. 2093NS 5-19-2003 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2097NS 7-7-2003 1 16-86 Ord. No. 2098NS 8-4-2003 1 22-52 - 22-53 2 22-52 - 22-53 6 22-54 7 22-55 8 22-56 9 22-57 10 22-57 Ord. No. 2099NS 8-4-2003 1 19-487 Ord. No. 2102NS 9-2-2003 1 19-487 Ord. No. 2105NS 10-6-2003 1 2-5 Ord. No. 2106NS 10-6-2003 1 19-450 Ord. No. 2109NS 10-20-2003 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2111NS 11-3-2003 1 18-3 Ord. No. 2115NS 11-17-2003 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2125NS 1-20-2004 1 7-61 Ord. No. 2126NS 1-20-2004 1 7-461 2 7-462 Ord. No. 2127NS 1-20-2004 1 7-31 - 7-32 Ord. No. 2128NS 1-20-2004 1 7-361 Ord. No. 2130NS 1-20-2004 1 7-297 Ord. No. 2131NS 1-20-2004 1 26-436 Ord. No. 2133NS 2-2-2004 1 13-36 2 13-37 3 13-2 4 13-3 Ord. No. 2145NS 3-15-2004 1 23-38 Ord. No. 2153NS 4-19-2004 1 7-396 2 7-397 3 7-398 Ord. No. 2154NS 4-19-2004 1 7-126 2 7-126 3 7-129 Ord. No. 2155NS 4-19-2004 1 7-302 Ord. No. 2156NS 5-17-2004 1 25-226 2 25-228 3 25-229 4 25-266 Ord. No. 2164NS 6-7-2004 1 10-11 Ord. No. 2167NS 6-21-2004 1 26-26 2 26-27 Ord. No. 2169NS 7-6-2004 1 3-1 2 3-191 Ord. No. 2618NS 7-6-2004 1 1-10 Ord. No. 2174NS 8-16-2004 1 20-37 Ord. No. 2189NS 1-3-2005 1 26-231 Ord. No. 2194NS 4-18-2005 1 20-172 2 20-172 3 20-173 4 20-173 Ord. No. 2205NS 6-6-2005 1 7-32 2 7-160 3 7-331 4 7-362 Ord. No. 2207NS 6-20-2005 2 25-280 3 25-281 Ord. No. 2208NS  6-20-2005 1 25-278 Ord. No. 2209NS 6-20-2005 1 10-7 Ord. No. 2214NS 8-1-2005 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2222NS 11-7-2005 1 20-137 2 20-138 3 20-139 4 20-140 Ord. No. 2223NS 11-7-2005 1 20-133 2 20-134 3 20-135 Ord. No. 2224NS 11-21-2005 1 8-3 Ord. No. 2237NS 2-6-2006 1 24-8 Ord. No. 2238NS 2-21-2006 1 24-43 2 24-44 3 24-44 4 24-45 5 24-45 Ord. No. 2239NS 2-21-2006 1 26-29 2 26-231 3 26-231 Ord. No. 2241NS 3-6-2006 1 26-70 Ord. No. 2243NS 3-22-2006 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2252NS 4-3-2006 1 5-179 2 5-308 Ord. No. 2248NS 4-17-2006 1 2-35 Ord. No. 2250NS 5-1-2006 1 5-248 Ord. No. 2251NS 5-1-2006 1 5-146 Ord. No. 2257NS 5-15-2006 1 20-5 Ord. No. 2259NS 5-15-2006 1 26-437 Ord. No. 2260NS 6-5-2006 1 26-71 Ord. No. 2272NS 7-17-2006 1 23-38 Ord. No. 2278NS 9-5-2006 2 19-76 3 19-77 4 19-78 Ord. No. 2279NS 9-18-2006 1 26-71 Ord. No. 2288NS 11-6-2006 1 26-72 Ord. No. 2289NS 11-20-2006 1 26-97 2 26-272 Ord. No. 2293NS 1-16-2007 1 20-243 Ord. No. 2297NS 2-5-2007 1 20-40 Ord. No. 2298NS 2-5-2007 1 20-39 Ord. No. 2299NS 2-5-2007 1 20-38 Ord. No. 2300NS 2-5-2007 1 20-5 Ord. No. 2302NS 2-20-2007 2 16-59 Ord. No. 2311NS 5-7-2007 1 2-30 Ord. No. 2312NS 6-4-2007 1 23-1 2 23-4 3 23-5 4 23-38 5 23-39 Ord. No. 2315NS 6-18-2007 1 2-98 Ord. No. 2323NS 8-6-2007 1 27-77 Ord. No. 2324NS 8-6-2007 1 20-96 Ord. No. 2325NS 8-20-2007 2 20-160 3 20-161 4 20-162 5 20-163 Ord. No. 2333NS 11-19-2007 1 23-40 Ord. No. 2339NS 2-19-2008 1 5-179 2 5-308 3 5-52 Ord. No. 2340NS 3-10-2008 1 2-98 Ord. No. 2351NS 5-5-2008 1 2-209 2 2-209 3 2-209 4 2-209 5 2-209 6 2-209 Ord. No. 2352NS 5-19-2008 1 26-26 2 26-27 Ord. No. 2361NS 6-16-2008 1 16-56 2 16-58 3 16-117 4 16-119 5 16-122 6 16-123 Ord. No. 2362NS 6-16-2008 1 16-216 2 16-218 3 16-224 4 16-253 5 16-254 6 16-255 7 16-288 8 16-290 Ord. No. 2375NS 11-3-2008 1 17-33 Ord. No. 2381NS 11-17-2008 1 5-16 Ord. No. 2382NS 12-1-2008 1 19-184 Ord. No. 2383NS 12-1-2008 1 5-87 2 5-88 3 5-89 Ord. No. 2384NS 12-1-2008 1 5-18 Ord. No. 2385NS 12-1-2008 1 5-3 2 5-3 Ord. No. 2386NS 12-1-2008 1 5-19 Ord. No. 2387NS 12-1-2008 1 5-17 Ord. No. 2394NS 2-17-2009 1 1-10 Ord. No. 2395NS 2-17-2009 1 5-3 2 5-19 3 5-16 Ord. No. 2397NS 3-2-2009 1 2-209 2 2-209 3 2-209 4 2-209 Ord. No. 2403NS 6-15-2009 1 7-431 2 7-432 Ord. No. 2406NS 9-8-2009 2 22-88 3 22-89 4 22-90 5 22-91 6 22-92 7 22-93 8 22-94 Ord. No. 2410NS 9-8-2009 1 26-26 2 26-26 3 26-27 4 26-27 Ord. No. 2421NS 1-19-2010 1 26-1 2 26-1 3 26-1 4 26-1 5 26-1 6 26-1 7 26-1 Ord. No. 2424NS 2-1-2010 1 26-1 Ord. No. 2431NS 4-19-2010 1 5-50 Ord. No. 2432NS 4-19-2010 1 20-7 2 20-38 Ord. No. 2435NS 5-17-2010 1 10-9 2 10-11 Ord. No. 2436NS 6-21-2010 1 23-4 2 23-38 3 23-39 Ord. No. 2437NS 8-2-2010 1 14-26 - 14-26 - 14-27 - 14-28 - 14-29 - 14-30 - 14-31 - 14-32 - 14-33 - 14-34 - 14-35 - 14-36 - 14-37 - 14-66 - 14-67 - 14-68 - 14-69 - 14-70 - 14-71 - 14-72 - 14-96 - 14-97 - 14-98 - 14-99 - 14-100 2 14-26 - 14-27 - 14-28 - 14-29 - 14-30 - 14-31 - 14-32 - 14-33 - 14-34 - 14-35 - 14-36 - 14-37 - 14-66 - 14-67 - 14-68 - 14-69 - 14-71 - 14-72 - 14-96 - 14-97 - 14-98 - 14-99 - 14-100 Ord. No. 2439NS 8-16-2010 1 5-17 Ord. No. 2440NS 8-16-2010 1 19-51 Ord. No. 2441NS 9-7-2010 1 16-59 2 16-321 3 16-322 4 16-323 5 16-324 6 16-325 7 16-326 8 16-327 9 16-328 Ord. No. 2442NS 9-7-2010 1 22-117 - 22-117 - 22-118 - 22-119 - 22-120 - 22-121 - 22-122 Ord. No. 2445NS 9-7-2010 1 8-32 2 8-33 3 8-34 4 8-35 5 8-36 6 8-37 7 8-38 8 8-39 9 8-40 10 8-41 Ord. No. 2448NS 12-6-2010 1 2-209 2 2-209 3 2-209 4 2-209 1 2-204 2 2-206 3 2-207 4 2-208 Ord. No. 2457NS 6-6-2011 1 20-26 Ord. No. 2458NS 6-6-2011 1 7-462 Ord. No. 2469NS 1-17-2012 1 16-117 Ord. No. 2470NS 1-17-2012 1 16-183 Ord. No. 2484NS 8-6-2012 1 26-26 2 26-26 3 26-27 4 26-27 Ord. No. 2485NS 8-6-2012 - 26-67 Ord. No. 2486NS 8-20-2012 1 7-581 Ord. No. 2499NS 3-18-2013 1 7-31 2 7-32 3 7-61 16 7-266 17 7-267 18 7-297 20 7-361 21 7-362 27 7-431 28 7-432 29 7-461 30 7-462 32 7-491 33 13-36 34 13-37 Ord. No. 2502NS 6-10-2013 1 5-3 Ord. No. 2507NS 6-17-2013 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2508NS 6-17-2013 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2509NS 6-17-2013 1 2-204 Ord. No. 2510NS 6-17-2013 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2511NS 7-1-2013 1 6-27 2 6-29 3 6-30 4 6-57 5 6-58 6 6-59 7 6-59 Ord. No. 2519NS 10-21-2013 2 15-146 3 15-147 4 15-148 5 15-149 6 15-150 7 15-151 8 15-152 Ord. No. 2520NS 10-21-2013 2 12-1 3 12-2 4 12-3 5 12-25 6 12-26 7 12-27 8 12-28 9 12-29 10 12-30 11 12-31 12 12-32 13 12-53 14 12-54 15 12-55 16 12-56 17 12-57 18 12-58 19 12-59 20 12-60 21 12-61 22 12-62 23 12-63 24 12-64 25 12-65 26 12-66 27 12-67 28 12-68 29 12-89 30 12-90 31 12-91 32 12-92 33 12-93 34 12-94 35 12-95 36 12-96 37 12-117 38 12-118 39 12-119 40 12-120 41 12-121 42 12-142 43 12-143 44 12-144 45 12-145 46 12-146 47 12-147 48 12-148 49 12-149 50 12-150 51 12-151 Ord. No. 2521NS 11-18-2013 1 8-461 2 8-462 3 8-463 4 8-464 5 8-465 6 8-466 7 8-467 8 8-468 9 8-469 10 8-470 11 8-471 12 8-472 13 8-473 14 8-501 15 8-502 16 8-503 17 8-504 18 8-505 19 8-506 20 8-507 21 8-508 22 8-509 23 8-510 24 8-511 25 8-512 26 8-513 Ord. No. 2522NS 11-18-2013 1 22-143 Ord. No. 2523NS 11-18-2013 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2524NS 12-2-2013 1 19-726 Ord. No. 2525NS 12-2-2013 1 25-128 Ord. No. 2527NS 1-21-2014 1 10-1 2 10-2 3 10-7 4 10-9 5 10-11 Ord. No. 2528NS 1-21-2014 - 11-26 - 11-26 - 11-27 - 11-28 - 11-29 - 11-31 - 11-32 - 11-33 - 11-34 - 11-35 - 11-36 - 11-37 - 11-38 - 11-39 - 11-40 Ord. No. 2529NS 2-18-2014 1 4-1 2 4-4 3 4-7 5 4-43 Ord. No. 2530NS 2-18-2014 1 26-29 3 26-29 - 26-99 - 26-166 - 26-168 - 26-261 - 26-263 - 26-364 - 26-405 - 26-406 - 26-409 2 26-27 3 26-29 - 26-99 - 26-166 - 26-168 - 26-261 - 26-263 - 26-364 - 26-405 - 26-406 - 26-409 4 26-68 5 26-271 6 26-331 7 26-404 8 26-407 Ord. No. 2135NS 2-2-2004 1 13-139 Ord. No. 2532NS 3-3-2014 1 1-2 2 1-10 3 1-10 - 12-152 - 12-152 - 12-153 - 12-154 4 1-15 5 1-16 Ord. No. 2533NS 3-3-2014 1 7-3 2 7-126 3 7-160 4 7-397 5 7-712 6 7-522 - 7-523 Ord. No. 2534NS 3-3-2014 1 13-8 - 13-9 - 13-37 - 13-139 2 13-67 4 13-110 - 26-73 Ord. No. 2535NS 3-3-2014 1 20-41 - 20-41 - 20-42 - 20-43 - 20-44 - 20-45 2 17-33 Ord. No. 2541NS 4-7-2014 2 2-1 3 2-4 4 2-30 5 2-31 6 2-32 7 2-34 8 2-38 9 2-98 11 2-147 13 2-241 15 2-245 16(a) 2-315 16(b) 2-316 16(c) 2-317 16(d) 2-318 17 2-408 18 2-432 19 2-469 Ord. No. 2542NS 4-7-2014 1 8-1 2 8-32 - 8-34 - 8-35 - 8-40 - 8-192 - 8-224 - 8-225 - 8-256 - 8-259 - 8-291 - 8-327 - 8-328 - 8-363 - 8-364 - 8-398 - 8-434 - 8-465 - 8-505 - 8-508 - 8-511 3 8-37 Ord. No. 2545NS 6-2-2014 1(Exh. 1) 22-170 - 22-171 - 22-172 - 22-173 - 22-174 - 22-175 - 22-204 - 22-205 - 22-206 - 22-236 - 22-237 - 22-238 - 22-239 - 22-259 - 22-260 - 22-261 - 22-262 - 22-263 - 22-290 - 22-290 - 22-291 - 22-292 - 22-293 - 22-294 - 22-295 - 22-296 - 22-297 - 22-298 - 22-330 - 22-331 - 22-332 - 22-333 - 22-334 - 22-335 - 22-336 - 22-337 - 22-363 - 22-364 - 22-365 - 22-366 - 22-367 - 22-393 - 22-394 - 22-395 - 22-396 - 22-397 - 22-398 - 22-399 - 22-400 - 22-401 - 22-402 - 22-403 - 22-404 - 22-405 - 22-406 - 22-407 - 22-408 - 22-409 - 22-410 - 22-411 - 22-412 - 22-438 - 22-439 - 22-440 - 22-441 - 22-466 - 22-467 - 22-468 - 22-469 - 22-470 - 22-471 - 22-472 - 22-473 - 22-474 - 22-475 - 22-476 - 22-477 - 22-478 - 22-479 - 22-499 - 22-500 - 22-501 - 22-502 - 22-503 - 22-504 - 22-505 - 22-506 - 22-507 - 22-508 - 22-509 - 22-510 - 22-511 - 22-512 - 22-533 - 22-534 - 22-535 - 22-536 - 22-537 - 22-538 - 22-539 - 22-540 - 22-541 - 22-542 - 22-543 - 22-565 - 22-566 - 22-567 - 22-568 - 22-569 - 22-570 - 22-571 - 22-572 - 22-573 - 22-574 - 22-575 - 22-599 - 22-600 - 22-601 - 22-602 - 22-603 - 22-604 - 22-605 - 22-606 - 22-607 - 22-608 - 22-609 - 22-610 - 22-612 - 22-613 - 22-645 - 22-646 - 22-647 - 22-648 - 22-649 - 22-650 - 22-651 - 22-652 - 22-653 - 22-654 - 22-682 - 22-683 - 22-684 - 22-685 - 22-686 - 22-688 - 22-689 - 22-690 - 22-691 - 22-692 - 22-713 Ord. No. 2546NS 6-16-2014 1 20-11 Ord. No. 2551NS 8-18-2014 - 26-67 Ord. No. 2554NS 11-17-2014 1 2-204 Ord. No. 2555NS 11-17-2014 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2556NS 11-17-2014 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2558NS 2-17-2015 1 2-41 Ord. No. 2564NS 5-18-2015 2 7-750 3 7-751 4 7-752 5 7-753 6 7-754 7 7-755 Ord. No. 2566NS 6-15-2015 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2567NS 6-15-2015 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2568NS 6-15-2015 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2569NS 6-15-2015 1 8-325 2 8-328 3 8-329 - 8-330 - 8-331 4 8-332 5 8-333 6 8-334 7 8-335 8 8-336 9 8-337 10 8-338 11 8-339 Ord. No. 2574NS 9-8-2015 1 1-10 Ord. No. 2575NS 9-21-2015 1 19-571 Ord. No. 2576NS 10-19-2015 1 19-185 Ord. No. 2577NS 10-19-2015 1 11-29 2 11-30 3 11-38 Ord. No. 2580NS 2016 1 22-336 2 22-331 Ord. No. 2582NS 6-20-2016 1 8-325 2 8-327 3 8-328 4 8-329 5 8-332 6 8-333 7 8-334 8 8-335 9 8-336 10 8-337 11 8-339 Ord. No. 2591NS 12-5-2016 1 19-1 Ord. No. 2593NS 12-19-2016 1 5-2 2 5-3 3 5-3 4 5-3 5 5-5 6 5-5 7 5-17 8 5-19 9 5-49 10 5-50 11 5-52 12 5-83 13 5-88 14 5-111 15 5-119 16 5-146 17 5-147 18 5-148 19 5-176 20 5-178 21 5-179 22 5-208 23 5-211 24 5-243 25 5-276 26 5-281 27 5-306 28 5-307 29 5-308 30 5-338 31 5-341 32 5-372 Ord. No. 2597NS 3-20-2017 1 26-26 - 26-27 - 26-29 - 26-132 - 26-133 2 26-59 3 26-67 4 26-70 5 26-71 6 26-72 7 26-97 8 26-134 9 26-135 10 26-171 11 26-202 12 26-231 13 26-233 14 26-264 15 26-265 16 26-266 17 26-272 18 26-437 Ord. No. 2598NS 3-20-2017 1 21-1 - 21-9 2 21-6 3 21-11 4 21-24 5 21-25 Ord. No. 2599NS 3-20-2017 1 1-17 Ord. No. 2600NS 3-20-2017 1 7-31 2 7-32 3 7-61 4 7-160 5 7-266 7 7-297 8 7-331 9 7-361 10 7-362 12 7-491 13 13-36 14 13-37 15 7-461 16 7-462 - 19-571 - 7-267 Ord. No. 2606NS  6-19-2017 1 27-77 Ord. No. 2610NS  6-19-2017 Adopting Ord. Ord. No. 2613NS  8- 7-2017 1       Added 12-13 App. A Ord. No. 2623NS  1-16-2018 1 5-86 2 5-244 Ord. No. 2624NS  1-16-2018 1 20-17 Ord. No. 2625NS  1-16-2018 1 20-105 Ord. No. 2629NS  3-19-2018 Art. II, Div. 3 (title) 27-75, 27-76 Ord. No. 2633NS  4- 2-2018 1-10       Added Art. II, Div. 5, 
25-136-25-145 Res. No. 6560  4- 2-2018 1-4 App. A Ord. No. 2640NS  9- 4-2018 1       Rpld Art. II, 4-42-4-49 2 4-1 3 4-3 4 4-4(a) 5 4-5 6 4-7 7 4-9 8 App. A 9       Added 4-12 Ord. No. 2641NS  9-17-2018 1       Added Art. VIII, 8-541-8-543 Ord. No. 2643NS 10- 1-2018 1 2-209 Ord. No. 2644NS 11- 5-2018 1-8 15-146-15-152 Ord. No. 2646NS 12-17-2018 1(App.) App. A 2       Added 26-101(c) 3 26-132(a) 4       Added 26-132(c) 5       Added 26-173 6-8       Added 26-231(e)-(g) Res. No. 6580 12-17-2018 1-4 App. A  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Oklahoma Statutes (O.S.). 
O.S. 
Title Section Section 
this Code 2 1-3 5-7 3-81 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. III 3-85 15-123 3-89 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. III 3 61 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 65.1 6-56 103 Ch. 6 (note) 4 44 et seq. 5-3 99 5-8 - 5-11 499 et seq. Ch. 5, Art. V 499.1 5-371 501 et seq. 5-2 - Ch. 5, Art. II - 5-179 8 1 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 111 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 10 1102(E) 20-104 2-2-403 12-142 11 1-101 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) 2-101 Ch. 2 (note) 2-104 Ch. 2 (note) 8-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 8-101 Ch. 2 (note) 8-105 Ch. 2, Art. IV 14-101 et seq. 2-33 14-102 Ch. 1 (note) 14-103 Ch. 1 (note) 14-105 2-39 - 2-181 14-106 2-33 14-107 7-31 - 7-361 - Ch. 7 (note) - Ch. 7, Art. II - Ch. 13 (note) - Ch. 13, Art. II 14-108 et seq. 1-11 - 1-12 14-108 1-1 - 1-8 14-109 1-1 - 12-89 14-110 1-1 - 12-89 14-111 1-10 - 12-145 17-101 et seq. 2-96 - Ch. 2, Art. V 17-102 2-181 - 2-236 17-102(D) 2-245 17-105 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 17-112 Ch. 25 (note) 17-201 et seq. 2-96 17-203 2-96 21-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII 21-102 Ch. 19, Art. X 22-101 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 22-101 2-4 - Ch. 2, Art. V 22-101.1 2-123 22-104 Ch. 2, Art. V - Ch. 6 (note) - 15-1 - Ch. 26 (note) - Ch. 21 (note) 22-106 et seq. Ch. 7 (note) 22-106 Ch. 8 (note) 22-106 Ch. 8, Art. III 22-106 Ch. 8, Art. IV 22-106 Ch. 8, Art. V 22-106 Ch. 8, Art. VII 22-107 Ch. 8 (note) - 8-227 - 15-90 - 15-122 - 27-56 - 7-126 22-109 20-10 22-109.1 22-411 22-110 Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 13 (note) - Ch. 13, Art. II - 13-71 - 20-7 - 20-13 - 20-14 - Ch. 20, Art. II - 20-66 - 20-68 22-111 15-1 - Ch. 20, Art. IV, Div. 2 22-112 Ch. 7 (note) - Ch. 7, Art. IX 22-113 Ch. 7 (note) - Ch. 13 (note) - 13-1 - Ch. 13, Art. II 22-115 Ch. 5 (note) - 5-2 - 5-11 - Ch. 5, Art. III, Div. 2 - 5-83 22-117 Ch. 19 (note) - 19-9 - 24-3 22-118 Ch. 8, Art. VII - 8-461 22-119 Ch. 19, Art. X 22-120 15-1 22-121 4-44 - Ch. 5 (note) - 5-5 - Ch. 5, Art. III - 5-82 - Ch. 20, Art. IV 22-122 Ch. 27 (note) 26-101 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 26-101 5-15 26-108 10-6 26-112 10-12 27-101 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) - 12-2 - 12-3 27-101-27-132 12-150 27-104 1-10 - Ch. 12, Art. II - 12-25 27-105 12-27 27-106 12-25 - 12-28 27-107 12-29 27-108 12-30 - Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 27-109 12-31 27-113 12-55 27-115 12-55 27-116 12-61 27-117 12-66 27-119 1-10 - 12-89 27-120 12-90 27-121 12-91 27-123 12-96 27-124 12-96 27-126 12-96 29-101 et seq. Ch. 13 (note) - Ch. 13, Art. II 29-102 Ch. 13, Art. III, 
Div. 2 29-103 13-67 29-201 et seq. Ch. 13 (note) - Ch. 13, Art. II 31-101 et seq. 2-3 32-104 Ch. 26 (note) - Ch. 19, Art. X 33-101 et seq. Ch. 21 (note) 33-201 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) - Ch. 16, Art. II, Div. 4 34-101 et seq. Ch. 17 (note) - Ch. 17, Art. II 34-104 17-33 35-101 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) 35-101 26-63 36-101 et seq. Ch. 24 (note) 36-101 Ch. 24, Art. II 36-106 27-26 36-107 Ch. 7, Art. XV - Ch. 24, Art. VI - Ch. 27 (note) 36-116 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. X 36-401 et seq. Ch. 21 (note) 37-101 et seq. Ch. 15 (note) - Ch. 26 (note) 37-102 Ch. 21 (note) - Ch. 16 (note) 37-120 26-63 37-201 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. IV 39-101 et seq. Ch. 21 (note) - Ch. 24 (note) 41-101 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) - 22-1 42-101 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) 43-113 22-605 45-101 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 45-103 22-24 48-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4 48-102 2-205 48-104 2-207 49-100.1 et seq. Ch. 13 (note) - Ch. 13, Art. II - 13-69 49-124 2-181 - 13-69 50-101 et seq. Ch. 17 (note) - 17-32 50-108 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 52-101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 12 51 et seq. Ch. 17 (note) 72 1-2 951 20-168 15 13 Ch. 20, Art. III 777.1 et seq. 11-39 17 1 et seq. 2-104 - 26-1 18 552.1 et seq. 8-296 - Ch. 8, Art. III, Div. 4 552.18 8-295 19 338 Ch. 6 (note) 19 901.25 Ch. 13 (note) - Ch. 13, Art. II 1001 et seq. Ch. 21 (note) 1608 8-223 20 1404 12-26 21 1 et seq. Ch. 20 (note) 10 1-10 28 20-1 264 20-42 267 20-5 355 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 371 et seq. 20-6 385 12-92 388 12-94 390 12-93 421 et seq. 20-2 537 20-3 540 5-47 - 13-4 540A 19-44 - 20-43 546 20-4 565 et seq. 12-144 577 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 641 et seq. 20-7 901 et seq. 20-8 907 et seq. 8-332 907 Ch. 8 (note) 915 et seq. 20-13 931 20-9 1021A(1) 20-32 1021A(2) 20-32 1026 20-10 1092 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 1092 8-333 1151 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 1161 et seq. 10-12 1166 10-13 1198 13-4 1208 20-12 1215 4-7 1216 4-7 1221 5-11 1222 et seq. 5-15 1272 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II - 20-66 1289.7 20-66 1289.8 20-66 1318 20-43 1361 20-13 1362 20-14 1364 20-68 1503 20-16 1505 Ch. 8 (note) 1551 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 1681 et seq. Ch. 5 (note) 1684 5-14 1685 5-2 1701 20-17 1702 20-18 1704 20-17 1706 20-17 1709 20-17 1712 20-17 1713 8-333 1715 20-19 1731 20-20 1751 et seq. 20-21 1760 20-22 1835 20-26 1851 et seq. 13-8 1861 8-296 22 22-115 Ch. 5, Art. II 35 20-43 91 et seq. 20-43 102 20-43 103 20-43 105 20-43 171 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) - 17-31 172 12-55 188 20-43 196 13-4 202 19-390 513 12-62 952 12-92 1108 12-68 1115.1 12-67 - 12-67 1181 et seq. Ch. 2 (note) - 12-26 1181 Ch. 12 (note) 1321 17-36 1327 17-36 1341 et seq. 20-20 25 16 1-2 23 1-2 24 1-2 25 1-2 26 1-2 26(1) 1-2 26(3) 1-2 31 1-2 32 1-9 115 2-181 145.2 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. X 301 et seq. 6-29 1101 et seq. 7-522 1201 2-315 1401 et seq. 2-318 1401 2-315 1501 et seq. 7-522 1701 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2 1704 2-345 27A 2-4-201 Ch. 26 (note) 2-4-701 Ch. 26, Art. IV 2-6-304 Ch. 26, Art. III 2-6-305 Ch. 26, Art. III 2-6-401 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. IV 2-10-101 et seq. Ch. 23 (note) - 23-1 2-10-102 23-2 2-10-901 Ch. 23 (note) 2-10-901(B) 23-38 2-10-1101 et seq. Ch. 23 (note) 29 2-115 16-118 - 4-110 16-116 - 4-112 16-181 - 6-301 16-119 - 6-302 16-118 36 6453 8-508 37 8 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 8 et seq. 4-2 8 20-11 163.1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II 163.2 4-1 163.8 4-43 163.10 4-43 163.11 4-43 219.1 4-45 241 4-46 243 4-48 506 4-1 508 4-1 509 4-1 518 4-3 - 4-4 - 4-5 537 19-180 537(A)(1) 4-8 537(B)(2) 4-8 - 15-146 537(C)(7) 4-8 538(e) 4-8 549 4-10 553 et seq. 4-10 554.1 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-6 569 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 38 18.1 12-90 40 71 Ch. 8 (note) 43A 3-403 22-206 - 22-648 3-428 Ch. 4 (note) 47 1-101 et seq. 19-2 1-105 19-221 1-125 19-2 - 19-182 - 19-221 1-174 19-221 2-117 12-152 6-103 12-142 6-105 12-142 6-113 19-6 6-303 19-5 7-201 19-258 7-202 19-258 7-301 et seq. 19-258 7-600-7-607 19-7 7-600 19-7 - 19-255 7-601 et seq. 19-258 8-104 Ch. 8, Art. VII 10-101 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. VI 10-102 19-254 10-102.1 19-254 10-103 19-253 10-104 19-257 10-104A 19-254 10-105 19-255 10-106 19-256 10-107 19-257 10-108 19-258 10-117 19-258 11-102 19-4 11-103 19-43 11-104 19-141 11-105 19-8 11-106 19-164 11-202 19-108 - 19-109 11-203 19-110 11-204 19-111 11-205 19-112 11-206 19-114 11-207A 19-115 11-301 19-147 11-302 19-148 11-303 19-149 11-304 19-150 11-305 19-151 11-306 19-152 11-307 19-153 11-308 19-154 11-309 19-155 11-310 19-156 11-311 19-157 11-312 19-158 11-313 19-159 11-401 19-160 11-402 19-161 11-403 19-162 11-404 19-163 11-405 13-6 - 19-165 11-501 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. VII 11-501 19-286 11-502 19-287 11-503 19-288 11-504 19-289 11-505 19-290 11-506(a) 19-291 11-506(b) 19-291 11-507 19-292 11-601 19-167 11-602 19-168 11-603 19-166 11-604-11-606 19-169 11-701 19-170 11-702 19-170 11-703 19-113 11-704 19-163 11-705 19-171 11-801 et seq. 19-145 11-801 19-176 11-801 Ch. 19, Art. XI, 
Div. 5 11-803 Ch. 19 (note) 11-803 19-145 11-804 19-146 11-806 19-727 11-901 19-176 11-902 15-45 - 19-178.5 11-1001 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. XI, 
Div. 2 11-1002 19-45 - Ch. 19, Art. IX 11-1003 13-110 - 19-546 11-1004 19-442 11-1005 19-441 11-1007 19-450 11-1101 19-443 11-1102 19-172 11-1104(a) 19-144 11-1104(b) 19-144 11-1105 19-10 11-1108 19-142 11-1109 19-143 11-1110 19-11 11-1201 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. VIII 11-1201(b) 19-321 11-1201(c) 19-321 11-1202 19-322 11-1203 19-323 11-1204 19-324 11-1205 19-325 11-1206 19-326 11-1207 19-327 11-1301 19-173 12-101 19-211 12-201 19-212 12-202 19-213 12-203 19-214 12-204 19-215 12-214 19-216 12-218 19-171 - 19-164 - 19-165 12-301(a) 19-217 12-301(c) 19-217 12-301(e) 19-217 12-303 19-218 12-401 13-6 - 19-219 12-402 19-220 12-417 19-182 12-422 19-221 15-101 Ch. 19 (note) 15-102 Ch. 19 (note) - 19-41 - 19-43 - 19-50 - 19-107 - 19-154 - Ch. 19, Art. XI, 
Div. 2 15-104 19-113 15-108 19-113 - 19-162 15-112 19-450 17-101 et seq. 19-42 101 et seq. Ch. 19 (note) 230.24 8-508 421 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. III 421(7) 8-191 752 16-222 - 19-179 756 19-179 759 19-179 901 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. IX - 19-359 1101 et seq. 19-51 - 19-450 1102 19-182 1136 19-450 12-608, 12-609 19-330 50 - Ch. 5 (note) - 5-5 - Ch. 5, Art. III - 5-82 1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. IV 1.1 20-170 41 15-5 42 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 51 21 2-181 24.3 Ch. 2, Art. V 24A.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 93 Ch. 12 (note) 52 1 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 52 137 Ch. 28 (note) 52 318.3 28-71 52 420.1 et seq. Ch. 13 (note) 52 - Ch. 13, Art. II 59 61 et seq. Ch. 15 (note) 199.1 Ch. 15 (note) 396 et seq. Ch. 15 (note) 495 19-221 990 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. V 990 8-361 1001 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. VI 1015 Ch. 7, Art. VI 1016 Ch. 7, Art. VI 1019 Ch. 7, Art. VI 1020 Ch. 7, Art. VI 1301-1340 12-68 1301 12-68 1332 12-68 1501 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 1680 et seq. 7-129 1693 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. III 1696 7-126 - 7-129 - 7-160 1800.1 et seq. 8-32 - 8-36 1800.2 et seq. 8-31 1850.2 et seq. 7-296 1850.11 7-298 2000 et seq. 22-206 60 18-863 22-648 176-180 2-248 651 et seq. 17-33 61 101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 61 119.1 2-99 62 310.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 348.1 2-236 - 2-240 361 et seq. 2-241 431 et seq. 2-236 471 et seq. 2-236 472 2-237 - 2-238 475 2-237 516.5 2-233 - 2-281 541 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 - 2-236 551 et seq. 2-181 - 2-236 551 2-237 562 2-236 851 et seq. 22-54 852 22-54 853(9) 22-57 858(D) 22-55 862 22-54 63 1-101 et seq. 15-1 1-102 1-2 1-209 15-1 1-301 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) - Ch. 15 (note) 1-319 10-10 - 10-12 1-501 et seq. Ch. 15 (note) 1-508 Ch. 5 (note) - Ch. 5, Art. III, Div. 3 1-517 et seq. Ch. 15 (note) 1-1011 et seq. 15-1 1-1011 20-202 1-1013 et seq. Ch. 21 (note) 1-1101 et seq. Ch. 15 (note) 1-1902 22-206 1-2511 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II 91 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 127 et seq. Ch. 13 (note) - Ch. 13, Art. II 142 et seq. 28-195 330.90 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II 683.3 19-2 683.4 11-27 683.11 11-28 - 11-31 946 10-12 1051 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. IX 2451 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II 4002 et seq. 16-217 4200 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II, Div. 6 - 16-220 4214 16-217 65 1-101 et seq. 2-3 4-103 et seq. 2-3 66 63 Ch. 19, Art. X 201 et seq. Ch. 19, Art. X 67 203 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 68 202(d)-(i) 2-401 205 25-36 - 25-163 - 25-240 217 25-126 - 25-198 220 25-127 227 25-71 - 25-199 - 25-200 1350 et seq. Ch. 25, Art. II 1352 25-27 1355 et seq. Ch. 25, Art. II, Div. 3 1358(A) 25-98 1358(A)(6) 25-99 1360 25-97 1361 25-69 1362 25-70 1369 25-127 1401 et seq. Ch. 25, Art. III - 25-157 1408 25-196 1511 Ch. 8 (note) 1621 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. IV 2601 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 2701 et seq. Ch. 25 (note) 2701 Ch. 25, Art. IV 2704 25-281 69 303 Ch. 24 (note) 317 Ch. 24 (note) 611 Ch. 24 (note) 612 Ch. 24 (note) 648 Ch. 24 (note) 1208 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. VI 70 24-115 Ch. 7, Art. XIV 628.9 13-68 72 1 et seq. 8-193 74 85.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 324.11 Ch. 7 (note) 951 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2 75 309-317 12-26 76 23 26-61 82 1601 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 1601-1618 14-67 1618 Ch. 14 (note) 85 24.1 2-181  
