7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 1/269
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
SKIATOOK CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Skiatook. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the SKIATOOK MUNICIPAL CODE and is hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be
supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal documents. (1991 Code § 1-102; amd. 2011
Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the state as
the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (2011 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place
in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code. (2011 Code)
1-1-4: JURISDICTION:
A. All provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city are extended to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside the
corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein.
B. Any word in any such provision indicating that its effect is limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also such
outlying real property belonging to or under the control of the city. (1991 Code § 1-103)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council. (2011 Code; amd. Ord.
2013-3, 2-12-2013)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
A. All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
1. Ordinances promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the
city's indebtedness.
2. Any appropriation ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or prescribing salaries for city officers.
3. Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations.
4. Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations.
5. Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants, or accepting the beneficial interest in any
trust.
6. Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 2/269
7. Improvement ordinances.
8. Bond ordinances.
9. Ordinances relating to elections.
10. Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city.
11. All special ordinances.
B. All such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if fully set out herein. (1991 Code § 1-104; amd. 2011 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section 1-2-1 of this chapter, except as this code may contain provisions for such matters, in
which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2011 Code)
1-2-3: EFFECT OF REPEAL; COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Reviving Prior Ordinances: The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
B. Offenses: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.
C. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
D. Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued
or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the effective date hereof. (2011 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or any
codes or portions of codes adopted herein, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or any
codes or portions of codes adopted herein. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1991 Code § 1-107; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS; INTERPRETATIONS:
A. Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried out.
B. Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the
day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
not be counted.
D. Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 3/269
E. Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
F. Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
G. May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
H. Or; And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
I. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
such meaning.
J. Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
Words used in the plural number may also include the singular unless a contrary intention plainly appears.
K. Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the city of Skiatook".
L. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
M. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to city ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1991 Code § 1-106; amd. 2011 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Skiatook, counties of Tulsa and Osage, state of Oklahoma.
CODE: This code of the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
COUNCIL OR CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
COUNTY OR COUNTIES: The county of Tulsa and/or the county of Osage, either or both, as may be applicable.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year shall begin July 1 and end June 30 of the following year.
LAW: Includes applicable federal law, provisions of the constitution and statutes of the state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city and, when
appropriate, any and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OS: Oklahoma Statutes, as amended.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to an actual person, any persons and to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and
corporate, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them, unless a contrary intention plainly appears.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 4/269
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE OR THE STATE: The state of Oklahoma.
STATUTORY REFERENCES: References to statutes of the state of Oklahoma as they now are or as they may be amended.
STREET: Streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, highways, courts, places, squares, curbs and all other public ways in the city which
are dedicated and open to public use.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
WEEK: Seven (7) days.
WHOLESALER, WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or
things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by
such person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1991 Code §§ 1-108, 1-109; amd. 2011 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1991 Code § 1-101; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Penalties Imposed: Except as provided by State law or otherwise in this Code, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City an act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not exceeding the following: (2011 Code)
1. Traffic: The maximum fine for traffic-related offenses relating to speeding or parking shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or sixty (60)
days in jail, and court costs and fees as set by the City and/or required by State law.
2. Other Offenses: The maximum fine for all other offenses shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and/or sixty (60) days in jail and court
costs and fees as set by the City and/or required by State law. (Ord. 2017-05, 10-10-2017, eff. 11-1-2017)
B. Aiding Or Abetting: Any person who shall aid, abet or assist in the violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this section.
C. Each Day A Separate Offense: Each day or any portion of a day during which any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (2011 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each
and every separate section.
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this
Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 5/269
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2011 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2011 Code)
Chapter 5
CITY COUNCIL
1-5-1: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The form of government of the incorporated city of Skiatook shall be that known as the statutory council-manager form of city government. The governing
body of the city shall consist of one council member from each ward of the city and one council member at large. All council members shall be elected at
large by the registered voters of the city. (Ord. 2012-15, 12-27-2012)
1-5-2: COMPENSATION; EXPENSES:
A. Compensation For Services: Members of the city council of the city of Skiatook shall receive as compensation for their services the sum of six thousand
dollars ($6,000.00) per year, payable monthly at the rate of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month.
B. Other Compensation; Reimbursement Of Expenses: The city may also pay during the term of office of council members any increases in payroll taxes,
such as FICA, unemployment, medicare and other similar taxes mandated by taxing authorities. Council members shall receive no other compensation
or benefits from the city except as provided in this section. They may, however, be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred by them which arise out of
and in the course of their service for which proper authentication is provided. (Ord. 2013-2, 2-12-2013)
1-5-3: POWERS VESTED IN COUNCIL, DESIGNATED POWERS:
A. All powers of a statutory council-manager city, including the determination of matters of policy, shall be vested in the council. Without limitation of the
foregoing, the council may:
1. Appoint and remove the city manager as provided by law;
2. Enact municipal legislation subject to limitations as may now or hereafter be imposed by the Oklahoma constitution and law;
3. Raise revenue, make appropriations, regulate salaries and wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the city, subject to such limitations as may now or
hereafter be imposed by the Oklahoma constitution and law;
4. Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city, and investigate municipal affairs, or authorize and provide for such inquiries;
5. Appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, members of commissions and boards and other quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial officers as
provided by law, or prescribe the method of appointing or electing and removing them;
6. Create, change and abolish offices, departments and agencies other than those established by law, and assign additional functions and duties to
offices, departments and agencies established by this code; and
7. Grant pardons for violations of municipal ordinances, including the remission of fines and costs, upon the recommendation of the municipal judge.
(Ord. 2013-15, 7-30-2013)
Chapter 6
PERSONNEL REGULATIONS AND BENEFITS
1-6-1: PERSONNEL REGULATIONS:
A. Increase Or Decrease In Salary And Expenses: In no case shall the expense or salary of any council member or elected official be increased or
decreased after the election or appointment of such official or during his term of office as a full time employee. (1991 Code § 1-126; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Discrimination1: Employees shall be hired by the city without regard to sex, color, race, creed, or age, except as hereinafter set forth; provided,
however, that sex may be considered in the hiring of employees when there exists a very real substantial and rational relationship between the job to
be performed and the ability or propriety of either sex to perform it. (1991 Code § 1-949; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
C. Mandatory Retirement: All employees of the city, excepting only those holding elected offices, shall retire upon the last day of the month in which they
attain their seventieth birthday, or such time as may be further addressed by the applicable state or federal guidelines. Retirement at such age shall be
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 6/269
mandatory. This mandatory retirement shall not, however, apply to persons occupying elected positions. (1991 Code § 1-951; amd. 2011 Code; Ord.
2016-8, 8-9-2016)
D. Jury Duty: Whenever any employee or officer of the city is duly summoned to serve as a juror on a jury in any court of this state or any municipality,
whether grand or petty, the wages which such employee would have received in his employment with the city had he not been summoned to jury duty
shall be paid during the time such employee is serving as a juror, less, however, the per diem compensation which such employee receives for his
service as a juror. (1991 Code § 1-952; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
E. Grievance Procedure: Any grievances which an employee of the city may have shall be first presented to the head of the department to which such
employee is assigned; and if satisfaction is not there obtained, such grievances shall be brought by such employee before the city council by a written
statement of the same; and such employee shall be entitled to appear before the city council and present whatever evidence he may have concerning
such grievances. (1991 Code § 1-953; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
F. Social Security:
1. Acceptance Of Federal Program: It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to the employees and
officials thereof, not excluded by law or ordinance, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of
the system of federal old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act, and amendments thereto, including Pub.L.
734, 81st congress. In pursuance of said policy and for that purpose, the city shall take such actions as may be required by applicable state or
federal laws or regulations. (1991 Code § 1-1076; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
2. Agreements: The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state department
of public welfare, as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in subsection F1 of this section. (1991 Code § 1-
1077; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
3. Withholding Wages: Withholding from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in subsection F1 of this section is
hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be
paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or regulations. (1991 Code § 1-1078; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
4. Appropriations: There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws
or regulations for employer contributions, which shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws or regulations. (1991 Code
§ 1-1079; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
5. Records And Reports: The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(1991 Code § 1-1080; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
6. Exclusions:
a. There is hereby excluded from this subsection any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now
covered or authorized to be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city.
b. There is hereby excluded from this subsection any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official,
compensation for which is on a fee basis, or any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal
laws or regulations.
c. There is hereby excluded from this subsection any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee or official not on a
monthly salary basis whose employment shall be considered part time.
d. There is hereby excluded from this subsection any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, employee or official whose
employment shall be of an emergency nature. (1991 Code § 1-1081; amd. Ord. 2016-8, 8-9-2016)
1-6-2: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
CITY: The incorporated city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise referenced, means the city council of the incorporated city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
EMPLOYEE: A person regularly employed by the city working not less than thirty six (36) hours weekly, any elected or appointed official, council
member, independent contractors who perform substantial services for the city on a continuing basis for whom the city council elects to provide such
coverage, whether such person is engaged in a governmental or nongovernmental function of the city.
INSURANCE: Any hospital and medical benefits, accident, health or life insurance or any of the aforesaid issued by any company authorized to do
business in Oklahoma.
RETIREMENT FUND: A fund or system for employees not otherwise provided for by a pension or retirement system for the purpose of conferring
delayed compensation and retirement allowances and other benefits for employees and surviving spouses and children in order to encourage
continuous and meritorious service on the part of employees and to thereby promote efficiency. (1991 Code § 1-3051)
B. Insurance: Pursuant to the provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 23-108, medical and life insurance in a form and substance acceptable to the
city council may be provided for all employees, and others, including independent contractors, performing substantial and recurring services for the city,
for whom the city council directs coverage, whether those officers or employees are engaged in a governmental or nongovernmental function of the
city. (1991 Code § 1-3052; amd. 2011 Code; per correspondence dated 4-23-2014)
1-6-3: RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 7/269
A. Employee Retirement System: There is hereby adopted by reference, as though set forth herein in its entirety, an employee retirement system. A copy
of said retirement system provisions, and amending ordinances, shall be and remain on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.
(2011 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. Firefighters Pension And Retirement System: The fire department of the city shall be subject to all of the provisions of the Oklahoma state firefighters
pension and retirement system act2, all of the provisions of which are hereby accepted by the city for the use and benefit of its fire department, which
shall also be subject to all of the obligations thereunder.
C. Police Pension And Retirement System: The police department of the city shall be subject to all of the provisions of the Oklahoma state police pension
and retirement system act3, all of the provisions of which are hereby accepted by the city for the use and benefit of its police department, which shall
also be subject to all of the obligations thereunder. (2011 Code)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE A. CITY MANAGER
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS:
A. The council shall appoint a city manager by a vote of a majority of all its members subject to the terms of employment established by the council. It shall
choose the city manager solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to the actual experience in, or the
knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. At the time of appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the city or
state; but during the tenure of holding office the city manager shall reside within the boundaries of the city, the school district or districts that overlap the
city boundaries, or within ten (10) miles of the city or school district. Neither the mayor nor any members of the city council may be appointed city
manager during the term for which they shall have been elected nor within two (2) years after they cease to hold such office. (Ord. 2013-16, 8-27-2013)
1-7A-2: SUSPENSION OF CITY MANAGER:
The city council may suspend or remove the city manager at any time by a vote of a majority of all of the members of the city council, unless other terms
are approved through written agreement by the city council. (Ord. 2013-16, 8-27-2013)
1-7A-3: DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER:
A. The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and
administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible therefor to the council. He shall:
1. Appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, remove, demote, lay off or suspend all heads of administrative departments and other
administrative officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by law. The manager or the council by ordinance may authorize the
head of a department, office or agency to appoint and remove the subordinates in such department, office or agency;
2. Supervise and control all administrative departments, officers and agencies;
3. Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect; and
recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
4. Submit to the council a report after the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
5. Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make recommendations as he deems desirable; and
6. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance. (Ord. 2013-16, 8-27-2013)
1-7A-4: LIMITATION OF AUTHORITY:
The city manager shall act within the authority granted by the city council or as set forth in state law, and any action taken by the city manager which has
not been duly authorized shall be deemed to be a recommendation for action to the city council, who may approve, disapprove or ratify any action taken by
the city manager or any such recommendation. (Ord. 2013-16, 8-27-2013)
1-7A-5: CONTRACTS:
The city manager may contract and pay for all supplies, materials, equipment or services necessary for offices, departments and agencies of the city,
including municipally owned utilities, within the spending limitation or other authority as set by the city council, and pursuant to law or ordinance. The city
manager may also transfer between offices and departments, funds and personnel, and may sell surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment,
subject to law and the regulations promulgated by the city council by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 2013-16, 8-27-2013)
ARTICLE B. CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 8/269
1-7B-1: CITY CLERK:
The city clerk shall be an officer of the city, appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and removable by the city manager. The city clerk shall
serve as clerk for the city council. (Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
1-7B-2: DUTIES OF CITY CLERK:
Subject to regulations the council may prescribe, the city clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of the council; enroll all ordinances and resolutions
passed by the council in a book or set of books kept for that purpose; have custody of documents, records and archives, as may be provided for by law or
by ordinance; attest and affix the seal of the city to documents as required by law or ordinance, and have such other powers, duties, and functions related
to statutory duties of the office as may be prescribed by law or ordinance. In addition, the person who serves as city clerk may be employed by the city to
perform duties not related to the position of city clerk. The salary, if any, for said duties shall be provided for separately by ordinance. (Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
1-7B-3: SAME PERSON MAY HOLD BOTH OFFICES:
The same person may hold the office of city clerk and the office of city treasurer at the same time, as provided by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 10-118.
The city council may appoint as city treasurer the same person appointed by the city manager as city clerk, and vice versa. When one person is serving in
both offices simultaneously, the positions shall be referred to as the combined office of the city clerk-treasurer. (Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
1-7B-4: CITY TREASURER:
The city treasurer shall be an officer of the city, appointed by the city council for an indefinite term. (Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
1-7B-5: DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER:
The city treasurer shall deposit daily all funds received for the city in such depositories as the city council may designate, and shall disburse such funds in
the manner provided by applicable law, ordinance or resolution. The city treasurer shall have such other powers, duties and functions related to statutory
duties of the office as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance. The person who serves as city treasurer may be employed by the city to perform duties
not related to the position of city treasurer. The salary, if any, for said duties shall be provided for separately by ordinance. (Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT, DUTIES AND COMPENSATION:
The city attorney is appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and is removable by the city manager. The city attorney is an officer of the city.
The city attorney is the chief legal advisor of the city council and all other officers, departments, and agencies of the city government in matters relating to
their official powers and duties. He represents the city in proceedings in the courts, and performs all services incident to his position which may be required
by law or ordinance. He may attend regular meetings of the city council and prepare ordinances. He shall receive compensation as set by the council, and,
in addition thereto, receive reasonable fees for representing the city in lawsuits or controversies to which the city is a party, whether tried, settled or
otherwise. He may provide other special services as requested by the council or city manager. When duly authorized by the council or city manager, he
shall receive a reasonable fee for such special services. (Ord. 2013-19, 9-24-2013)
1-7C-2: OTHER ATTORNEYS:
For cases appealed from the police court or municipal court to the county or district court, or from the county or district court to the supreme court, or for
any other case, lawsuit or claim, the city may employ outside counsel to cooperate with the city attorney; provided, that no counsel shall be employed
unless approved by the city council. (Ord. 2013-19, 9-24-2013)
Chapter 8
ELECTIONS
1-8-1: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES:
A. Wards Designated And Described: The city shall be divided into six (6) wards, as follows:
1. Ward 1: Ward 1 shall consist of that area and portion of the city of Skiatook within the following boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of North Cincinnati Avenue and East Oak Street, thence south along the centerline of North Cincinnati Avenue
approximately 507 feet to the corporate limit boundary, thence east approximately 579 feet, thence south approximately 304 feet, thence west
approximately 577 feet to the centerline of North Cincinnati Avenue, thence south along the centerline of North Cincinnati Avenue approximately
4,306 feet to the corporate limit boundary, thence west along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,316 feet, thence south approximately 662
feet, thence west approximately 1,319 feet, thence south approximately 271 feet, thence west approximately 287 feet to the centerline of North
Osage Drive, thence north along the centerline of North Osage Drive to the centerline of West Beech Street, thence west along the centerline of
West Beech Street to the centerline of South Russell Street, thence north along South Russell Street to the centerline of West Oak Street, thence
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 9/269
east along the centerline of West Oak Street to the centerline of South Javine Street, thence north along the centerline of South Javine Street to the
centerline of West Maple Street, thence east along the centerline of West Maple Street to the centerline of South E Street, thence south along the
centerline of South E Street to the centerline of East Oak Street thence east along the centerline of East Oak Street to the centerline of North
Cincinnati Avenue said point also being the point of beginning.
And Ward 1 shall consist of a parcel of land within Section 35, Township 22 North, Range 12 East that is a part of Skiatook Corporate Limits located
approximately 825 feet south of the intersection of North Osage Drive and West 133rd Street North.
2. Ward 2: Ward 2 shall consist of that area and portion of the city of Skiatook within the following boundaries:
Beginning at a point of West Oak Street and South Russell Street, thence south along the centerline of South Russell Street to the centerline of East
Beech Street, thence east along the centerline of East Beech Street to the centerline of South Osage Avenue, thence south along the centerline of
South Osage Avenue to the centerline of West 133rd Street North, thence west along the centerline of West 133rd Street North to approximately 51
feet east of the centerline of South Lombard Lane, also being the corporate limit boundary, thence north along the corporate limit boundary
approximately 2,608 feet, thence west continuing along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,328 feet, thence south approximately 5,212
feet, thence west approximately 1,329 feet, thence south approximately 1,301 feet, thence west approximately 1,327 feet, thence north
approximately 3,908 feet, thence east approximately 989 feet, thence south approximately 1,319 feet, thence east approximately 335 feet, thence
north approximately 1,322 feet, thence east approximately 809 feet, thence north approximately 781 feet, thence west approximately 800 feet,
thence north still continuing along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,825 feet, thence east approximately 1,264 feet, thence north
approximately 653 feet, thence east approximately 133 feet, thence north approximately 142 feet, thence east approximately 122 feet, thence north
approximately 770 feet, thence west approximately 521 feet, thence north approximately 1,048 feet to the centerline of West Oak Street, thence east
along the centerline of West Oak Street to the centerline of South Russell Street said point also being the point of beginning.
Thence together with the strip of land generally 70 feet wide and commonly referred to as the Skiatook fence line and any other lands within the
corporate limits of the city of Skiatook attached thereto in Osage County.
Township 22 North, Range 12 East,
Section 34 and
Township 21 North, Range 12 East,
Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and
Township 21 North, Range 11 East,
Sections 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and
Township 21 North, Range 10 East,
Sections 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and
Township 22 North, Range 10 East,
Sections 6, 7, 18, 19, 30, 31 and
Township 23 North, Range 10 East,
Sections 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 and
Township 23 North, Range 11 East,
Sections 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and
Township 23 North, Range 12 East,
Sections 27, 28, 29, 30, 34
3. Ward 3: Ward 3 shall consist of that area and portion of the city of Skiatook within the following boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of Country Road and North Lenapah Avenue, thence east along the centerline of Country Road to the centerline of
North Choctaw Road, thence south along the centerline of North Choctaw Road to the centerline of Rogers Boulevard, thence east along the
centerline of Rogers Boulevard to the centerline of South Hominy Avenue, thence south along the centerline of South Hominy Avenue to the
centerline of West 4th Street, thence east along the centerline of West 4th Street to the centerline of South Hominy Avenue, thence south along the
centerline of South Hominy Avenue to the centerline of Elm Street, thence west along the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of Hominy
Avenue, thence southeast along the centerline of Hominy Avenue, thence east approximately 62 feet, thence south approximately 350 feet to the
centerline of West Oak Street, thence west along the centerline of West Oak Street approximately 852 feet, thence south along the corporate limit
boundary approximately 2,625 feet, thence west continuing along the corporate limit boundary approximately 2,656 feet, thence north approximately
491 feet, thence northeast approximately 525 feet, thence north approximately 784 feet, thence west approximately 35 feet, thence north
approximately 492 feet, thence west approximately 441 feet, thence north approximately 654 feet to the centerline of West Oak Street, thence west
along the centerline of West Oak Street approximately 1,323 feet, thence north approximately 654 feet, thence west along the corporate limit
boundary approximately 661 feet, thence south approximately 641 feet to the centerline of West Oak Street, thence west along the centerline of
West Oak Street approximately 635 feet, thence north along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,968 feet, thence west approximately 659
feet to the centerline of 46th West Avenue thence north along the centerline of 46th West Avenue approximately 602 feet to the corporate limit
boundary, thence east along the corporate limit boundary approximately 3,310 feet to the centerline of North Lenapah Avenue, thence north along
the centerline of North Lenapah Avenue to the centerline of Rogers Boulevard, thence west along the centerline of Rogers Boulevard to the
centerline of Supernaw Street, thence north along the centerline of Supernaw Street to the centerline of West Red Corn Drive, thence east along the
centerline of West Red Corn Drive to the centerline of North Wildhorse Street, thence north along the centerline of North Wildhorse Street to the
centerline of West Redeagle Drive, thence east along the centerline of West Redeagle Drive to the centerline of North Lenapah Avenue, thence north
along the centerline of North Lenapah Avenue to the centerline of Country Road said point being the point of beginning.
4. Ward 4: Ward 4 shall consist of that area and portion of the city of Skiatook within the following boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of North Cincinnati Avenue and East Oak Street, thence west along the centerline of East Oak Street to the centerline
of South E Street, thence north along the centerline of South E Street to the centerline of East Maple Street, thence west along the centerline of East
Maple Street to the centerline of South Javine Street thence south along the centerline of South Javine Street to the centerline of West Oak Street
thence west along the centerline of West Oak Street to the centerline of South John Zink Street, thence north along the centerline of South John Zink
Street to the centerline of State Highway 20, thence east along the along the centerline of State Highway 20 to centerline of North Osage Street,
thence north along the centerline of North Osage Street to the centerline of East 2nd Street, thence east along the centerline of East 2nd Street to
the centerline of North C Street, thence north approximately 777 feet along the centerline of North C Street to the corporate limit boundary, thence
east approximately 60 feet, thence south approximately 852 feet, thence east approximately 1,316 feet, thence south approximately 54 feet, thence
east approximately 194 feet, thence south approximately 222 feet, thence west approximately 198 feet to the centerline of State Highway 11/North
Cincinnati Avenue, thence south approximately 1,049 feet to the centerline of East 5th Street and the corporate limit boundary, thence east
continuing to follow the corporate limit boundary to include other lands within the corporate limits in the following sections, Section 4, 5, 8, 9, 16, 19,
20, 21, 28, 29, 30, 32, and 33 of Township 22 North, Range 13 East, and Section 5 Township 21 North Range 13 East, and Section 25 of Township
22 North Range 12 East.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 10/269
Thence together with the strip of land generally 70 feet wide and commonly referred to as the Skiatook fence line and any other lands within the
corporate limits of the city of Skiatook in Tulsa County attached thereto described as follows:
Township 22 North, Range 13 East,
Sections 4, 5, 6, and
Township 22 North, Range 12 East,
Sections 1, 2 and
Township 21 North, Range 13 East,
Sections 5, 6 and
Township 21 North, Range 12 East,
Section 1
5. Ward 5: Ward 5 shall consist of that area and portion of the city of Skiatook within the following boundaries:
Beginning at the intersection of West Country Road and Lenapah Street, thence south along the centerline of Lenapah Street to the centerline of
West Redeagle Drive, thence west along the centerline of West Redeagle Drive to the centerline of North Wildhorse Street, thence south along the
centerline of North Wildhorse Street to the centerline of West Red Corn Drive, thence west along the centerline of West Red Corn Drive to the
centerline of Supernaw Street, thence south along the centerline of Supernaw Street to the centerline of Rogers Boulevard, thence west along the
centerline of Rogers Boulevard approximately 2,728 feet, thence north following the corporate limit boundary approximately 447 feet, thence west
along the corporate limit boundary approximately 98 feet, thence south along the corporate limit boundary approximately 447 feet, thence continuing
west along Rogers Boulevard and the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,503 feet, thence south along the corporate limit boundary
approximately 64 feet, thence east along the corporate limit boundary approximately 3,228 to the centerline of 46th West Avenue, thence south
along the centerline of 46th West Avenue to the centerline of West 145th Street North, thence west along the centerline of West 145th Street North to
the centerline of North 50th West Avenue, thence south along the centerline of North 50th West Avenue approximately 982 feet, thence east
following the corporate limit boundary approximately 657 feet, thence south following the corporate limit boundary approximately 327 feet to the
centerline of West 144th Place North, thence west along the centerline of West 144th Place North approximately 325 feet to the corporate limit
boundary thence south along said boundary approximately 655 feet to the centerline of West Oak Street, thence west along the centerline of West
Oak Street approximately 1,652 feet, thence north along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,312 feet, thence west following the corporate
limit boundary approximately 660 feet, thence north continuing along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,803 feet, thence west and south
along the corporate limit boundary approximately 12,862 feet, thence west approximately 857 feet, thence north and east continuing along the
corporate limit boundary approximately 13,150 feet, thence north along the corporate limit boundary approximately 589 feet, thence east along the
corporate limit boundary approximately 731 feet, thence north approximately 251 feet, thence east approximately 588 feet to the centerline of North
52nd West Avenue, thence north along the centerline of West 52nd West Avenue to the centerline of West Country Road, thence east along the
centerline of West County Road and the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,324 feet, thence south along the corporate limit boundary
approximately 2,574 feet, thence east along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,321 feet, thence north along the corporate limit boundary
approximately 5,254 feet, thence east along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,326 feet, thence south continuing along the corporate limit
boundary approximately 1,768 feet, thence east approximately 497 feet, thence south approximately 215 feet, thence east again approximately 490
feet, thence south along the corporate limit boundary approximately 663 feet to the centerline of West Country Road, thence east along the
centerline of West County Road to the centerline of Lenapah Street said point also being the point of beginning.
6. Ward 6: Ward 6 shall consist of that area and portion of the city of Skiatook within the following boundaries:
Beginning at a point being the intersection of West Country Road and North Choctaw Road, thence north along the centerline of North Choctaw
Road approximately 825 feet to the corporate limit boundary, thence east along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,579 feet, thence south
approximately 158 feet, thence east approximately 439 feet, thence north along the corporate limit boundary approximately 329 feet, thence east
approximately 819 feet, thence north approximately 332 feet, thence east approximately 514 feet to the centerline of North Lombard Lane, thence
south along the centerline of North Lombard Lane approximately 2,072 feet to the corporate limit boundary, thence east approximately 289 feet,
thence north approximately 37 feet, thence east approximately 1,541 feet to the centerline of North John Zink Street, thence south along the
centerline of North John Zink Street approximately 669 feet to the corporate limit boundary, thence east approximately 591 feet, thence north
approximately 61 feet, thence east continuing along the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,083 feet, thence south approximately 84 feet,
thence east approximately 300 feet, thence south approximately 139 feet to the centerline of East Cherokee Street and the corporate limit boundary,
thence east along the centerline of East Cherokee Street and the corporate limit boundary approximately 1,228 feet to the centerline of North C
Street, thence south along the centerline of North C Street to the centerline of East 2nd Street, thence west along the centerline of East 2nd Street to
the centerline of North Osage Street, thence south along the centerline of North Osage Street to the centerline of Rogers Boulevard, thence west
along the centerline of Rogers Boulevard to the centerline of John Zink Street, thence south along the centerline of John Zink Street to the centerline
of West Oak Street, thence west along the centerline of West Oak Street approximately 3,569 feet, thence north approximately 350 feet, thence west
approximately 62 feet to the centerline of Hominy Avenue, thence northwest along the centerline of Hominy Avenue to the centerline of Elm Street,
thence east along the centerline of Elm Street to the centerline of South Hominy Avenue, thence north along the centerline of South Hominy Avenue
to the centerline of West 4th Street, thence west along the centerline of West 4th Street to the centerline of South Hominy Avenue, thence north
along the centerline of South Hominy Avenue to the centerline of Rogers Boulevard, thence west along the centerline of Rogers Boulevard to the
centerline of North Choctaw Road, thence north along the centerline of North Choctaw Road to the centerline of West Country Road, said point also
being the point of beginning.
(Ord. 2013-1, 1-8-2013)
B. Annexations Added To Appropriate Ward: In the event that additional areas shall hereafter be annexed to the city, or, in any other manner authorized by
law, become a part of the corporate limits of the city, the areas so annexed shall become a portion of that ward to which the greater portion of the
annexed area is adjacent. (1991 Code § 22-7)
C. Public Notice Required: At least thirty (30) days' notice shall be given of the proposal to change the boundaries and number of wards. Such notice shall
be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. After such notice, the city council may make the proposed changes by
ordinance which must be approved by two-thirds (2/3) vote of its members. (1991 Code § 22-8)
Chapter 9
EQUAL ACCESS TO PROGRAMS, EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
1-9-1: EQUAL ACCESS TO PROGRAMS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 11/269
A. City Policy: It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that no otherwise qualified individual with a disability, as defined by 42 USC section 12111,
shall, solely by reason of his disability, be denied admission or access to, or treatment or involvement in programs and activities of the city.
B. Filing Of Grievance: Any individual who believes himself aggrieved by a violation of this section may file a grievance with the city manager or his
designee within thirty (30) days after the occurrence giving rise to the grievance. The person to whom the grievance is submitted shall review the
grievance, conduct an investigation of the claims made therein, and render a written decision within five (5) days of the conclusion of the investigation.
Such review may include an administrative hearing between the person or agency filing the grievance, and the person or agency alleged to be the
cause of the grievance, during which time both parties shall be allowed to testify, call witnesses, or present other evidence; and both parties shall be
entitled to notice of the actual issues to be discussed in advance of the hearing. (Ord. 96-24, 11-12-1996)
1-9-2: ELIGIBILITY FOR EMPLOYMENT:
A. Recruitment; Basis For Eligibility: The city shall utilize whatever recruitment programs are deemed necessary to seek out and secure the most qualified
individuals to fill positions available within the city. Eligibility will be based on merit and fitness, and qualifications established for the particular position
that is open.
B. Discrimination Prohibited: No person shall be favored or discriminated against because of age, race, sex, political or religious affiliations, national origin
or ancestry in any manner involving employment, including job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee
compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment.
C. Discrimination Against Disabled Persons; Exceptions: No otherwise qualified disabled individual shall, solely by reason of his disability, be discriminated
against in any manner involving employment. As used herein, "employment" includes recruitment, appointment, layoff, termination, promotion,
demotion, transfer, compensation, training, selection for training, or any other term, condition or provision of employment. As used herein, the term
"disability" shall have the same meaning as in 42 USC subsections 12111(8), (9) and (10); and by this reference the standards set forth therein are
incorporated within this chapter. However, excluded from the term is any individual who is an alcoholic or drug user whose current use of alcohol or
drugs prevents the individual from performing the duties of the job in question, or whose employment, by reason of such alcohol or drug abuse, would
constitute a direct threat to the property or the safety of others. (Ord. 96-24, 11-12-1996)
1-9-3: CIVIL ACTION AGAINST CITY:
This chapter shall not be construed to create any civil action against the city not authorized by the equal opportunity for individuals with disabilities act of
the United States, as set forth in 42 USC section 12111 and the following sections of that act. (Ord. 96-24, 11-12-1996)
Chapter 10
MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
1-10-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
A. Seal Established; Custody: There is hereby created and adopted a corporate seal for the incorporated city of Skiatook; said seal shall at all times be in
the custody of the city clerk and shall be used by him to authenticate all papers and documents requiring a seal. (1991 Code § 1-801; amd. Ord. 2013-
3, 2-12-2013)
B. Description: Said seal shall have the word "Seal" in the center and the words "The Incorporated City of Skiatook, Oklahoma", around the margin. (1991
Code § 1-801)
Chapter 11
MUNICIPAL COURT
1-11-1: CREATION AND ORGANIZATION OF COURT:
A. Creation: Pursuant to the authority conferred upon the city by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 27-101 et seq., and pursuant to the resolution heretofore
made by the city council finding that the efficient disposition of cases involving violation of municipal ordinances necessitates putting this court into
operation, there is hereby created the municipal court of the incorporated city of Skiatook in Tulsa and Osage Counties, state of Oklahoma, which shall
be a court not of record; and this chapter shall govern the operation, organization and procedure of such court. (1991 Code § 12-1; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Resolution Of City Council: The city council hereby resolves and determines that the efficient disposition of cases involving the violation of municipal
ordinances necessitates putting into operation the municipal court of the city. The city council hereby directs the city clerk to cause to be filed certified
copies of such resolution to be filed in the offices, respectively, of the county clerks of Tulsa and Osage Counties and the clerk of the supreme court of
the state of Oklahoma, which shall be subject to judicial notice in all courts of this state. (1991 Code § 12-2; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
1-11-2: JURISDICTION:
The municipal court of the city shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of the city is
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 12/269
charged. (1991 Code § 12-3)
1-11-3: MUNICIPAL JUDGES:
A. Appointment; Qualifications; Term; Compensation:
1. There shall be one judge for the municipal court. The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city
council. (1991 Code § 12-4)
2. The judge of the municipal court shall be licensed to practice law in the state of Oklahoma. He shall serve for a term of two (2) years, said term
expiring on the last day of the last month of odd numbered years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the
vote of a majority of all members of the city council for such cause as is provided for by the law of the state of Oklahoma for the removal of public
officers. Any appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the unexpired term. Nothing in the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to prevent the
judge from engaging in the practice of law in any other court during his tenure of office. The judge shall be paid in the same manner as other
municipal officials. (1991 Code § 12-4; amd. 2011 Code)
3. The mayor, with the consent of the city council, may appoint as judge:
a. An attorney licensed to practice law in Oklahoma, who resides in the county in which the city is located or in an adjacent county; or
b. An attorney licensed to practice law in Oklahoma, who maintains a permanent office in the city; or
c. In the event no person is willing to serve who meets the qualifications of subsection A3a or A3b of this section, any suitable person residing in the
city or within twenty (20) miles of the boundaries of the city.
4. The mayor may be designated as judge of the municipal court upon approval by the city council.
5. In the event the population of the city shall, after the effective date hereof, equal or exceed seven thousand five hundred (7,500), the judge shall be
licensed to practice law in the state of Oklahoma; provided, that in such case if no attorney licensed to practice law in Oklahoma resides in the
county or in an adjacent county in which the city is located, who is at the time of appointment willing to accept the appointment as judge, the mayor,
with the consent of the city council, may appoint any suitable and proper person as judge.
6. If the judge of the municipal court is not a licensed attorney, the trial shall be to the court, and the court may not impose a fine of more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and may not order the defendant imprisoned except for the nonpayment of fines or costs, or both. (1991 Code § 12-4)
B. Change Of Venue Prohibited; Disqualification Of Judge: No change of venue shall be allowed from the municipal court, but the judge of the municipal
court may be disqualified under the same terms and conditions as are now provided by law for courts of record, and in case of such disqualification, a
special judge shall be appointed as provided in subsection A of this section. (1991 Code § 12-5)
C. Acting Or Alternate Judge; Compensation:
1. In the event of disqualification of the judge in a particular case, or his absence or inability to act, the mayor may appoint some person, qualified as
provided in subsection A of this section, as acting municipal judge of the court in the place of the judge during his absence or inability to act or in a
case wherein the judge is disqualified; or, in its discretion, the city council may hereafter by resolution designate an alternate judge of the court, in the
same manner and for the same term as the judge and possessing the qualifications prescribed by subsection A of this section, who shall sit as acting
judge of the court in case of the absence, inability or disqualification of the judge. However, if the office of alternate judge has not been created by
resolution of the city council, a special judge shall, in such event, be selected. If both the judge and the alternate judge, if one has been designated,
are unable to sit, the mayor may appoint an acting judge as provided in this section. The city council, by ordinance, shall provide for the
compensation of an acting judge of the court. (1991 Code § 12-6)
2. An acting judge or alternate judge of the municipal court shall be paid the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each day devoted to the
performance of court duties, except that, for any month, the total payments so calculated for an acting judge and/or alternate judge shall not exceed
the salary of the municipal judge. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
D. Vacancies In Office: Vacancies in the office of the judge of any municipal court shall be filled in the same manner as provided for the appointment of the
judge in the first instance. (1991 Code § 12-7)
1-11-4: PROSECUTING ATTORNEY:
A. Powers And Duties: The prosecution of cases in the municipal court shall, at the discretion of the city council, be conducted by the municipal attorney of
the city, an assistant duly designated by him or an attorney designated by resolution of the city council as the municipal prosecutor. The prosecutor, in
any event, shall have full power to prosecute for the violations of any penal ordinance of the city in the municipal court and shall have the power to
prosecute and resist appeals in proceedings in error and review from the municipal court.
B. Compensation; Term: The compensation and term of service of the municipal prosecutor shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 92-09, 5-
26-1992)
1-11-5: CLERK OF THE COURT, DUTIES:
The city clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be ex officio clerk of the municipal court. The clerk of the municipal court shall: (1991 Code § 12-9;
amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
A. Assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court, preparation of writs, processes, or other papers;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 13/269
B. Administer oaths required in judicial or other proceedings before the court;
C. Be responsible for the entry of all pleadings, and proceedings in the dockets of the court;
D. Perform such other clerical duties in relation to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct; and (1991 Code § 12-9)
E. Receive and give receipts for and disburse or deliver to the city treasurer all fines, forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of money properly payable to
the municipal court. Such funds and sums of money while in the custody of the city treasurer shall be deposited and disbursed upon vouchers as
directed by the city council. (1991 Code § 12-9; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
1-11-6: COURT MARSHAL, DUTIES:
The city council, upon the recommendation of the judge of the municipal court, may designate any appropriate person who is a resident of the city to serve
as marshal, and in the absence of such a designation, the chief of police or corresponding officer of the city shall execute any writs and other processes
directed to him, except as herein otherwise provided, and such duty may be performed by any deputy marshal or by any members of the police force of
the city, as the case may be. (1991 Code § 12-10)
1-11-7: BOND OF CLERK AND JUDGE:
A. Clerk Of The Court: The clerk of the municipal court shall give bond to the city council. The bond shall be approved by the city council and shall be in an
amount to be fixed by the city council. The bond shall be in such form as determined by the municipal court. (1991 Code § 12-11; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Judge: The city council may provide that the judge, the alternate judge, and an acting judge, or any of them, shall give a bond to the city council. If a
bond is required, it shall be in an amount to be fixed by the city council. It shall be conditioned in the same manner as the bond that is required of the
clerk of the court, and it shall be approved by the city council. (1991 Code § 12-11)
1-11-8: FEES, FINES AND FORFEITURES; DISPOSITION:
All of the fees, fines and forfeitures which come into the municipal court shall be paid by the clerk of the court to the city treasurer. The treasurer shall
credit such deposits to the fund designated by the city council. The court clerk shall make duplicate receipts for the fees, fines and forfeitures collected by
him, one copy of which shall be retained by the city treasurer together with a detailed statement of all costs, the style of the case in which they were paid,
and the name of the party paying the same. (1991 Code § 12-12; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
1-11-9: PROCEDURE; JUDICIAL NOTICE; WRITS AND PROCESSES:
Except as otherwise provided for by law, the code of procedure in the municipal court shall be the same as is provided for by state law for the trial of
misdemeanors. The court shall take judicial notice of state statutes and the ordinances of the city. Writs and processes of the court may be issued by the
judge or clerk thereof to any proper officer. All writs and processes of the municipal court in which a violation of a municipal ordinance is charged shall be
directed to the chief of police of the city or to some other appropriate peace officer. A law enforcement officer of the city may serve an arrest warrant
issued by the municipal court any place in Tulsa and Osage Counties. (1991 Code § 12-13; amd. 2011 Code)
1-11-10: RULES FOR CONDUCT OF COURT BUSINESS:
The judge of the municipal court may prescribe rules, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, for the proper conduct of the business of the municipal
court. (1991 Code § 12-14)
1-11-11: PROSECUTIONS BY VERIFIED COMPLAINT:
All prosecutions commenced in the municipal court shall be by complaint which shall be subscribed by the person making the complaint and shall be
verified before a judge, the court clerk, a deputy court clerk, or a police officer. No warrant for arrest shall be issued until the complaint has been approved
by the judge of the municipal court. All prosecutions for the violation of municipal ordinances shall be styled, "The City of Skiatook vs. (naming the person
or persons charged)". (1991 Code § 12-15)
1-11-12: ARRAIGNMENT; FINES IN LIEU OF APPEARANCE:
The arraignment shall be made by the court. The judge or the prosecuting attorney shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights
and of the consequences of conviction, and ask him whether he pleads guilty or not guilty. The city council by ordinance may prescribe a schedule of fines
which the defendant may pay in lieu of his appearance before the municipal court, and such payment shall constitute a final determination of the cause
against the defendant. (1991 Code § 12-16)
1-11-13: BAIL; RELEASE ON OWN RECOGNIZANCE; TRAFFIC CITATION:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 14/269
A. Release Of Arrested Resident:
1. If a resident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer for violation of any traffic ordinance for which section 1-11-14 of this chapter does not
apply, or is arrested for the violation of a nontraffic ordinance, the officer shall immediately release said person if the person acknowledges receipt of
a citation by signing it. Provided, however, the arresting officer need not release said person if it reasonably appears to the officer that the person
may cause injury to himself or others or damage to property if released, that the person will not appear in response to the citation, or the person is
arrested for an offense against a person or property. If said person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest
and his appearance shall be compelled.
2. If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided for in this subsection, he shall be admitted to bail either
before or after arraignment, or shall be released on personal recognizance. Failure of a person to have a valid driver's license when charged with a
traffic violation is hereby declared a misdemeanor.
B. Release Of Arrested Nonresident: If a nonresident of this municipality is arrested by a law enforcement officer for a violation of any ordinance for which
section 1-11-14 of this chapter does not apply, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment.
C. Amount And Conditions Of Bail: The amount and conditions of bail granted pursuant to the provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall be
determined by the judge who shall prescribe rules for the receipt of bail and for the release on personal recognizance. In the event of arrests at night,
emergencies, or when the judge is not available, a court official, the chief of police or his designated representative may be authorized by the judge,
subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge, to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the
accused. The cash bond shall not exceed the maximum fine provided for by ordinance for each offense charged. The court official, chief of police or his
designated representative is authorized, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge, to release a resident of the city on personal
recognizance. (1991 Code § 12-17)
1-11-14: MISDEMEANOR OR TRAFFIC VIOLATION RELEASE PROCEDURE:
If a resident or nonresident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation or a traffic ordinance, other than an
ordinance pertaining to a parking or standing traffic violation, and the arrested person is eligible to sign a written promise to appear and be released upon
personal recognizance as provided for in 22 Oklahoma Statutes section 1115.1, then the procedure provided for in the state and municipal traffic bail bond
procedure act as applied to municipalities, shall govern. The city council, by ordinance, may prescribe a bail bond schedule for this purpose and may
provide for bail to be used as payment of the fine and costs upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, as provided for in 22 Oklahoma Statutes section
1115.1. Absent such ordinance, the municipal court may prescribe a bail bond schedule for traffic offenses. The amount of bail shall not exceed the
maximum fine provided by ordinance for each offense. (1991 Code § 12-17.1)
1-11-15: FAILURE TO APPEAR ACCORDING TO TERMS OF BOND; FORFEITURE:
If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or conditions of his bond either for hearing, arraignment, trial or judgment,
or upon any other occasion when his presence in court or before the magistrate may be lawfully required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered upon
the court minutes, thereby declaring the bond to be forfeited. Without advancing court costs, the judge shall then cause the forfeiture to be certified to the
district court in Tulsa or Osage Counties, where it shall be entered upon the judgment docket and shall have the full force and effect of a district court
judgment. At such time as the forfeiture is entered upon the district court judgment docket, the law of the state of Oklahoma shall govern in accordance
with the provisions of 59 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1331 through 1333 and 1335. A surety shall have all remedies available under the provisions of 22
Oklahoma Statutes section 1108 and 59 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1301 through 1340. Court costs shall be collectible from the proceeds of the bond.
(1991 Code § 12-18; amd. 2011 Code)
1-11-16: REQUIREMENT FOR JURY TRIAL:
In all prosecutions in the municipal court for any offenses punishable by a fine of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, a jury trial shall be had unless waived by the defendant and the city. In all other prosecutions, or in cases wherein a jury trial is
waived by the defendant and the city, trial shall be to the court. (1991 Code § 12-19; amd. 2011 Code)
1-11-17: DEFENDANT'S DEMAND OR WAIVER OF JURY TRIAL:
A. Decision Of Defendant: At his arraignment, the defendant shall be asked whether he demands or waives the trial by jury. His election shall be recorded
in the minutes of the arraignment and entered on the docket of the court respecting proceedings in the case. (1991 Code § 12-20)
B. Change Of Decision: An election made at arraignment waiving jury trial may be changed by the defendant only for good cause shown with permission
of the court. (1991 Code § 12-21)
1-11-18: JURY PROVISIONS:
A. Request For Jurors:
1. Jurors shall be selected under the same terms and conditions as are provided by law for jurors in the district courts. Whenever a calendar has been
made up for the trial of cases by jury, the judge of the municipal court shall request separately, in writing, the presiding judges of the district courts of
Tulsa and Osage Counties to cause the names of a stated number of jurors deemed sufficient to dispose of the cases on the calendar from each of
the two (2) judicial districts, who from their addresses appear to reside within the corporate limits of the city, to be drawn in accordance with the
governing statutes of the state for the drawing of jurors, and to be certified as a list by the clerk of the district court to the judge of the municipal court.
The proportion of jurors from the judicial district in which the district court of Tulsa County sits and the judicial district in which the district court of
Osage County sits shall be in the same proportion as the total population of the city, according to the last decennial census, bears to the total
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 15/269
population located in Tulsa County and the total population of the city located in Osage County so that the total number of jurors summonsed shall as
nearly as practicable be divided between the two (2) counties in the same percentiles as is the total population of city. (1991 Code § 12-22; amd.
2011 Code)
2. The request shall be made in time for the lists to be certified and the jurors to be summoned legally before the trial of the calendar begins. If it is
anticipated that the completion of the jury docket will require more than two (2) weeks, the request for jurors shall specify the number required for
each two (2) week period, as provided by law for the drawing of the jurors for the district court. The judge of the municipal court shall make written
request to the chief judges of the district courts for stated numbers of jurors in the proportions required by this section if, after allowance for
exemptions, the number originally listed is found to be insufficient. Additional drawing of other names may also be requested by the judge when
necessary, in accordance with the law for such additional drawings in the district court. If, in the future, provisions of the law respecting the drawing of
the jury lists for the district court are changed, the judge shall take such steps, in requesting jury lists for the court, as are necessary to comply with
the state law and apportion jurors selected among Tulsa and Osage Counties proportionately. (1991 Code § 12-22)
B. Summons Of Jury:
1. Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of the court shall cause a summons substantially in such form as determined by the municipal court to be
issued and served upon each person on the list. (1991 Code § 12-23; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Service of such summons shall be made as the judge may prescribe by rule or direct order, either in person upon the juror by the chief of police, or
by any member of the police force of the city, or by the clerk of the court, through certified mail, directed to the juror at his address as given in the jury
list, with request for a personally signed return receipt. In any proceeding wherein service of summons by mail is in issue, evidence of the due
mailing of the summons by the clerk or a member of his staff and the presentation of an official postal return receipt purportedly signed by the
addressee shall be prima facie evidence that the summons was duly received by the addressee and, therefore, that he was properly served
therewith. (1991 Code § 12-23)
C. Composition Of Jury; Qualifications:
1. A jury in the court shall consist of six (6) jurors, good and lawful men and women, citizens of the city of Skiatook in Tulsa and Osage Counties of the
state of Oklahoma, possessing the qualifications of jurors in the district court.
2. Trial of all actions shall be according to the rules of procedure established by law for the district courts of Oklahoma in the trial of misdemeanor
criminal actions, except where the municipal code of the state of Oklahoma or the ordinances of city require otherwise. (1991 Code § 12-24)
D. Sitting Together: After the jurors are sworn, they must sit together and hear the proofs and oral arguments of the parties, which must be delivered in
public and in the presence of the defendant. (1991 Code § 12-25)
E. Decisions Of Judge; Instructions To Jury: In all actions tried before a jury, the judge shall determine all questions of law, including questions as to the
introduction of evidence arising during the trial. He also shall instruct the jury as to the law. (1991 Code § 12-26)
F. Verdict:
1. Rendered: A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the vote of five (5) jurors. (1991 Code § 12-27)
2. Delivery And Recording: The verdict of the jury, in all cases, must be general. When the jury has arrived at its verdict, it must deliver the verdict
publicly to the court. The judge must enter the verdict in the docket or cause it to be so entered. (1991 Code § 12-28)
3. Verdict Returned For Lesser Included Offense Or Attempt: The jury may find the defendant guilty of any offense, the commission of which is
necessarily included in that with which he is charged, or of an attempt to commit the offense. (1991 Code § 12-29)
G. Fees And Mileage For Jurors: Jurors shall receive for their services such amount per day, plus mileage, at such rate, as allowed by statute per mile for
each mile necessarily traveled by the most direct route in going to and from the court from their respective places of residence. The claims for such
compensation shall show the location of the juror's residence and the route and miles traveled, and must be verified as other claims against the city are
verified. Jurors shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. (1991 Code § 12-30; amd. 2011 Code)
1-11-19: COURT COSTS:
In all cases, in addition to any fine or imprisonment provided, there shall also be assessed court costs in such amounts as established by statute; provided,
however, that the court may, for good cause shown, suspend all or part of the court costs. (1991 Code § 12-32; amd. 2011 Code)
1-11-20: SUSPENSION OF SENTENCES:
A. Action Of Judge On Sentencing; Causes For Warrant Issuance: In all cases upon conviction, plea of guilty or no contest, the court may suspend all or
any part of a sentence, may defer sentencing, place the defendant on probation, as provided by the laws of the state, or impose any other punishment
provided by law for conviction of misdemeanors. Any person so released upon deferred sentencing or probation shall be required to report at such
times and to such person or officer as the judge shall direct. The judge may cause a warrant to be issued for any person so released if it shall be made
to appear to the judge that such person:
1. Has been guilty of the violation of any law after his release;
2. Is habitually associating with lewd or vicious persons; or
3. Is indulging in vicious habits.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 16/269
B. Confinement Of Prisoner: Upon the issuance of the warrant by the judge, the person shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he
was originally sentenced and shall serve out the full term for which he was originally sentenced. (1991 Code § 12-33)
1-11-21: CONTEMPT OF COURT:
The judge of the municipal court shall have power to enforce due obedience to orders, rules and judgments made by him while holding his court or to
processes issued by him in the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of Oklahoma. (1991 Code § 12-34)
1-11-22: PROSECUTION FOR SAME OFFENSE OF ANOTHER COURT PROHIBITED:
When a defendant has been in jeopardy for the same or any lesser included offense in any other municipal court, or district court, he shall not be
prosecuted in the city court for the same or a lesser included offense. (1991 Code § 12-35)
1-11-23: WRITS OF MANDAMUS, PROHIBITION AND CERTIORARI:
Whenever the district court of any county wherein the municipal court is established shall have the same jurisdiction to issue to the municipal court writs of
mandamus, prohibition and certiorari, such writs shall be obeyed by the judge of the municipal court and all other officers of the city. (1991 Code § 12-36)
1-11-24: APPEALS:
A. Filing Of Appeal; Notice; Bond:
1. An appeal may be taken from a final judgment of the municipal court by the defendant by filing in the district court of Tulsa County or Osage County,
within ten (10) days from the date of the final judgment, a notice of appeal and by filing a copy of the notice with the municipal court. In case of an
appeal, a trial de novo shall be had, and there shall be a right to jury trial if the offense is punishable by a fine of more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), and costs. (1991 Code § 12-37; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Upon conviction, at the request of the defendant, or upon notice of appeal being filed, the judge of the municipal court shall enter an order on his
docket fixing an amount in which bond may be given by the defendant, in cash or sureties for cash in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00); except that, if the conviction involved a fine only, the amount of the bond shall be no greater
than twice the amount of such fine. Bond shall be taken by the clerk of the court wherein judgment was rendered. Any pledge of sureties must be
approved by a judge of the court.
3. Upon appeal being filed, the judge shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, certify to the clerk of the appellate court the original papers in the case. If the
papers have not been certified to the appellate court, the prosecuting attorney shall take the necessary steps to have the papers certified to the
appellate court within twenty (20) days of the filing of the notice of appeal, and failure to do so, except for good cause shown, shall be grounds for
dismissal of the charge by the appellate court, the cost to be taxed to the city. The certificate shall state whether or not the municipal judge hearing
the case was a licensed attorney in Oklahoma.
4. All proceedings necessary to carry the judgment into effect shall be had in the appellate court. (1991 Code § 12-37)
B. Municipal Prosecutor To Defend Appeals From Municipal Court: Appeals to the district court shall be defended by the municipal prosecutor designated
by the city council pursuant to section 1-11-4 of this chapter or, should no municipal prosecutor be designated, by the municipal attorney or his
designated assistant.
C. Appeals From District Court: If an appeal is taken to the court of criminal appeals from the final judgment or order of a district court in an appeal from
the final judgment of the municipal court, the same shall be defended by the attorney designated as municipal prosecutor or, should no municipal
prosecutor be designated, by the municipal attorney or his designated assistant. (Ord. 92-09, 5-26-1992)
1-11-25: SUPREME COURT:
Whenever the supreme court issues orders of statewide application relative to procedures in and practices before the municipal courts and appeals
therefrom or calls annual conferences of the judges of the municipal courts of Oklahoma to consider matters calculated to bring about a speedier and more
efficient administration of justice, the judge of the municipal court shall comply with the same and attend all meetings except when it is not feasible for him
to do so. (1991 Code § 12-39)
1-11-26: PAYMENT OF FINES AND COURT COSTS:
A. Work In Lieu Of Fine: The judge of the court shall be empowered, in his discretion and with the consent of the defendant, to permit a person convicted
and sentenced to pay a fine and costs, or either, to work for the city in lieu of the payment of such fine and costs; and in such event, the defendant shall
receive credit for such voluntary work at a rate of pay per diem or per hour to be prescribed in such case by the judge. In the event the court shall fail to
set forth the per diem rate of pay, the rate shall be that prescribed as the minimum wage by federal law at the time the work is performed. Such work
shall be performed under the supervision of the chief executive officer of a department of the city. (1991 Code § 12-51)
B. Refusal To Pay Fine: A person fined for violation of an ordinance of the city who is financially able but refuses or neglects to pay the fine or costs may
be compelled to satisfy the amount owed by working on the streets, alleys, avenues, areas, and public grounds of the city subject to the direction of the
street commissioner or other proper officials, at a rate per day as the city council may hereafter prescribe by ordinance until the fine and costs are
satisfied. Until the city council shall specify otherwise, the rate shall be equal to the minimum wage prescribed by federal law. (1991 Code § 12-52)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 17/269
C. Refusal To Work: All persons who shall be convicted in the court of the city for violation of any ordinance and sentenced to pay the fine and costs, who
shall refuse to pay such fine or costs and refuse to work as provided herein, shall be imprisoned in the jail of the city for one day for each twenty five
dollar ($25.00) fine and costs assessed, not to exceed a total confinement of ten (10) days; provided, however, that any fine and costs imposed shall
be deemed fully satisfied and executed when the person convicted shall have served ten (10) days in the jail of the city. (1991 Code § 12-53; amd.
2011 Code)
D. Reimbursement Of Law Enforcement Officers Training Fund: For every person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) or
more, excluding parking and standing violations, or for any person forfeiting bond when charged with such an offense, the court shall order the
convicted person to pay the sum of four dollars ($4.00) as a separate penalty assessment; and for each such person convicted or forfeiting bond, the
city shall deposit to the law enforcement officers training fund, as provided in 20 Oklahoma Statutes section 1313.2, the sum of four dollars ($4.00).
The city treasurer or other individual designated by the city council shall deposit into the law enforcement officers training fund on a quarterly basis an
amount equal to four dollars ($4.00) times the number of such fines collected by the city during the preceding quarter. If state law shall be amended to
increase or decrease the amount required to be forwarded by municipalities, this subsection shall in that event be deemed to have been amended
accordingly to assess the charge required by state law. (1991 Code § 12-54; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
E. Penalty: Whenever an act or omission is declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by this code or city ordinances without the declaration or
proscription of a specific punishment, the same shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title. (1991 Code § 12-55; amd. 2011 Code)
1-11-27: CITATIONS; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
A. Attempt To Intimidate Officer: Every person who, directly or indirectly, utters or addresses any threat or intimidation to any judicial or ministerial officer, to
any juror, referee, arbitrator, umpire or assessor or other person authorized by law to hear or determine any controversy, with intent to induce him either
to any act not authorized by law, or to omit or delay the performance of any duty imposed upon him by law, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (1991 Code
§ 12-75)
B. Issuance Of Citation:
1. Any law enforcement officer who has arrested a person on a violation of an ordinance of the city may issue a citation to such person to appear in
court, which shall contain the name and address of the cited person, the offense charged and date on which the person is to appear in court, which
shall be at least five (5) days after the issuance of the citation unless the person cited requests an earlier date. A copy of the citation shall be
delivered to the person cited and the person released from custody. As soon as practicable thereafter, the officer shall file the original of the citation
with the court.
2. In the event the judge finds sufficient grounds for issuance of a warrant, he may issue a summons commanding the defendant to appear rather than
issue a warrant.
3. A person who has been summoned to appear who wilfully fails to appear in response to a summons is guilty of a misdemeanor; and, in addition, a
warrant may be issued for his arrest for the failure to appear and for violation of the offense for which the summons was issued. (1991 Code § 12-76)
C. Failure To Appear; Failure To Pay:
1. Every person who has been issued a citation, in response to which such person has agreed in writing to appear, who, without good cause, fails to
appear at the time and place set forth in such citation, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
2. Every person who has requested and has been granted additional time within which to pay a fine imposed by the court who, without good cause,
fails to pay the fine imposed within the time allotted by the court and fails to appear at the time fixed by the court for payment of the fine is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 12-77)
D. Misdemeanor: Every person convicted of violating subsections A through C of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 12-
78)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS, GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-1-1: ADVISORY CAPACITY:
A. The duties, powers and functions of all boards, agencies and commissions, excepting only those specifically enumerated in section 2-1-2 of this
chapter, existing or hereafter created by the city, shall be solely advisory to the city council.
B. Except for those boards, agencies and commissions specified in section 2-1-2 of this chapter, when exercising functions specified by state statute, the
jurisdiction of all boards, agencies and commissions created by or existing by virtue of the city is limited to making recommendations to the city council
for action or legislation. No agency, board or commission shall make any rules or regulations nor shall it make any findings or issue any orders. (1991
Code § 1-151)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 18/269
2-1-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the city board of adjustment, created in title 11, chapter 15 of this code, when it is exercising powers conferred upon it by
state statutes; nor to the emergency management administration, created in title 6, chapter 3 of this code, during times of emergency, but shall apply to the
emergency management administration at all other times. (1991 Code § 1-152; amd. 2011 Code)
2-1-3: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
All interlocal governmental cooperation agreements, mutual aid agreements and any other agreements between the city and any other corporation,
person, board, agency, commission or governmental subdivision shall be of no force or effect unless the same is formally approved and ratified by the city
council. This section shall apply to all boards, agencies and commissions of the city, including those excepted from certain portions of this chapter in
section 2-1-2 of this chapter. (1991 Code § 1-153)
2-1-4: FISCAL AFFAIRS:
No board, agency or commission of the city shall make any expenditure, obligate the city or its funds, fix salaries of employees or agents, enter into
contracts or dispose of any public property unless the same is approved by the city council as required for the payment of any other public debt or the
assumption of any public obligation. All funds shall be subject to the control of the city council and the city treasurer. (1991 Code § 1-154; amd. Ord. 2013-
3, 2-12-2013)
Chapter 2
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-2-1: MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
A. Appointment: There is hereby created a planning commission of the city to be composed of five (5) members, residents of the city, each of whom shall
be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the city council, and two (2) ex officio members, who shall be the mayor and the city clerk.
(1991 Code § 1-1050; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. Qualifications; Term: The five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council shall be qualified voters of the city, and shall
be appointed and confirmed for a term of three (3) years; provided, however, that when the first appointment is made hereunder the term of office of
two (2) of the said members shall expire on the first day of 1960. The term of office of two (2) of the said members shall expire on July 1, 1961, and the
term of one of the said members shall expire on July 1, 1962.
C. Purpose And Function: The members of said commission shall be appointed with the purpose in view of securing the services of citizens and residents
of the city who are best qualified to plan for the growth, development, and improvement of the city, and who are interested in developing Skiatook as a
whole.
D. Compensation: The membership of the city planning commission shall serve without salary.
E. Filling Vacancies: In the event of a vacancy on said commission for any reason, a successor shall be appointed as hereinabove provided for the original
appointments for the unexpired term only. (1991 Code § 1-1050)
2-2-2: ELECTION AND TERM OF CHAIRMAN, SECRETARY:
Immediately after the appointment and qualification of the members, the planning commission shall meet and elect one of their number chairman and one
of their number secretary, which officers, when elected, shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are elected and qualified. (1991 Code § 1-
1051)
2-2-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The planning commission shall prescribe rules and regulations governing and controlling the transaction of business before it, and a meeting shall be held
at least once each month, on such day as shall be prescribed in said rules and regulations adopted, and special meetings may be called at any time by the
chairman of the commission. Said rules and regulations shall be limited only by the statutes of the state providing for building, zoning, and planning, as
authorized in 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 43-101 to 45-103, inclusive, and in the amendments thereof. (1991 Code § 1-1052; amd. 2011 Code)
2-2-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Generally: It shall be the duty of the planning commission to prepare, as soon as practical, a comprehensive plan for the future physical development,
growth, improvement, convenience and beautification of the city, which, if approved by the city council, shall be known as the official city plan of
Skiatook, Oklahoma. It shall be the duty of said commission to prepare plans for extensions, modifications or alterations in said official city plan as
necessitated by changed conditions or growth and development of the city, and submit the same to the city council for consideration. It shall be the
further duty of the planning commission to investigate all matters relating to the location and development of parks, recreation places, boulevards,
streets, and other public grounds, the platting of proposed additions or new areas, the location and design of works of art, public buildings, and all
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 19/269
public structures, and to make a report of their findings on any proposed or contemplated project relative to any of the above matters to the city council;
to investigate all questions with reference to the location of transportation lines and terminal facilities for transit systems, and the zoning and
redistricting of the city with reference to the uses to which private property therein may be put, and the area, height, and use of buildings, and report its
findings to the city council. (1991 Code § 1-1053)
B. Additional Powers And Duties: The said commission shall have all of the powers and duties granted by the statutes of the state of Oklahoma, 11
Oklahoma Statutes sections 46-101 through 46-105, inclusive, and any amendments thereto. (1991 Code § 1-1054; amd. 2011 Code)
2-2-5: INVESTIGATION AND REPORTS:
All projects or matters that fall within the purview of the duties of the planning commission as specified in this chapter coming before the city council shall
be referred to the planning commission for investigation and report before any final action shall be taken thereon; provided, that if the planning commission
fails to make an investigation and report on any matter or subject referred to it for a period of thirty (30) days, such failure shall be considered a refusal to
approve the proposed plan or project, and the city council shall be under no obligation to wait longer for the reports or recommendations concerning said
projects. (1991 Code § 1-1055)
2-2-6: NATURE OF REPLATTING:
No replatting of any existing subdivision in the city shall be considered by the planning commission unless a notice be published at least once in a
newspaper having general circulation within the city not less than fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing, which notice shall briefly set out the proposed
replatting, and the time and place of hearing for such replatting. In addition, there shall be posted for not less than fifteen (15) days a sign or signs, of a
size and type approved by the planning commission for such places as may be designated by the planning commission, upon the property concerned in
said replatting, and stating briefly the proposed replatting and the time and place of the hearing upon such replatting. All costs of publication and signs
herein provided shall be at the expense of the individual, association, or corporation applying for the replatting. (1991 Code § 1-1056)
2-2-7: EMPLOYMENT OF PLANNING ENGINEER, OTHERS:
The planning commission shall, subject to approval of the city council, have the power and authority to employ a planning engineer and secretary, clerks
and such necessary technical and professional advisors and services as may be deemed necessary, including the authority to make such contracts as it
shall deem advisable with other planning agencies authorized by the statutes of the state; provided, that the total amount of funds so expended and the
obligations incurred by the city in any one fiscal year for such purposes shall not exceed the appropriation for the use of the planning commission. (1991
Code § 1-1057)
Chapter 3
AIRPORT COMMISSION
2-3-1: MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Skiatook municipal airport commission (commission), which shall consist of five (5) members,
each of whom shall reside within the area bounded by that line established and known as the city fence line. (Ord. 97-06, 7-29-1997)
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT OR REMOVAL; TERM OF OFFICE:
A. Appointment; Term: Commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the city council, and shall hold office at
the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 92-13, 11-24-1992)
B. Removal: Commissioners may be removed with or without cause and without notice by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the city council. (1991 Code § 1-763;
amd. 2011 Code)
2-3-3: OFFICERS; LEGAL COUNSEL:
A. Officers: The commission shall elect annually from its members a chairman and vice chairman and shall also appoint a secretary who may, but need not
be, a member of said commission. (1991 Code § 1-770)
B. Legal Counsel: The attorney for the city, or his successor, shall serve as ex officio legal counsel for said commission. Additional counsel may be
employed by the commission with consent of the city council. (1991 Code § 1-771)
2-3-4: MEETINGS:
The commissioners shall meet at least quarterly, and the city clerk notified of all meetings and the agenda. The clerk shall post the agenda as required by
law. Other meetings may be held at any time by said commission or upon the call of the mayor or the city clerk after notice and posting as required by law.
(1991 Code § 1-769; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 20/269
2-3-5: COMPENSATION, REIMBURSEMENT AND LIMITATIONS:
A. Compensation And Reimbursement: Unless otherwise directed by the city council, the members of the commission shall receive no compensation for
their service but shall be entitled to reimbursement of all expenses reasonably incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of the
commission.
B. Oath: Each commissioner shall take and file the oath as required by law in the state of Oklahoma.
C. Holding Elective Office Or Being Candidate: No member of such commission shall hold any elective office under the municipal government while a
member of said commission, nor shall any such member be a candidate for any such elective office while a member of said commission.
D. Conflict Of Interest: Furthermore, no member of said commission shall have any interest in any concession, right or privilege to conduct any business or
render any service for compensation upon the premises of the municipal airport nor in any business enterprise possessed of any such interest. (1991
Code § 1-762)
2-3-6: AUTHORITY OF COMMISSIONERS:
A. Duties And Responsibilities:
1. The airport commission shall serve as an advisory body to the city council; and all requests relating to matters concerning the municipal airport shall
first be made to the airport commission, which in turn shall make recommendations to the city council.
2. The commission shall, subject to control by and directives of the city council, manage, operate, and maintain the municipal airport and its related
properties and facilities.
3. The commission shall prepare and present to the city council a comprehensive plan for the use of the airport and shall submit to the city council its
recommendations for minimum standards, conditions, requirements and zoning for use of airport property and qualifications for persons using the
same. The commission shall also make recommendations for use of airport land and property and for achieving an aesthetically appealing
appearance for the airport.
B. Acceptance Or Rejection Of Commission Recommendations: The city council may accept or reject the recommendations of the commission as it deems
appropriate. (1991 Code § 1-764)
2-3-7: USE OF REVENUE:
A. All revenue derived from the operation of such airport and related property shall be placed in a special account of the city and expended only for airport,
aviation or related purposes.
B. Expenditures for the operation and improvement of the airport shall be paid as other municipal expenses as the city council shall direct. (1991 Code § 1-
765)
2-3-8: ADDITIONAL POWERS OF COMMISSION:
A. The commission shall, in addition to the powers enumerated in this chapter, have such other and further powers as the city council shall from time to
time delegate to it.
B. Whenever the commission shall place a recommendation before the city council by a duly adopted resolution of the commission and the city council
shall fail to accept, reject or modify the same within two (2) regularly scheduled meetings of the city council following receipt of the recommendation,
the recommendation shall become effective with respect to the operation of the airport. (1991 Code § 1-766)
2-3-9: ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The commission shall recommend the adoption of such rules and regulations as it deems necessary and expedient for the proper operation and
management of the municipal airport, its related properties and facilities and shall as the situation may change recommend to the city council amendment
of such rules and regulations. (1991 Code § 1-767)
2-3-10: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. The city treasurer shall keep a record of all revenues and expenditures of the airport, its related properties and facilities. (1991 Code § 1-768; amd. Ord.
2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. The commission shall prepare and file an annual report and such additional reports as may be required with the city council setting forth the needs and
requirements of the airport and related facilities, making recommendations for improvements to and utilization of all airport property.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 21/269
C. It shall also be the duty of said commissioners to furnish such other and further reports, data and information as may be requested by the city council.
(1991 Code § 1-768)
Title 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Chapter 1
PURCHASING POLICIES
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
PURCHASING OFFICER: Purchasing agent of the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma, as designated by the city council.
SUPPLIES: Means and includes all new supplies, materials, and equipment. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-26-2013)
3-1-2: PURCHASING OFFICER:
There is hereby established a purchasing officer for the city of Skiatook who shall have the authority and duties as set forth in this chapter. The purchasing
officer shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at their pleasure. No bond shall be required of a purchasing officer. The city council, in its
discretion, may appoint one or more purchasing officers. The city manager shall be a designated purchasing officer for the city by virtue of the position,
unless otherwise provided by motion or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-26-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-05 - PURCHASES WITHOUT APPROVAL. Go to new ordinance.
3-1-3: PURCHASES WITHOUT APPROVAL:
The purchasing officer of the city of Skiatook shall be empowered to purchase supplies and services, when the item or items purchased or contracted for
do not exceed the sum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), provided, that the purchasing officer may not, for the purpose of avoiding this prohibition,
enter into separate contracts each for a sum of less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), when the total of the purchases are for the same purposes
and exceed the purchasing limit set forth herein. (Ord. 2013-04, 2-26-2013)
3-1-4: COMPETITIVE BIDS:
A. Procedure: All purchases required by the city council, or other authority, to be made by competitive bid shall contain the following information:
1. Scope Of Notice: The notice required herein shall include a general description of the services required or the articles to be purchased and shall
state where bids shall be submitted and where specifications may be secured and the time and place of opening of bids.
2. Bid Deposits: When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer or the city council, bid deposits may be required, and when they are required, it
shall be so stated in the public notice inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to a return of such money where it has been required. A
successful bidder, when bid deposits have been required, shall forfeit the bid deposit required upon his failure to enter into a contract within ten (10)
days after the award. (1991 Code § 1-1094)
3. Bid Opening Procedure: Bids shall be submitted, sealed, to the purchasing officer or the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope.
Bids shall be opened at such time and place as contained in the notice. (1991 Code § 1-1094; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
4. Rejection Of Bids: The city council shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual
services included in the proposed acquisition when the public interest will be served thereby. The city shall not accept bids of any person who is in
default of the payment of taxes, licenses, utilities or other monies due to the city.
5. Lowest Best Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest best bidder. In determining the lowest best bidder, in addition to the price, the following
factors should be considered:
a. The capacity and skill to perform the contract or to provide the service.
b. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified without delay or interference.
c. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder.
d. The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
e. The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service.
f. The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the services.
g. The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required.
h. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract.
i. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. (1991 Code § 1-1094)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 22/269
B. Award To Other Than Low Bidder:
1. Reasons For Such Award: When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full statement of the reasons placing the order elsewhere shall be
entered on the minutes of the city council.
2. Tie Bids: When one or more bids are received for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded
to a bidder residing within the corporate limits of the city; or when one of the bidders does not reside in the city, the award shall be made to the bidder
residing in the closest proximity to the city. (1991 Code § 1-1095)
C. Solicitation Of Quotes Authorized: Unless otherwise authorized in subsection D of this section, for any purchase of supplies, materials, vehicles or
equipment exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the purchasing officer shall submit to at least three (3) persons, firms or corporations dealing
in and able to supply the same, or to a smaller number if there are not three (3) persons, firms or corporations dealing in and able to supply the same, a
request for quotation, or invitation to provide a quotation, giving them an opportunity to provide a quotation or bid after giving the specifications and/or
requirements for the supplies, materials, vehicles or equipment to be purchased. The solicitation of quotes pursuant to this subsection is not authorized
if a competitive bidding procedure is required by state law or ordinance.
D. Purchases Authorized: The following purchases are authorized without the requirement of solicitation of quotes or the solicitation of bids, unless
otherwise mandated by the city council or required by law:
1. The purchase of supplies, materials, vehicles, or equipment whose cost does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in a single transaction
and for which competitive bidding is not required by law;
2. The purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services which can be furnished only by a single dealer, or which have a uniform price
wherever purchased;
3. The purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services purchased from another unit of government at a price deemed below that
obtainable from private dealers, including government surplus;
4. The purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services when purchased at a price not exceeding a price set therefor by the state
purchasing agency or any other state agency hereafter authorized to regulate prices for items purchased by the state, whether such price is
determined by contract negotiated with a vendor or otherwise;
5. The purchase of supplies, materials, vehicles or equipment directly from any contract duly awarded by this state or any state agency pursuant to the
Oklahoma central purchasing act, and commonly referred to as the "state bid price";
6. Purchases of supplies, materials, vehicles, equipment or contractual services pursuant to cooperative purchasing agreements entered into with a
public agency or a political subdivision of this state or another state as authorized by the interlocal cooperation act, 74 Oklahoma Statutes section
1001 et seq.;
7. Contractual services of a professional nature, such as engineering, architectural, financial, accounting, medical or legal, unless competitive bidding is
required by applicable law or regulation. (Ord. 2016-12, 10-25-2016)
3-1-5: LEASE/PURCHASE AGREEMENTS:
The city council may enter into such lease/purchase agreements for supplies as they deem necessary for the efficient operation of the city. (1991 Code
§ 1-1096)
3-1-6: SALE OR DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY:
A. All supplies, equipment and materials owned by the city which are no longer used or have become obsolete, worn out or unnecessary, and are no
longer of any use to the city, and the value of such obsolete, worn out or unnecessary supplies, equipment or materials does not exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per surplus item or item(s), for items that are customarily sold together, may be disposed of by the city manager in the manner of
sale or disposal authorized in this section. The city manager shall keep a journal of all property declared surplus with a value of less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and the disposition of the property.
B. All supplies, equipment and materials owned by the city which are no longer used or have become obsolete, worn out or unnecessary, and are no
longer of any use to the city, and the value of such obsolete, worn out or unnecessary supplies, equipment or materials exceeds one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per surplus item or item(s), for items that are customarily sold together, may be disposed of by the city manager when authorized by the
city council in the manner of sale or disposal authorized in this section, or in such manner as the city council may prescribe.
C. The city manager, or designee, shall utilize one of the following methods of sale or disposition of surplus property that will bring the most benefit to the
city of Skiatook, unless otherwise directed by the city council:
1. Transfer to public trust with the city of Skiatook being the beneficiary of the trust.
2. Trade-in credit toward the acquisition of new or used property.
3. Sale of surplus property "as is, where is, with all faults", with no warranties, express or implied, as to the condition, usability, or fitness for a particular
purpose, according to one of the following methods:
a. Sale at public auction to include online auction sites.
b. Solicitation of sealed bids, with award to the highest responsible bidder.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 23/269
c. Sale for scrap. Surplus property may be sold for scrap if the city manager, or his designee, determines that the scrap value of the surplus property
exceeds the sale value of the property if sold by another method.
d. Negotiated sale. Surplus property may be sold by negotiation if the city manager, or his designee, determines that only one known buyer is
available or interested in acquiring the property.
D. Surplus property that is of minimal or no value to the city and which costs of disposition of such equipment would exceed the amount recovered, the city
manager shall dispose of the surplus property in the manner most beneficial to the city.
E. Surplus property which may be of value or use to another public agency, including, but not limited to, municipalities, counties or the state of Oklahoma
may be donated by the city to such public agency, as approved by the city manager or directed by the city council.
F. Proceeds from the sale of surplus property shall be deposited into the appropriate fund as determined by the city manager. (Ord. 2013-5, 3-26-2013)
3-1-6-5: SALE OR DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS REAL PROPERTY:
Any real property of the city of Skiatook, either improved or unimproved, declared by the city council to be surplus and no longer necessary to the
operations of the city may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city council upon such terms which are deemed to be most beneficial to the city of
Skiatook and its citizens. (Ord. 2016-10, 10-25-2016)
3-1-7: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The purchasing officer shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interest of the city will
be served thereby. (1991 Code § 1-1098)
3-1-8: PROHIBITIVE PURCHASES:
Any contract subject to the provision of this chapter in which the purchasing officer or any officer of the city is financially interested, directly or indirectly,
shall be void. (1991 Code § 1-1099)
3-1-9: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
A. By Purchasing Officer: In case of an apparent emergency which requires the immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the mayor shall be
empowered to grant written authorization to the purchasing officer to secure by purchase in the open market at the lowest attainable price, any supplies
or contractual services, regardless of the amount of the expenditures.
B. By Department Head: In case of an actual emergency occurring during normal office hours, the head of any department of the city may, with the
consent of the purchasing officer and the approval of the mayor, purchase directly any supplies or contractual services where the immediate
procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of such department which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of the citizens. In the
case of an actual emergency occurring outside regular office hours, the head of any using agency may, with the consent of the mayor or the purchasing
officer, purchase directly any supplies or contractual services whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of such
department which vitally affects the life, health or convenience of the citizens; provided, that he shall exercise great care to ensure that the supplies or
contractual services are procured at a reasonable cost. The purchasing officer may further make purchases in the event of an emergency as provided
in 61 Oklahoma Statutes section 130. (1991 Code § 1-2000)
Chapter 2
SALES TAX
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
A. Generally; Statute Adopted: The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma sales tax code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes section
1352 and 37 Oklahoma Statutes sections 576 and 593, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (1991 Code § 7-17; amd.
2011 Code)
B. Tax Collector Defined: The term "tax collector" as used in this chapter means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state,
duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. (1991 Code § 7-18)
3-2-2: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma sales tax
code1. (1991 Code § 7-19)
3-2-3: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 24/269
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purpose of
this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. (1991 Code § 7-20)
3-2-4: TAX IMPOSED; PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
A. Tax Levied: City sales taxes, in the total amount of three percent (3%), shall be imposed and effective as indicated by ordinance, unless otherwise
extended by a vote of the people. Said taxes have been approved by a majority of the qualified registered voters of the city voting on same in elections
conducted in the manner prescribed by Oklahoma Statutes. (1991 Code § 7-1; amd. 2011 Code)
1. In addition to the sales tax listed in this subsection A, the following tax will also be levied:
Tax
Rate Purpose Term Of Tax
0.50% Youth sports facilities October 1, 2014 to and including September 30,
2019
0.50% Constructing, improving, repairing and maintaining streets, roads, alleys, bridges and
sidewalks
July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2031
(Ord. 2014-10, 4-8-2014, eff. 10-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-14, 12-8-2015, eff. 7-1-2016)
B. General Purpose Of Revenues: It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the
municipal government of the city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the city council for any purpose for which funds
may be lawfully expended as authorized by the stated purpose of said tax and the statutes of the state of Oklahoma. (1991 Code § 7-21; amd. 2011
Code)
3-2-5: SALES SUBJECT TO TAX; EXEMPTIONS:
The city sales tax shall be levied upon the gross receipts or gross proceeds of such sales as specified by Oklahoma Statutes, and exemptions from such
taxes shall be allowed pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes. (1991 Code §§ 7-1, 7-2, 7-3; amd. 2011 Code)
3-2-6: DUE DATE; MANNER OF PAYMENT:
The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the sales
tax law of the state of Oklahoma. (1991 Code § 7-4)
3-2-7: BRACKET SYSTEM:
A. System Adopted; Rates: A bracket system is hereby adopted for the convenience of vendors in the city for collection of both the state and city sales tax.
Such bracket system is designed and shall be interpreted so as not to be inconsistent with the purpose of the bracket system provided in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1362. The sales tax rate shall be as set forth in section 3-2-4 of this chapter. (1991 Code § 7-5; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Responsibility Of Vendor: The use of the bracket system does not relieve the vendor from the duty or liability to remit to the Oklahoma tax commission
the prescribed amount of gross proceeds (less the discount allowed by law and ordinance) derived from all sales. (1991 Code § 7-5)
3-2-8: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (1991 Code § 7-6)
3-2-9: COLLECTION BY VENDORS:
A. The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor, and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in the city to collect
from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average
equivalent thereof.
B. Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall constitute
a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as
other debts. (1991 Code § 7-7)
C. A vendor who wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied by this chapter, or wilfully or intentionally fails,
neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by
whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax herein levied, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 25/269
he is absorbing the tax, or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax, or in any manner
whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of an offense; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(1991 Code § 7-7; amd. 2011 Code)
3-2-10: RETURNS, REMITTANCES AND DISCOUNTS:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected is made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed
for returns and remittances required by the state sales tax code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may
be allowed by said code for collection of state sales taxes. (1991 Code § 7-8)
3-2-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY:
A. Assessment: 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in
amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter.
Provided, that the failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this
chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim
to any discount allowed under this chapter. (1991 Code § 7-9)
B. Waiver: The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax herein levied may be waived or
remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes section 220; and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this chapter. (1991 Code § 7-10)
3-2-12: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 227;
and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter. (1991 Code § 7-11)
3-2-13: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the
making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter
shall be an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code
§ 7-12; amd. 2011 Code)
3-2-14: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205 of the state sales tax code, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted
by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if herein set forth in full. (1991 Code § 7-13)
3-2-15: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city, by their approval of this chapter at an election, hereby authorize the city council by ordinances duly enacted to make such
administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or proper
for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as
provided by law. (1991 Code § 7-14)
3-2-16: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the city ordinances. (1991 Code § 7-15)
Chapter 3
UTILITIES TAX
3-3-1: TAX LEVIED:
From and after the effective date hereof, there is hereby levied and assessed an annual tax of two percent (2%) upon the gross receipts from residential
and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water in the city, which tax shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or
excise tax levied by the city, all as provided by 68 Oklahoma Statutes sections 2601 through 2605. (Ord. 95-01, 1-31-1995)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 26/269
3-3-2: APPLICATION OF TAX:
The tax levied under section 3-3-1 of this chapter shall, when levied, apply to all persons, firms, associations, or corporations engaged in the business of
furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water within the corporate limits of the city, except it shall not apply to any person, firm, association or
corporation operating under a valid franchise from the city, nor to the city or its public works authority when providing any such services. (Ord. 95-01, 1-31-
1995)
3-3-3: PAYMENTS QUARTERLY:
The tax levied under section 3-3-1 of this chapter shall be levied for a term of not less than one year and shall be payable quarterly, and revenues received
shall be placed in the general revenue fund of the city. (Ord. 95-01, 1-31-1995)
3-3-4: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
Any person, firm or corporation failing or refusing to pay such tax when levied shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted from the city; and in
addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person, firm or corporation for the amount of the tax, and all expenses of collecting same,
including reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 95-01, 1-31-1995)
3-3-5: PRIOR LIEN:
The tax so imposed shall constitute a first and prior lien on all the assets located within the city of any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business
of selling power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water within the city limits. (Ord. 95-01, 1-31-1995)
3-3-6: ELECTRIC SERVICE IN STAR LAKE ESTATES:
Any persons, firms, associations, or corporations engaged in the business of furnishing electric service within the addition of Star Lake Estates (located at
the northeast corner of the intersection of State Highway 75 and 176th Street North) in the city not operating under a valid franchise from the city, and
upon whom the tax provided under section 3-3-1 of this chapter is imposed, is hereby granted a revocable permit by the city for so long as this chapter
remains in effect and the taxes are paid in accordance with the terms of this chapter to acquire, construct, erect, install, maintain, extend, own and operate
an electrical distribution system within such addition, including, but not limited to, an electric distribution substation(s), transformers and transformer
stations, switches, circuit breakers and regulators, electric lines and circuits, whether same be primary or secondary services, street lighting, poles,
standards, cable, guys and anchors, and any other apparatus and appurtenances comprising the electric system in, across, upon and under the streets,
alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, sidewalks, parkings, driveways, rights of way, utility easements, and other public ways, all being sometimes referred to
herein as "streets, alleys, avenues, and other public ways", in the city as now constituted, and as may be added to hereafter, for the purpose of
transmitting, distributing, and selling electric service to Star Lake Estates, its inhabitants for residential, commercial and industrial uses, and for any and all
other purposes for which electric service, during the period of this revocable permit may be used, together with the right to enter upon the streets, alleys,
avenues and other public ways of the city for the purpose of trimming and removing trees, etc., constructing, erecting, installing, extending, locating,
operating, maintaining, removing and repairing the electric system and all its apparatus, machinery, structures and appurtenances, etc. (Ord. 95-01, 1-31-
1995)
Chapter 4
USE TAX
3-4-1: EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF INTANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY LEVIED:
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the municipality tangible personal property
purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming within the municipality of such property at the rate equal
to the prevailing total of all sales taxes levied by the municipality on the purchase price of such property. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid
at the time of importation or storage of the property within the municipality and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside Oklahoma; provided,
that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against tangible personal property intended solely for use outside the municipality, but which is stored within
the municipality pending shipment outside the municipality or which is temporarily retained in the municipality for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing,
alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the tax authorized herein, may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales
tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes
imposed by the municipality had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-2: AUTOMATIC CHANGE IN USE TAX RATE UPON CHANGE IN SALES TAX RATE:
The rate of excise tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall automatically adjust to match the prevailing sales tax rate levied by the municipality, such
change in use tax rate to be effective on the date the change in the prevailing sales tax rate takes effect, and such change in use tax rate not requiring
further approval of the governing body of the municipality. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 27/269
A. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property brought into the municipality by a nonresident individual, visiting in this municipality, for
his or her personal use or enjoyment, while within the municipality;
B. In respect to the use of tangible personal property purchased for resale before being used;
C. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property on which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma use tax code
and this chapter, has been paid by the person using such tangible personal property in the municipality, whether such tax was levied under the laws of
Oklahoma or some other state or municipality of the United States. If any article of tangible personal property has already been subjected to a tax by
Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the Oklahoma use tax code
and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the
Oklahoma use tax code and this chapter, and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed. Provided, that no credit shall be
given for taxes paid in another state or municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in Oklahoma and the
municipality;
D. In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the
municipality, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons for the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the
municipality. Provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of
manufacturing property subject to taxation under the sales tax code of the municipality. The term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those
establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
E. In respect to the use of tangible personal property now specifically exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the municipality;
F. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property brought into the municipality by an individual with intent to become a resident of this
municipality where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or enjoyment;
G. In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads;
H. In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into this municipality for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold;
I. In respect to the use of rail transportation cars to haul coal to coal fired plants located in this municipality which generate electric power. (Ord. 2016-04,
3-8-2016)
3-4-4: TIME WHEN DUE; RETURNS; PAYMENT:
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use code of the state of
Oklahoma. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-5: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Such taxes, penalty, and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-6: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR:
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state of Oklahoma, and making sales of tangible personal property from
a place of business outside this state for use in this municipality, shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the
purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation,
require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name and address of all its agents operating in this municipality and
location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in this city. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-7: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILER OR VENDOR NOT MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS WITHIN STATE OR
BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT STATE; PERMITS:
The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a
place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible personal property for use in this municipality, and by the out of state place of business
of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without Oklahoma and making sales of tangible personal property at such out of
state place of business for use in this municipality. Such retailer or vendor may be issued without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the tax
commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer
or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible personal property sold to his knowledge for use within this municipality. Such authority and permit may be
canceled when at any time the tax commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in this
municipality. Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within this municipality by the
retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be
subject to applicable municipality sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number
accordingly. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-8: REVOKING PERMITS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 28/269
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
herein levied, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or the Oklahoma use tax code or any order, rules or regulations of the tax
commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in 68 Oklahoma Statutes, 2011, section 1408, by order revoke the use tax
permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in this state may, after notice
and hearing above provided, cancel said corporation's license to do business in this state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has
complied with the obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma use tax code, or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-
2016)
3-4-9: REMUNERATIVE DEDUCTIONS ALLOWED VENDORS OR RETAILERS OF OTHER STATES:
Returns and remittances of the tax herein levied and collected shall be made to the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma use tax code; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by said code for the collection of state use taxes. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-10: INTEREST AND PENALTIES; DELINQUENCY:
68 Oklahoma Statutes, 2011, section 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as
therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. Provided, that the
failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall
cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any
discount allowed under this chapter. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-11: WAIVER OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the municipality tax herein levied may be waived
or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 Oklahoma
Statutes, 2011, section 220, and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-12: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS; CLAIM FOR REFUND:
Refund of erroneous payment of the municipality use tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner
and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state use tax as set forth in 68 Oklahoma Statutes, 2011,
section 227, and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-13: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of
any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this chapter shall be an
offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending taxpayer shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and costs. Each
day of noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-14: RECORDS CONFIDENTIAL:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the municipality use tax is legislatively recognized and
declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes, 2011, section 205, of the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof, is
hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the municipal use tax as is herein set forth in full. (Ord. 2016-04,
3-8-2016)
3-4-15: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the municipality's ordinances. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-16: PROVISIONS SEVERABLE:
The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this chapter is for any reason held invalid
or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, sentence or clause hereof. (Ord. 2016-04,
3-8-2016)
3-4-17: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma use tax code, 68 Oklahoma Statutes, 2011, section 1401, are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 29/269
CITY OR MUNICIPALITY: The city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
TRANSACTION: Sale. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-18: TAX COLLECTOR DEFINED:
The term "tax collector" as used herein means the department of the municipality government or the official agency of the state, duly designated according
to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-19: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma use tax code.
(Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-20: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission pursuant to the Oklahoma use tax code are for the purpose of this chapter
hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional municipality permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
3-4-21: PURPOSES OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the municipality
and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body of the municipality for any purposes for which funds may be lawfully
expended as authorized. (Ord. 2016-04, 3-8-2016)
Chapter 5
TELEPHONE FEES AND TAXES
ARTICLE A. TELEPHONE EXCHANGE FEE
3-5A-1: ANNUAL INSPECTION FEE:
A. Fee Imposed; Time Of Payment:
1. From and after the effective date hereof, there is hereby levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each and every person, firm and
corporation operating a telephone exchange in the city, in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the gross revenues for each current year for local
exchange telephone transmission service rendered wholly within the limits of the city to compensate the city for the expense incurred and services
rendered incidental to the exercise of its police power supervision, police regulation and police control of the construction of lines and equipment of
said telephone company in the city.
2. The said inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the city on or before March 1 of each year, commencing with the first billing date of
the telephone company after the effective date hereof, for the calendar year ending December 15, 1951, and shall be paid into and appropriated and
expended from the general revenue fund of the city.
B. Fee In Lieu Of Other Charges: During continued substantial compliance with the terms of this section by the owner of any telephone exchange, the
charge levied hereby shall be and continue to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license, privilege and permit fees or taxes or
assessments except ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that it is not intended hereby to extinguish or abrogate any existing arrangement whereby
the city is permitted to use underground conduit, duct space or pole contacts of said company for the fire alarm and/or police call systems of the city,
and/or electric distribution system of the city. (1991 Code § 5-51)
ARTICLE B. TELEPHONE TARIFF, 911 SERVICE
3-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
A. 911 Emergency Service: Words and phrases used in this article shall have the definitions set forth in 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2813, where the
phrase or word is defined in such statute. (Ord. 94-16, 12-13-1994)
B. VoIP Emergency Service: In addition to other definitions previously defined by ordinance and statute, the words and phrases used in this article shall
have the definitions set forth in 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2852, where the phrase or word is defined in such statute. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-10-2009)
3-5B-2: TAX IMPOSED; OPERATION OF EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 30/269
A. Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed upon the tariff charges for exchange telephone service or its equivalent of the local exchange telephone
company providing service within the corporate limits of the city, a fee of five percent (5%).
B. Operation Of Emergency Telephone Service: Three percent (3%) of the proceeds of the fee shall be utilized to pay for the operation of emergency
telephone service as specified in 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2813. Two percent (2%) of the proceeds of the fee shall be utilized for the purchase of
ancillary communication systems necessary to pass the reported emergency to the appropriate emergency service and personnel. Such two percent
(2%) fee shall remain in effect for such time as the city council deems necessary for the purposes aforestated. (Ord. 2002-02, 1-29-2002)
3-5B-3: COLLECTION:
A. Monthly Collection: The fee shall be collected monthly by the local exchange telephone company and forwarded within thirty (30) days of the close of
the month in which such fee was collected to the city treasurer. (Ord. 94-16, 12-13-1994; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. Commencement Of Tax: Collection of the fee imposed by this article shall continue uninterrupted pursuant to ordinance 452 until the same is defeated
by referral to the electorate as provided in 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 2814(B). (Ord. 94-16, 12-13-1994)
3-5B-4: USE OF FUNDS:
Revenues derived from the fee hereby imposed shall be utilized for engineering, installation, administration and other recurring and onetime costs
necessary to implement, administer, operate and maintain emergency 911 telephone service in the city. (Ord. 94-16, 12-13-1994)
3-5B-5: ADMINISTRATION OF SERVICE; FEE:
A. Administration: The city administrator, or any other official designated by the city council, is authorized to administer the 911 telephone service within the
city.
B. Administrative Fee: The local exchange telephone company providing service within the city shall be entitled to retain as an administration fee three
percent (3%) of the fee imposed and collected hereby. (Ord. 94-16, 12-13-1994)
3-5B-6: COOPERATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES:
The city administrator or other person charged with administration of the emergency service is authorized to cooperate with other governing bodies who
may impose a similar fee and who wish to participate in the 911 service of the city. (Ord. 94-16, 12-13-1994)
3-5B-7: NATURE OF SERVICE:
The E-911 service shall, to the greatest extent possible, have the features and capabilities described in the resolution of the city council, adopted January
12, 1988. (Ord. 94-16, 12-13-1994)
Chapter 6
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS AND ENDOWMENT
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CAPITAL ENDOWMENT FUND: A fund created by allocation of such revenues and receipts as the city council may from time to time so direct, and the
interest income generated by investment of such allocated revenues and receipts. The accumulated resources of the fund may be used and budgeted by
the city council from time to time for the purpose of construction, erection, acquisition, renovation or the making of other capital improvement of or to a
permanent municipal asset at a cost exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with a useful life expectancy of not less than ten (10) years.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: The acquisition of or additions to fixed assets, including machinery and equipment, furniture, land, buildings, improvements
other than buildings, and all construction, reconstruction, appurtenances or improvements to real property accomplished according to the conditions of a
contract, and which cost exceeds three hundred dollars ($300.00) with a useful life expectancy of not less than three (3) years.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND RESERVE: An account created by allocation of a specific portion of the city's sales tax receipts which may be budgeted
annually by the city council for recurring capital improvements.
CITY: The incorporated city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
SALES TAX: The municipal sales tax imposed upon designated sales by chapter 2 of this title. The municipal sales tax is currently established at the rate
of three percent (3%). Where reference is made in this chapter to a "penny" of the sales tax revenue, the same has reference to the gross sales tax
revenue represented by the tax levy of one percent (1%) or approximately one penny for each dollar of sales subject to the tax as set forth in this code.
(Ord. 96-13, 6-11-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 31/269
3-6-2: FUND AND RESERVE CREATED:
There are hereby created two (2) financial resources which shall be known as the Skiatook capital endowment fund and the Skiatook capital improvement
reserve. (Ord. 2002-03, 1-29-2002)
3-6-3: CAPITAL ENDOWMENT FUND:
A. Purpose: The purpose of the capital endowment fund is to establish a fund in the nature of an endowment that, with the interest derived therefrom, will
from time to time provide for many of the capital improvements needs of the city.
B. Principal Of Fund: The principal of the capital endowment fund may not be used, expended, encumbered, or pledged for any purpose whatever except
for acquisition of real estate which the city council deems necessary to assure the development of future capital improvements, or except for
replacement or repair in a dire emergency of capital improvements destroyed or substantially damaged by a disaster after a finding by the city council
that such a disaster does in fact exist and an emergency is declared. Any determination to use, expend, encumber or pledge any principal of the capital
endowment fund shall require a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the city council.
C. Interest Income: Interest income produced by the capital endowment fund need not be appropriated or expended annually by the city council. Interest
not expended or appropriated in a fiscal year shall be added to and become a part of the principal of such fund. (Ord. 2002-03, 1-29-2002)
3-6-4: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT RESERVE:
A. Segregation Of Funds: The capital improvement reserve funds collected during the fiscal year shall be segregated in an interest bearing account from
other municipal funds; the funds so accumulated shall annually at the beginning of each subsequent fiscal year be transferred to the general fund of the
city. It may then be budgeted for capital improvements of the city during that fiscal year.
B. Allocation Of Funds: Funds placed in the general fund from the capital improvement reserve shall be allocated and budgeted for capital improvements
on an annual basis. These funds shall not be used for ordinary short term acquisitions by the city nor for salaries, supplies, fees or other expenditures
which are essentially ordinary operating expenses. (Ord. 2002-03, 1-29-2002)
Chapter 7
AMBULANCE DISTRICT
3-7-1: AMBULANCE DISTRICT CREATED:
There is hereby formed, pursuant to article 10, section 9C of the constitution of the state of Oklahoma, an emergency medical service district (i.e., an
ambulance service district) which is hereinafter referred to as "district"; subject, however, to approval of the registered voters of the city at a special
election hereby called, at which all registered voters residing in the city shall be entitled to vote as to whether or not such district shall be formed, and at
which election the registered voters at the same time and in the same question will vote on whether to authorize a tax levy not to exceed zero mills. (1991
Code § 11-26)
3-7-2: RATE OF LEVY:
A. Rate Of Levy; Approval: Subject to approval by the electorate, there is hereby authorized a tax levy of zero mills; provided, that a tax levy of not more
than three (3) mills on the dollar of the assessed valuation of all taxable property in the district may hereinafter be levied if and when approved in a
subsequent election. No special levy may be made without the approval of all registered voters residing within the city since adequate revenue for
formation and maintenance of the district has been heretofore provided for in ordinance 249, which ordinance is hereby ratified and approved. (1991
Code § 11-27)
B. Increase In Levy:
1. In the event the mill levy set forth in any special election proclamation is less than three (3) mills, the board of trustees of the district may call a
subsequent election to consider increasing the mill levy; provided, however, the total levy authorized by subsection A of this section shall not exceed
three (3) mills.
2. The board of trustees of the district shall have jurisdiction over the sale and refunding of any bonds issued by the district and shall be responsible for
the economical expenditure of the funds derived from the bonds. (1991 Code § 11-36)
3-7-3: GOVERNED BY CITY COUNCIL:
The district formed in this chapter shall be governed by the city council; and all rights, duties, privileges and obligations of the residents and voters of the
city shall be as set out in this chapter. (1991 Code § 11-28)
3-7-4: DISTRICT BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 32/269
A. Term Of Office: Members of the board of trustees of the district shall hold a term of office coextensive with the term of office which they hold as council
member of the city. (1991 Code § 11-29)
B. Powers And Duties; Bond:
1. Such board of trustees of such district shall have the power and duty to promulgate and adopt such rules, procedures and contract provisions
necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of this chapter and shall individually post a fidelity bond in an amount not less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00).
2. The board of trustees of the district shall have the additional powers to hire a manager, and appropriate personnel, contract, organize, maintain, or
otherwise operate the emergency medical services within the city, and such additional powers as may be authorized by the legislature. (1991 Code
§ 11-30)
3-7-5: ISSUANCE OF BONDS; PROCEDURE:
A. Authority Of Board; Approval: The board of trustees of a district may issue bonds, if approved by a majority vote at a special election for such purpose.
All registered voters within the designated district shall have the right to vote in said election. Such bonds shall be issued for the purpose of acquiring
emergency vehicles and other equipment and maintaining and housing the same. (1991 Code § 11-31)
B. Interest: The bonds authorized in subsection A of this section, if issued, shall not bear interest at a greater rate than that authorized by statute for the
issuance of city municipal bonds. Such bonds shall be sold only at public sale after twenty (20) days' advertisement in a newspaper for publication of
legal notices with circulation within the district. Any district may refund its bonds as is provided by law for refunding municipal bonds. (1991 Code § 11-
32; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Tax: The board of trustees of the district, upon issuing bonds as authorized in subsection A of this section, shall levy a special annual ad valorem tax
upon property within the district, payable annually in a total amount not to exceed three (3) mills on the dollar on the real and personal taxable property
in such district for the payment of principal and interest on outstanding bonds until the same are paid. However, the trustees may, from time to time,
suspend the collection of such annual levy when not required for the payment of the bonds. In no event shall the real and personal property in the city
be subject to a special tax in excess of three (3) mills for the payment of bonds issued hereunder. (1991 Code § 11-33)
D. Payment Of Bonds: There may also be pledged to the payment of principal and interest of the bonds herein authorized to be issued:
1. Any net proceeds from operation of the district that the board of trustees of the district shall deem not necessary to the future operation and
maintenance of said emergency medical services.
2. Any monies available from other funds of the district not otherwise obligated. (1991 Code § 11-34)
E. Designated Sums; Maturity; Payment: Bonds shall be issued for designated sums with serial numbers thereon and maturing annually after three (3)
years from the date of issuance. All bonds and interest thereon shall be paid upon maturity and no bonds shall be issued for a period longer than thirty
(30) years. Any district board of trustees may in its discretion schedule the payment of principal over the thirty (30) year period so that when interest is
added, there will be approximately level annual payments of principal and interest. (1991 Code § 11-35)
3-7-6: FEES AND GIFTS:
A. District Authority: The district shall be empowered to charge fees for services and accept gifts, funds or grants from sources other than the mill levy
which shall be used and accounted for in a like manner; provided, however, that, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, no charge shall be
made for the ambulance service rendered to those persons who receive it gratuitously pursuant to the provisions of ordinance 249. Persons served
outside the district, except those subject to the benefits of ordinance 249, shall be charged an amount equal to the actual cost for the service, not
taking into account any income the district receives from millage for sources within the district.
B. Legal Authority To File Suit: The board of trustees of the district shall have legal authority to bring suits necessary to collect amounts owed and to sue
and defend as necessary for the protection of the board.
C. Annual Audit: The state examiner and inspector is hereby authorized to conduct an annual audit of the operation of such district. (1991 Code § 11-37)
3-7-7: JOIN WITH OTHER DISTRICTS:
The district formed under this chapter may hereafter join an existing district or join with other incorporated cities or towns in the formation of a district, all
subject to the provisions of section 9C of article 10 of the constitution of the state of Oklahoma. (1991 Code § 11-38)
3-7-8: DISSOLUTION OF DISTRICT:
A. Process For Dissolution: The district created hereby may be dissolved through the millage levy changed by a majority vote of the registered voters
voting at an election called for that purpose by the city council; provided, that such an election shall not be called unless either three-fifths (3/5) of the
trustees of such district request that such an election be called by the city council or the respective county commissioners, as the case may be, or
presented a petition signed by not less than twenty five percent (25%) of all registered voters in the district. (1991 Code § 11-39)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 33/269
B. Levy In Event Of Dissolution: In the event the district is dissolved, any mill levy used to support, organize, operate and maintain the emergency medical
service district shall cease; provided, that such mill levy shall not cease until all outstanding emergency medical service bonds of the district are retired
and all other debts incurred by the emergency medical service district have been satisfied. (1991 Code § 11-40)
3-7-9: CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS:
All elections called under the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by the county election board or the boards of each county or counties involved,
upon receipt of an election proclamation issued by a majority of the members of the city council of the city of Skiatook. In the event the emergency medical
service district shall ever extend beyond the corporate limits of the city, such proclamation must be a joint proclamation from a majority of the board of
county commissioners of each county involved. Said proclamation shall be published in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation in each county
involved in the area affected, at least ten (10) days prior to said election, and said proclamation shall set forth the purpose of the election and the date
thereof. The county election board or boards shall certify the results of an election to the board or boards issuing such proclamation. (1991 Code § 11-41)
3-7-10: CAPACITY TO SUE OR BE SUED:
The board of the ambulance district shall have the capacity to sue and be sued, subject, however, to those provisions of section 9, article 10 of the
Oklahoma constitution relating to immunity from suit. (1991 Code § 11-41)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-04 - OCCUPATION TAXES . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-04 - OCCUPATION TAXES . Go to new ordinance.
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
All of the terms and phrases used in this chapter shall be given the same use and meanings as defined by the Oklahoma alcoholic beverage control act1.
(1991 Code § 2-6)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-04 - OCCUPATION TAXES . Go to new ordinance.
4-1-2: OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Annual Tax Levied: There is hereby levied and assessed an annual occupation tax on every business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages as
specifically enumerated herein and in the amount herein stated:
1. Brewer $1,250.00
2. Distiller 3,125.00
3. Winemaker 625.00
4. Oklahoma winemaker 75.00
5. Rectifier 3,125.00
6. Wholesaler 3,500.00
7. Class B wholesaler 625.00
8. Retail package store 400.00
9. Mixed beverage, initial and renewal 900.00
10. Caterer, initial and renewal 900.00
11. Special event - per day 50.00
B. Service Organizations: The occupation tax for those service organizations which are exempt under section 501(c)(19) of the internal revenue code for a
mixed beverage or bottle club license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. (1991 Code § 2-1)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 34/269
C. Brewer Or Class B Wholesaler: If a brewer or a class B wholesaler holds a license from the state to manufacture or wholesale any low point beer, then
the occupation tax for such brewer or class B wholesaler shall be reduced by seventy five percent (75%). (1991 Code § 2-1; amd. 2011 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-04 - OCCUPATION TAXES . Go to new ordinance.
4-1-3: PAYMENT REQUIRED; PENALTY:
A. Time Of Payment: Any state licensee originally entering upon any occupation listed in this chapter shall pay the tax therefor at the office of the city clerk
on or before the date upon which he enters upon such occupation. Said licensee shall provide a copy of his current state license before payment of an
occupation tax will be accepted. Thereafter, the licensee shall pay the tax annually on or before April 1. (1991 Code § 2-2; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
B. Proration Of Tax: The occupation tax subject to this chapter shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the year in which an occupation begins operations.
(1991 Code § 2-2)
C. Issuance Of Receipt: Upon payment of the said occupation tax, the city clerk shall issue a receipt to said state licensee, which said licensee shall post
in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein he carries on his occupation. (1991 Code § 2-2; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
D. Penalty For Nonpayment: Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this chapter without paying said occupation tax imposed therefor
in advance of such operation is guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate and additional offense. (1991 Code § 2-2; amd. 2011 Code)
4-1-4: ANNUAL REPORT TO STATE:
The city clerk shall make an annual report to the ABLE commission of the state of Oklahoma covering the fiscal year, showing the number and class of
licensees subject to the occupation tax and the amount of money so collected from said tax. (1991 Code § 2-3; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-04 - OCCUPATION TAXES . Go to new ordinance.
4-1-5: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE; INVESTIGATION:
A. Application: Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire, health and safety codes of the city required by 37 Oklahoma Statutes
shall apply at the office of the city clerk by filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office. (1991 Code § 2-4; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2013-
3, 2-12-2013)
B. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, the clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the
premises proposed for licensed operations comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and any health, fire, building and other safety codes
applicable to such premises.
C. Time Limit For City Action: The clerk shall act on all such applications within twenty (20) days of receipt thereof. (1991 Code § 2-4; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-
12-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-04 - OCCUPATION TAXES . Go to new ordinance.
4-1-6: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES:
A. Certificate Of Zoning: Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate
of zoning shall be issued to the ABLE commission.
B. Certificate Of Compliance: Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable fire, safety, and health
codes, a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the ABLE commission. (1991 Code § 2-5)
C. Signatures On Certificates: The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the mayor or city clerk. (1991 Code § 2-5; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-04 - OCCUPATION TAXES . Go to new ordinance.
4-1-7: LICENSE FOR THE SALE AND SERVING OF ALCOHOL AND/OR 3.2 BEER:
A. License Required:
1. License Application: It shall be unlawful for any business, vendor or person within the city of Skiatook to serve, sell or offer for sale alcohol and/or 3.2
beer without a license issued by the city of Skiatook as hereinafter provided. Every vendor desiring to engage in business as a retail vendor serving
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 35/269
or selling alcohol and/or 3.2 beer, or to continue operating as a vendor selling or serving alcohol and/or 3.2 beer within the city of Skiatook if doing so
at the time this section is adopted, shall make application to the city clerk on forms available in the office of the city clerk. A license shall be issued to
each vendor whose application is approved.
2. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The license granted by the city of Skiatook shall at all times be displayed in public view in the vendor's place
of business. This license may be suspended or revoked as provided herein if the vendor, or any person or agent employed by the vendor or acting
on the vendor's behalf, is convicted of the offense of selling or serving alcohol to a minor, or enters into a plea bargain agreement after being
charged with such offense. "Conviction" throughout this section shall be deemed to include entry of a guilty or nolo contendere plea by any person
charged with selling or serving alcohol and/or 3.2 beer to a minor. Each vendor making application for a license under this section shall expressly
acknowledge the vendor's awareness that a license granted pursuant to this section may be suspended or revoked by the city of Skiatook if an
owner, officer, director, manager, employee or agent of the vendor is either convicted of selling or serving alcohol and/or 3.2 beer to a minor on the
vendor's behalf or enters into a plea bargain agreement after being charged with such offense. It shall not be a defense under this section for a
vendor to assert or claim that an employee or agent of the vendor unlawfully sold or served alcohol and/or 3.2 beer to a minor contrary to the
vendor's rules, policies, procedures or training. Assertion of such a defense will not prevent the vendor's license from the penalties set forth in
subsection H of this section.
3. Acknowledgment Of Compliance Checks: A vendor shall specifically acknowledge awareness on the license application submitted to the city of
Skiatook that alcohol compliance checks are performed on a regular and ongoing basis in the community by law enforcement, and shall further
acknowledge the vendor's consent to such compliance checks as a necessary condition of obtaining and retaining a license from the city of Skiatook
under this section. The vendor shall also acknowledge on the application its awareness that conviction of the vendor's employee or agent for the
offense of selling or serving alcohol and/or 3.2 beer to a minor, or the acceptance of a plea bargain agreement by the employee or agent after being
charged with such offense, will result in suspension or revocation of the vendor's license as provided in subsection H of this section.
B. License Fee:
1. Alcohol And/Or 3.2 Beer Not To Be Consumed On The Vendor's Premises: An annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid by a vendor to the city
of Skiatook if the vendor intends to sell alcohol and/or 3.2 beer which is not intended to be consumed on the vendor's premises. This fee shall be
paid when the vendor's application for a license is submitted to the city clerk. Licenses under this section shall be granted for a calendar year from
January 1 through December 31. The license fee for an initial license shall be prorated if such license is granted for less than a full calendar year.
The fee for annual license renewals shall not be prorated.
2. Alcohol And/Or 3.2 Beer Which Is Intended To Be Consumed On The Vendor's Premises: An annual license fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be
paid by a vendor to the city of Skiatook if the vendor intends to sell or serve alcohol and/or 3.2 beer which is intended to be consumed on the
vendor's premises. This fee shall be paid when the vendor's application for a license is submitted to the city clerk. Licenses under this section shall
be granted for a calendar year from January 1 through December 31. The license fee for an initial license shall be prorated if granted for a period of
time less than a full calendar year. The fee for annual license renewals shall not be prorated regardless of when the application for annual renewal is
filed.
C. License Application: Application for a license to sell or serve alcohol and/or 3.2 beer by a vendor located within the city of Skiatook shall be made by
completing and submitting the application form to the city clerk. The form shall include the vendor's business name, the owner's name and address if
the business is a sole proprietorship, the name of the president and all other officers and directors if the business is a corporation, and the names of all
partners or members if the vendor is a partnership or a limited liability company. The application form shall also require the vendor to submit
information verifying that the vendor has obtained the necessary permits required by state law from the district court in the county where the vendor is
located and the Oklahoma tax commission. The application form shall also require information regarding the number of each permit and the date each
permit was granted to the vendor. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement on the application form. Knowingly or intentionally
submitting an application containing false information shall be unlawful and shall serve as grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a vendor's
license issued by the city of Skiatook.
D. License Issuance: A license under this section shall be issued to a vendor when the applicant has completed each of the following requirements:
1. Obtained a county permit from the district court clerk and satisfied other applicable requirements under state law.
2. Satisfactorily submitted the application required under this section to the city clerk.
3. Paid the required license fee as set forth in subsection B of this section to the city of Skiatook.
All licenses shall be issued for one calendar year from January 1 to December 31. The fee for any license issued after the effective date of this
section, and for a period of less than one calendar year, shall be prorated accordingly. Payment of annual license fees must be made within thirty
(30) days from the date the license expires. Any vendor failing to pay the annual fee within thirty (30) days from the date the license expires, or within
thirty (30) days from the date the vendor begins selling or serving alcohol and/or 3.2 beer if a new application, shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in subsection H2 of this section.
E. Sale, Barter Or Gift: It shall be unlawful for any person or business licensed under this section to sell, serve, barter or give to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) any beverage containing alcohol and/or 3.2 beer. Conviction, or acceptance of a plea bargain, by an employee or agent of the
vendor for such an offense shall subject the vendor's license to sell or serve alcohol and/or 3.2 beer to suspension or revocation by the city as provided
in subsection H of this section.
F. Misrepresentation Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent their age to any vendor for the purpose of obtaining or facilitating the sale
or serving of alcohol and/or 3.2 beer.
G. Transfers: Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the
premises described in the application. If a business holding a license under this section is sold, a new license must be obtained by the new owner. A
separate license for each location of businesses with common ownership, including all chain stores and businesses owned and operated pursuant to
franchise agreements, must be obtained by a vendor operating more than one business engaged in the business of selling or serving alcohol and/or
3.2 beer within the city of Skiatook.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 36/269
H. Penalties:
1. Suspension Of License:
a. A license granted under this section may be revoked or suspended by the city manager, without a hearing subsequent to conviction of the vendor,
its employees or agents, for the sale of alcohol and/or 3.2 beer to a minor, or by the acceptance of a plea bargain for such an offense. In addition
to the fines and penalties which may be imposed upon the employee or agent serving or selling alcohol and/or 3.2 beer to a minor, the following
sanctions shall be imposed upon the vendor:
(1) First conviction of the vendor or its employees or agents within a twenty four (24) month period will result in the issuance of an official written
warning to the vendor that additional convictions will result in suspension of the vendor's license.
(2) Second conviction of the vendor or its employees or agents within a twenty four (24) month period will result in suspension of the vendor's
license to sell or serve alcohol and/or 3.2 beer for three (3) consecutive days.
(3) Third conviction of the vendor or its employees or agents within a twenty four (24) month period will result in suspension of the vendor's license
to sell or serve alcohol and/or 3.2 beer for up to seven (7) consecutive days.
(4) Each additional conviction of a vendor or its employees or agents within a twenty four (24) month period will result in an additional suspension
of the vendor's license to sell or serve alcohol and/or 3.2 beer for an additional thirty (30) day period.
b. The vendor shall have the right to appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council within five (5) business days of the city manager's
decision to revoke or suspend a vendor's license. The city council shall hold a public hearing at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting to
consider the matter, and thereafter shall affirm or reverse the decision of the city manager. If the city council determines that suspension of the
vendor's license is warranted under this section, the suspension shall begin within five (5) business days from the hearing date. During the
suspension period the vendor may not sell or serve alcohol and/or 3.2 beer.
2. Failure To Obtain A Permit As Required By This Section: Any existing vendor who fails to obtain a permit within thirty (30) days from the date this
section becomes effective shall be prohibited from selling or serving alcohol and/or 3.2 beer until such time as a license is obtained by the vendor. All
new businesses intending to sell or serve alcohol, for consumption either on or off the vendor's premises, shall be required to obtain a license under
this section within thirty (30) days of the date the vendor begins selling or serving alcohol and/or 3.2 beer. A vendor who continues to sell or serve
alcohol and/or 3.2 beer without obtaining an initial or renewed license under this section shall receive an initial written warning and thereafter shall
have three (3) business days to file an application with the city clerk to obtain a license in compliance with this section. Subsequent to the issuance
of a warning under this section, a vendor who continues to sell or serve alcohol and/or 3.2 beer after the three (3) day period without obtaining the
required license shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day alcohol and/or 3.2 beer are served or sold by the
vendor without a license. The city shall also be entitled to pursue injunctive relief and all other available legal remedies in the district courts against
the vendor. In addition, the city shall notify all state agencies vested with licensing, regulatory or review power, including, but not limited to, the ABLE
commission and the Oklahoma tax commission, of the vendor's failure to obtain a permit as required by this code.
3. Vendor Serving Or Selling Alcohol And/Or 3.2 Beer While Under Suspension: Any vendor who fails to adhere to the conditions of a suspension
imposed by the city manager or the city council and continues to serve or sell alcohol and/or 3.2 beer during such suspension is in violation of this
section and shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day alcohol and/or 3.2 beer are sold or served by the vendor
while its license is under suspension. In addition, the city shall be entitled to pursue any legal and injunctive relief, and shall notify the relevant
agencies set forth in subsection H2 of this section. (Ord. 2013-22, 11-12-2013)
Chapter 2
ITINERANT VENDORS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
INTERSTATE COMMERCE: As used in this chapter, items or property from another state which are consigned to any other state and eligible under the
tariffs, rules and regulations approved by the U.S. congress and/or federal administrative agencies as not subject to taxation due to their temporary
presence in this state.
PEDDLER AND/OR ITINERANT VENDOR (Used Interchangeably): Means and includes all persons, firms or corporations, as well as their agents and
employees who engage in the temporary or transient business in the city of selling or offering for sale any goods or merchandise, amusement or services,
or exhibiting the same for sale or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof and who for the purpose of carrying on such
business or conduction of such exhibits thereof either hire, rent, lease or occupy any room or space in any building, structure, other enclosure, vacant lot
or any other property whatever in the city in, through, or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale or exhibited for the purpose of
taking orders for the sale thereof.
PERSON: Shall include the singular and plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership, society or any
other organization.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER: A person who travels from place to place taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise
or property of any nature for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future.
TEMPORARY: As used in the definition of "interstate commerce", any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements
have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least one hundred (100) days, in or upon which such business is to be operated or
conducted.
TRANSIENT: As used in the definition of "peddler and/or itinerant vendor", any such business of any such itinerant vendor as may be operated or
conducted by persons, firms or corporations, or by their agents or employees who reside away from the city or who have fixed places of business in places
other than the city or who move stocks of goods or merchandise or samples thereof into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them, or the
unsold portion thereof, away from the city before the expiration of one hundred (100) days. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 37/269
4-2-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any "peddler", "itinerant vendor", "solicitor" and/or "canvasser" to sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale, or exhibit for the
purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, any goods or merchandise in the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a license as herein
provided for. The city clerk shall issue to each person a license authorizing such person to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale, or exhibit for the purpose
of taking orders for the sale thereof in the city his goods or merchandise only after such person shall have fully complied with all provisions of this
chapter and shall have paid the license fees hereinafter provided, which sum shall be compensation to the city for the services herein required of it and
to enable the city to partially defray the expenses of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. A separate license is required for each person. (Ord. 2012-
02, 4-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. Nontransferable: No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it
was issued.
C. Exhibition Of License: Peddlers, itinerant vendors, solicitors and canvassers shall exhibit and display their license or badge as evidence thereof to all
persons when they are engaged in itinerant vending, peddling, canvassing or soliciting. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
D. Fees:
1. Rate: For the issuance of a license, the city clerk shall assess and receive a fee of either five dollars ($5.00) per day; ten dollars ($10.00) per week;
or thirty dollars ($30.00) per month. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
2. Basis For Fees: For the purpose of this chapter, any period of days less than seven (7) calendar days shall be considered per day; any period of
seven (7) calendar days in total shall be considered one week; any period of more than seven (7) calendar days and not more than thirty (30)
calendar days shall be considered one month. The applicant may choose whichever basis (whether per day, per week or per month) as the applicant
so desires. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
3. Exemption: An itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor or canvasser which considers itself exempt from this chapter by reason of being engaged in
interstate commerce shall have the right to request a hearing before the city clerk to determine the burden, if any, imposed on the vendor by this
chapter. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
E. License Term: All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the date specified in the license. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
4-2-3: EXCLUDED PERSONS:
The following persons are excluded from the application of the provisions of this chapter and no license is required:
A. Persons engaged in selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such property;
B. Merchants having regular places of business in the city and their employees in taking orders at the houses of their customers for goods, wares and
merchandise held in stock at such places of business and in delivering the goods so ordered;
C. Persons selling daily or weekly newspapers;
D. Agents of Skiatook schools, churches or other nonprofit organizations permanently located within the boundaries of the city or within an eight (8) mile
radius thereof;
E. Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods or merchandise to parties engaged in the business of buying and selling and dealing in
goods or merchandise or service, or to sales at wholesale and not retail, or to sales of advertising in any phone book or other professional directories;
F. Sales of goods or merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable purpose; and
G. Vendors of farm produce, agricultural products or firewood in their natural states. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
4-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Filing Of Application: Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file with the city clerk in duplicate a sworn application in writing on a form to be
furnished by the clerk setting forth the information required by this chapter. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. Contents Of Application: The application shall provide the following information, when applicable:
1. Full name, description, birth date, and a copy of a valid driver's license or state issued photo identification card of each individual applicant.
2. Address, both legal and local.
3. Nature of business and kinds of goods or services to be sold.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 38/269
4. If employed by another, the name and address of the applicant's employer, together with a brief description of the credentials showing the exact
relationship.
5. Length of time for which right to do business is requested.
6. Description and license number or other identification of any vehicle to be used.
7. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or other offense involving dishonesty, the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
8. A written, notarized statement by the legal owner of the land upon which any fixed business location shall be located authorizing the use of the land
for the purposes desired by the applicant.
9. A copy of a valid state of Oklahoma sales tax permit, or proof that the applicant is exempt from the payment of sales tax; or other applicable
municipal, county, state or federal licenses or permits.
10. A certified copy of its corporate charter, permit or authority to do business in the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
4-2-5: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Police Report: Upon receipt of an application for license, the city clerk shall refer one copy to the chief of police who shall note thereon any record
concerning the applicant which may appear from the official records in his charge and return the same promptly to the clerk.
B. Other Investigation Or Inquiry: The city clerk shall cause such other investigation or inquiry to be made concerning the applicant's employer as may be
deemed necessary to determine the character and business responsibility of the applicant and whether his application is in compliance with the terms
and conditions of this chapter.
C. Issuance Of License; Badge: If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory
and the application is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter, the city clerk, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, shall issue
the license. Upon issuance of the license, the city clerk shall also issue and deliver to the applicant a badge in a size and of a nature to be designed by
the clerk which shall indicate that the applicant has received a license from the city.
D. Disapproval: If, as a result of the application and/or investigation provided for in this section, the applicant's character or business responsibility or that
of his employer are found to be unsatisfactory; and/or the facts stated in such application are found to be untrue and/or incomplete; and/or the applicant
fails to provide any document(s), proof, permit(s) and/or information as required in support of the application the chief of police or city clerk shall
endorse on such application his/her disapproval thereof and the reasons for the same, and the clerk shall then notify the applicant that his application
has been disapproved and that no license will be issued.
E. Appeal: Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk in the denial or revocation of a license as provided herein shall have
the right to appeal therefrom to the city council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the city council within fourteen (14) days after notice of the
action complained of has been given to the applicant personally or mailed, postage prepaid, to the address stated in his application. The city council
shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, notice of which shall be given to the applicant at least five (5) days prior to the date set for
hearing. The decision and order of the city council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
4-2-6: MINIMUM AGE OF LICENSEE:
No license shall be issued as an itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser or solicitor to any person under the age of sixteen (16) years, nor shall any licensee
under this chapter employ or engage any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to be employed as an itinerant vendor, canvasser, solicitor or peddler.
(Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
4-2-7: RESTRICTED AND PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Loud Noises: No itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser or solicitor, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, blow a horn or use any sound amplifying
device or system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or sidewalks of the city where loud and raucous sound is emitted or produced.
B. Use Of Streets: No itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets nor shall any be
permitted a stationary location, nor shall any be permitted to operate in a congested area where operations might impede or inconvenience the public.
C. Use Of Public Property To Establish A Business: No itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall use any public property within the corporate
limits of the city, including streets, parks and public rights of way, to establish a business or service operation. Exempt from this provision are any
itinerant vendors, peddlers, canvassers, or solicitors engaged in a special event or other activity authorized by the city council, city
manager/administrator, chief of police or other person(s) permitted to make such authorizations. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
4-2-8: POLICE RECORD OF CONVICTIONS:
The chief of police shall report to the city clerk all convictions for violations of this chapter and the clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and
record the reports of violations therein. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 39/269
4-2-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Grounds For Revocation: Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city clerk after notice has been served on the
applicant for any of the following causes: (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, omission or any false statement contained in the application for license.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as an itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor or canvasser.
3. Any violation of this chapter.
4. Conviction of any felony or other crime involving dishonesty.
5. Conducting the business of itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor or canvasser in an unlawful manner or in such a manner to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
B. Notice Of Revocation And Hearing: Notice of the revocation of a license shall be in writing, setting forth with particularity the grounds of complaint. Upon
receipt of a complaint, the city clerk shall forthwith revoke the license so issued and shall contemporaneously therewith set a time and place for
hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by the city clerk, at which hearing evidence may be presented by the complainant and the licensee. After
receiving and considering such evidence, the city clerk shall reinstate the license or shall permanently revoke the same. The hearing before the city
clerk must be conducted within five (5) days from the date of the receipt of the complaint. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city clerk shall
have the right to appeal to the city council as set forth in subsection 4-2-5E of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
4-2-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. Violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license granted. (Ord. 2012-02, 4-10-2012)
Chapter 3
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
4-3-1: DESCRIPTION:
"Adult entertainment establishments" shall be described as businesses which cater primarily to adults twenty one (21) years of age or older and/or which
sell intoxicating beverages and/or low point beer to be consumed on the premises, and all sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 2004-07, 9-14-2004)
4-3-2: INCLUDED USES:
Bar/tavern, beer bar, billiard parlor/pool hall, private club/nightclub, and sexually oriented business are considered included uses. (Ord. 2004-07, 9-14-
2004)
4-3-3: LOCATION RESTRICTION:
No person shall exercise supervisory control, manage, operate, cause or permit the establishment of any of the sexually oriented businesses as described
in this chapter in any area zoned other than CG or CH. (Ord. 2004-07, 9-14-2004)
4-3-4: USE CONDITIONS:
A. Illegal Activities Prohibited: Some of the businesses and activities described in this chapter may be illegal under state or federal law, and persons
associated therewith may be subject to criminal prosecution. Nothing in this chapter is intended to make legal any business or activity now illegal under
state or federal law.
B. Screening From Residential District: The uses included in this chapter, when located on a lot which is abutting a residential district, must be screened
from such residential district by the construction and maintenance of a screening fence or wall along the lot line or lines in common with such district.
C. Spacing Standards: Adult entertainment establishments must meet the minimum spacing standards listed below:
1. Public entrance doors shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from a residential district, which shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest
point on a residential zoning district boundary line to the nearest public entrance door of the adult entertainment establishment.
2. Such establishments shall not be located closer than three hundred feet (300') from a public park, school or church, which shall be measured from
the nearest point on the property line of a park, school or church to the nearest public entry door of the adult entertainment establishment measured
along the street right of way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points. For purposes of determining
measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street from such park, school or church shall be considered as if it were located on
the same side of the street.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 40/269
3. Such establishments shall be spaced at least three hundred feet (300') from any other adult entertainment establishment listed herein, which shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the wall of the portion of the building in which said business is conducted, to the nearest point of
the wall of the portion of the building in which another adult entertainment establishment is located.
4. The uses included in this chapter are prohibited except within a completely enclosed building. (Ord. 2004-07, 9-14-2004)
Chapter 4
OIL WELL DRILLING
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements for the drilling of wells on properties located within the corporate limits of the city, in
addition to those imposed by other governmental agencies. (1991 Code § 14-270)
4-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CORPORATE LIMITS: All areas legally annexed by the city of Skiatook, excluding those areas enclosed by a narrow strip of annexed territory, commonly
known as a "fence line".
DRILLING EQUIPMENT: All such items that may be necessary and proper to facilitate the access to mineral resources or the exploration for these
resources, specifically exempting those operations whose intent is to secure potable water supplies.
PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT: Those devices necessary and proper to extract mineral resources after access has been attained.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING: Any house, apartment, duplex or other structure which is normally occupied by a person as his or her place of abode and is
not located within an area zoned for commercial services.
SECURITY DEVICE: Any physical barrier to human or domestic animals. (1991 Code § 14-271)
4-4-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. Application; Information Required: At least ten (10) days prior to any activity by drilling equipment, the owner of mineral rights or his agent shall apply
with the building inspector of the city for a permit to drill, on such forms as the building inspector shall provide. Forms shall include the following
information:
1. Plot Plan: Plot plan containing distances from proposed wellhead to:
a. Adjoining surface property lines.
b. Streets, alleys, and/or other public/private roadways.
c. All structures, habitable or otherwise.
d. Known utility lines.
2. Proof Of Insurance: Proof of liability insurance, either specific or general in nature, insuring the driller or operator in the minimum amount of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for drilling purposes.
3. Security Device: Proposed security device.
4. Emergency Number: A twenty four (24) hour phone number to be used for notification in case of emergency. (1991 Code § 14-273)
B. Permit Fees: A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged to process a drilling application, and, in addition, a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each of the
following applicable inspections. All fees shall be payable at the time application is made. The following inspections shall be made, when applicable:
1. Temporary electrical service.
2. Permanent electrical service.
3. Security device installation.
4. Special inspections where necessary and appropriate. (1991 Code § 14-274)
4-4-4: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A minimum one hundred foot (100') setback shall be required from all public and private roadways or alleys, and surface property lines, including rights of
way, except those designated as easements; and for all structures, a minimum setback of twenty five feet (25') shall be maintained from all public or
private utility lines located underground. Variances may be granted only by the city council. (1991 Code § 14-275)
4-4-5: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 41/269
A. Discharge Onto Liquid Surfaces: No discharge onto the surface of any liquid, drilling mud, salt, water or other noxious or deleterious substances shall
be permitted from the well site or pits, tanks or other accessories to the operation.
B. Gases: No gases or other flammable vapors shall be released except in compliance with the rules of the Oklahoma corporation commission. (1991
Code § 14-276)
C. Noise: Noise emitted from such operation shall be limited so as not to cause a disturbance of the peace as provided for in state law. No operations may
be conducted after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and before six o'clock (6:00) A.M., at any well site within one thousand feet (1,000') of a residential,
commercial or other establishment where there are persons reasonably expected to be annoyed thereby. (1991 Code § 14-276; amd. 2011 Code)
4-4-6: SECURITY DEVICES:
Upon completion of drilling and placement of production equipment, an approved security device shall be placed around all mechanical and electrical
devices. Security devices shall be designed to restrict the accidental electrocution or entanglement in moving devices by humans or domestic animals. At
a minimum, the security device shall be a wooden or metal fence not less than fifty two inches (52") in height with positive locks at all access points. (1991
Code § 14-277)
4-4-7: DRILLING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Location: No person, firm or corporation shall conduct any drilling or other oil and gas mining operations within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a
residence; provided, that this provision shall not apply to any oil and gas well which was drilled prior to the effective date hereof, and in constant
production since the date drilling operations ceased.
B. City Permit: No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any oil and gas mining or exploration operation without having first applied for and received
from the city a permit for the same. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in mining operations except in compliance with any restrictions
imposed by the permit issued by the city. (1991 Code § 14-278)
4-4-8: DUPLICATED REQUIREMENTS; MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY:
In all cases where the requirements of this chapter are duplicated, more or less, by the state of Oklahoma or the corporation commission of the state of
Oklahoma, the more restrictive set of regulations shall apply. (1991 Code § 14-280)
4-4-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Penalty Imposed: Violation of this chapter is hereby declared a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (1991 Code § 14-281; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Nuisance Declared: A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and subject to abatement as other nuisances by civil action for injunction
and other remedies afforded by state law for abatement of nuisances. (1991 Code § 14-281)
Title 5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
TOBACCO USE IN CITY BUILDINGS, VEHICLES
5-1-1: TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE DEFINED:
"Tobacco", as used in this chapter, includes, but is not limited to, smoking tobacco such as used in pipes, cigarettes and cigars, and chewing or dipping
tobacco, such as snuff and chewing tobacco. It also includes tobacco substitutes and replacements consumed by the inhalation of smoke in the manner of
smoking cigarettes. "Electronic smoking device", as used in this chapter, means an electronic and/or battery operated device, the use of which may
resemble smoking that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. An electronic smoking device includes any such device,
whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, also known as an e-cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an
electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or description which can be classified as an electronic smoking device, including
electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS), and vapor products. (Ord. 2014-05, 2-11-2015)
5-1-2: USE PROHIBITED:
The use of tobacco or an electronic smoking device in any form is hereby prohibited on all real property, including all buildings and structures owned by the
city of Skiatook or the Skiatook public works authority. The use of tobacco or an electronic smoking device in any form is hereby prohibited in all vehicles
and equipment owned, operated or utilized by the city of Skiatook or the Skiatook public works authority. (Ord. 2014-05, 2-11-2015)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 42/269
5-1-3: EMPLOYEES AND CONTRACTORS:
A. Compliance Required: Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by employees and independent contractors of the city shall be a condition of
continued employment or contractual relations. All contracts between the city and contractors shall be deemed to include a provision requiring
compliance with this chapter.
B. Posting Of Signs: The city council shall cause conspicuous signs to be posted which conspicuously state that smoking in the municipal places
described in section 5-1-2 of this chapter is prohibited. (Ord. 93-02, 3-9-1993)
5-1-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each occurrence of a
violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 93-02, 3-9-1993; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 2
FOOD HANDLERS
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
FOOD: Shall include all commodities used for food, drink, confectionery, or condiment by man or animals, whether the same be simple or compound.
HEALTH OFFICER: The superintendent of health of the applicable county, whether Osage or Tulsa, or his authorized representative. (1991 Code § 11-1;
amd. 2011 Code)
5-2-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person who operates or who is employed by any business which produces, prepares, manufactures, sells
or packages "food", as defined in section 5-2-1 of this chapter, in the city to not have in his or her possession a current and unrevoked permit approved
by the health officer. (1991 Code § 11-3)
B. Application For Permit: Application for such a permit must be made in writing to the health officer by the person desiring such permit. Prior to approval
of such application and the issuance of such permit, the health officer shall instruct such person in approved sanitation practices in food handling;
provided, that the health officer is hereby authorized, in lieu of the above instruction, to require applicants for permits to attend a course of instruction in
sanitary practices of food service, prior to approval of such application and issuance of such permit. (1991 Code § 11-5)
C. Permit Fee: Upon approval of such application, the city-county health department of Tulsa County and/or Osage County shall issue said person, a
permit; provided, that there shall be collected a fee as provided by the city council, but in no event shall the fee be less than six dollars ($6.00) for each
permit to help defray the expenses of conducting the required course of instruction in sanitary practices of food services. Said permit shall entitle such
person to work in a food establishment during the thirty six (36) months following the date on which said permit is issued. (1991 Code § 11-6; amd.
2011 Code)
D. Temporary Permits: The health officer is hereby authorized to issue temporary permits permitting said applicant to work as a food handler, except as
described in section 5-2-3 of this chapter, until the next regular course of instruction in sanitary practices of food handling is conducted; provided, that
such temporary permit shall expire on the day the above mentioned course of instruction begins. (1991 Code § 11-7)
E. Medical Examinations: Before approval of application for a permit, the health officer may require, in his discretion, such medical and laboratory
examinations as he may deem necessary to minimize the possibility of transmission of communicable diseases. (1991 Code § 11-8)
5-2-3: EMPLOYMENT OF DISEASED PERSONS:
No employer shall employ, permit or suffer any person to work, nor shall any person work, in a building, room or vehicle occupied or used for the
production, preparation, manufacture, packaging, storage, sale, distribution and transportation of food, when such person is afflicted with any contagious
or infectious disease. (1991 Code § 11-2)
5-2-4: HIRING PERSONS POSSESSING PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who conducts or operates a business wherein food is produced, prepared, manufactured, sold, or packaged, other than
a temporary establishment, in the city, to hire or permit to be hired, or permit to work gratis, any person who does not possess a current and unrevoked
permit approved by the health officer. "Temporary food establishment" shall mean any food services establishment which operates at a fixed location, not
to exceed two (2) weeks. (1991 Code § 11-4)
5-2-5: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 43/269
The health officer may at any time revoke the permit of any person handling food for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, for carelessness
on the part of such person in the handling of food, or for any act affecting the health of the public. Such permit may be reinstated only by the health officer
upon showing that the matter complained of has been remedied. (1991 Code § 11-9)
5-2-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any section or provision of this chapter, or who shall violate any unlawful rule or regulation made by the superintendent of
health of Tulsa County or Osage County shall be guilty of an offense, and any person who shall refuse or fail to do anything herein commanded in this
chapter, or who does that which is prohibited herein shall likewise be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not less
than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than thirty five dollars ($35.00), including costs; provided, that each and every violation, and each day of violation shall
be a separate offense. (1991 Code § 11-10; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 3
HYPODERMIC SYRINGES
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms have the following meanings:
CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE: A drug, substance or immediate precursor in schedules I through V of the Oklahoma uniform controlled
substances act1 as that act now exists and may be hereafter amended.
DISPOSABLE SYRINGE: A hypodermic syringe which is manufactured for use one time or the needle of which is designed for use only one time.
HYPODERMIC SYRINGE OR SYRINGE: A device manufactured or designed to inject or extract a substance below the layer of the epidermis of any living
thing. (1991 Code § 11-101)
5-3-2: SALE OF SYRINGES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
No person or firm may sell a hypodermic syringe to another, except to a hospital or one licensed to prescribe or dispense a "controlled dangerous
substance" by the laws of this state or the United States, without first requiring identification of the purchaser of a prescription, certificate of need or an
authorization, written or verbal, for the purchase of the hypodermic syringe from a licensed physician or official of a state, county, or city-county health
department; and if the need is for use of the hypodermic syringe with animals or fowl, the certificate, prescription or authorization may be from a doctor of
veterinary medicine. (1991 Code § 11-102)
5-3-3: RECORD OF SALES:
A. Records Required: Any person who sells hypodermic syringes shall maintain a written record of sales, showing the name of persons to whom the
syringe was sold, the address of the buyer, the date of the sale, the number and type (by capacity) of syringes sold. (1991 Code § 11-103)
B. Inspection Of Records: Records required by this section to be maintained shall be made available for inspection during business hours to the chief of
police, the assistant chief of police or any other person who the chief of police may designate in writing. (1991 Code § 11-104)
5-3-4: USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Destruction Of Used Syringes: Any person who uses any disposable syringe shall, immediately after use of it, destroy it or render it or its needle
inoperable so that it cannot be used again by any other person. (1991 Code § 11-105)
B. Multiple Use: Any person who uses a needle or syringe intended for use more than one time shall, immediately after the final use of the same, destroy
the needle or syringe, or either, rendering it inoperable so that the needle or syringe cannot be used again by any other person. (1991 Code § 11-106)
5-3-5: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative to and shall not operate to repeal any other ordinances. (1991 Code § 11-109)
5-3-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Separate Violations: Every article sold and every day a sale is conducted in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (1991 Code
§ 11-107)
B. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 11-108; amd. 2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 44/269
Chapter 4
AMBULANCE SERVICE
5-4-1: PURPOSE; UTILITY SERVICE RATE INCREASE:
The City Council finds that the current cost for ambulance service provided by the City to its citizens and others is frequently a hardship upon those
compelled to call up such service and that the best interests of the residents of the City would be served by providing for ambulance service at a rate equal
to existing medical insurance coverage to certain classes of residents and by funding such ambulance service by an increase in the charge made for utility
services by seven dollars ($7.00) per month. Therefore, the ambulance service provided by this chapter shall be deemed a service supplemental to
insurance coverage afforded persons entitled to ambulance service by this chapter and shall be construed accordingly. (Ord. 2017-04, 6-13-2017)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meanings:
AMBULANCE: Any ground, air or water vehicle which is or should be approved by the Commissioner of Health, designed and equipped to transport a
patient or patients and to provide appropriate on scene and en route patient stabilization and care as required. Vehicles used as ambulances shall meet
such standards as may be required by the State Board of Health for approval, and shall display evidence of such approval at all times.
AMBULANCE SERVICE: Any private firm or governmental agency which is or should be licensed by the State Department of Health to provide levels of
medical care based on certification standards promulgated by the board.
CITY: The incorporated City of Skiatook excluding therefrom any area located within the City's "fence line" and not within the actual corporate limits of the
City.
EMERGENCY: A sudden and unexpected illness or injury requiring immediate transportation to a hospital or other place where emergency medical
attention is rendered and circumstances in which life or limb is in imminent danger of loss. Under no conditions shall any person be entitled to the
supplemental ambulance service provided by this chapter unless transportation of such person by ambulance was medically reasonable and necessary.
Ambulance service shall not be utilized as a taxi service or means of transportation.
GEOGRAPHIC CENTER: The intersection of the centerlines of Highway 20 and Osage Avenue in the City of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
ILLNESS OR INJURY: A physical impairment or disability which arose suddenly and unexpectedly and which requires immediate medical attention. It does
not include any mental illness or ambulance transportation when the person transported was biologically dead when the ambulance transportation
commenced. It does, however, include attempted suicide.
INSURANCE: Medical, hospitalization or other insurance or indemnity agreement which provides benefits or pays claims for medical services, automobile
insurance providing for payment of medical benefits to the insured or his family, third party liability coverage resulting in payment of medical expenses of
residents, workers' compensation benefits, Medicare and other welfare programs providing for payment of medical care or services. "Insurance benefits"
means the proceeds of such insurance or programs.
PHYSICIAN: Any medical doctor or osteopathic physician licensed to practice within the State of Oklahoma. It does not include any other practitioners of
the healing arts, including, but not limited to, psychologists, psychiatrists, and chiropractors.
PLACE OF BUSINESS OR BUSINESS: Any commercial establishment having a location separate and apart from any other such establishment.
RESIDENCE: One (1) single-family dwelling unit.
RESIDENT: A person permanently residing in the City of Skiatook for a continuous period of not less than sixty (60) days and who resides in the City with
the permanent intention of making the City his or her only place of residence for an indefinite period of time.
Other words and phrases used in this chapter are defined parenthetically in this chapter following the use of such word or phrase. (1991 Code § 11-12;
amd. Ord. 2012-12, 10-30-2012)
5-4-3: ELECTRIC SERVICE SURCHARGE:
A. Service Charges Not Affected: Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or alter existing ordinances relating to charges made for electric service by
the City, which schedule of rates are set forth in title 9, chapter 3, article A of this Code. (1991 Code § 11-24)
B. Surcharge Imposed; Exceptions:
1. Except for the exemptions set forth in subsection B2 of this section, there is hereby imposed upon the monthly charge for electric service furnished
by the City of Skiatook and/or Skiatook Public Works Authority to all subscribers of its electric service, wherever located, a surcharge in the sum of
seven dollars ($7.00) per electric meter, which monthly surcharge is in addition to any other charges for electric service which are now or may be
hereafter imposed by the City of Skiatook and/or Skiatook Public Works Authority. (Ord. 2017-04, 6-13-2017)
2. There is hereby excluded from the electric service surcharge imposed by this chapter the following:
a. All meters in excess of one (1) for any residence or business where multiple meters are employed to provide electricity to one (1) residence or one
(1) business, such as are found when multiple meters are used for the convenience of the utility or a single business or residence;
b. Public schools and churches (but not the parsonages); and (1991 Code § 11-13)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 45/269
c. Any electric meter which, if subjected to the surcharge, would, in the opinion of the City Clerk, result in charging one (1) residence or business
twice for ambulance service or imposing the surcharge under circumstances where there is little likelihood that the residence or business would
ever receive a benefit from supplemental ambulance service. (1991 Code § 11-13; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
5-4-4: ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE:
All monies derived by means of the rate increase set forth in section 5-4-3 of this chapter shall be deposited in the General Fund. (1991 Code § 11-14)
5-4-5: AMBULANCE SERVICE SUPPLEMENTAL TO INSURANCE BENEFITS:
After the effective date hereof, emergency ambulance service supplemental to insurance benefits will be furnished to all eligible persons in accordance
with the EMS operational protocols as approved by the Oklahoma State Department of Health and the Skiatook Fire Department (EMS) Medical Director.
A copy of the current EMS operational protocols shall be available for review at City Hall during normal business hours and are also available on the City's
website. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-20-2012)
5-4-6: PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR SERVICE:
The following persons ("eligible persons") are eligible to receive the supplemental ambulance service provided for in this chapter:
A. Residents of the City whose residence receive electric service from the City, members of their family and relatives permanently residing with such
resident and who are themselves residents of the City (including their newborn children). (1991 Code § 11-16)
B. Persons permanently residing without the City but within the area in which the City of Skiatook provides ambulance service, whether in its licensed
service area or the area in which the City of Skiatook is the primary provider of ambulance service, and have resided there for a continuous period of
not less than sixty (60) days and who reside there with the permanent intention of making the same their only place of residence, and who:
1. Subscribe to electric service from the City; or
2. Who, pursuant to section 5-4-8 of this chapter, make a written election to pay for and receive supplemental ambulance service and be subject to the
terms of this chapter, or who pay a monthly ambulance service surcharge at the ambulance subscription rate on a public utility bill, which said
ambulance surcharge is billed and collected by the utility provider and the surcharge is remitted to the City, subject to the terms of this chapter.
C. Nonresidents of the City who are employed by a place of business located in the City subscribing to the City's electric service or a place of business
located within the area in which the City of Skiatook provides ambulance service, whether in its licensed service area or the area in which the City of
Skiatook is the primary provider of ambulance service (a "covered business"), which place of business meets the requirements of subsection B of this
section when emergency ambulance service is the result of illness or injury arising out of and in the course of such nonresident's employment by a
covered business and when such employee is located:
1. Within the corporate limits of the City; or
2. On the place of business located outside the Municipal limits of the City but within the area in which the City of Skiatook provides ambulance service,
whether in its licensed service area or the area in which the City of Skiatook is the primary provider of ambulance service, and when such injury or
medical emergency occurs at the place of business where there exists an electric meter subscribing to the electric service of the City and when the
person or entity in whose name such service exists is subscribing to ambulance service of the City and is remitting the monthly ambulance service
surcharge established pursuant to this chapter, or who pay a monthly ambulance surcharge at the ambulance subscription rate on a public utility bill,
which said ambulance surcharge is billed and collected by the utility provider and the surcharge is remitted to the City, subject to the terms of this
chapter and section 5-4-8 of this chapter, or who pursuant to section 5-4-8 of this chapter, make a written election to pay for and receive
supplemental ambulance service, subject to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-08, 6-11-2013)
D. Any person requiring emergency ambulance service while lawfully upon the premises of any covered business as a business invitee or customer.
E. Residents of nursing homes, hospitals and other institutions or organizations located within the City or within five (5) miles of the geographic center of
the City who subscribe to and agree to pay for ambulance service from the City as provided in section 5-4-8 of this chapter. Residents of such
institutions who do not subscribe to membership in the ambulance service are not covered by the ambulance service provided by this chapter.
F. Persons who have no "insurance", as defined herein, but who otherwise qualify for supplementary ambulance service shall be provided such service at
no cost. (1991 Code § 11-16)
5-4-7: PERSONS EXCLUDED:
Supplemental ambulance service shall not extend to the following:
A. Where more than one (1) residence or business receives electricity through one (1) electric meter, the ambulance service provided for by this chapter
shall extend only to the resident in whose name the electric service account is carried and shall not extend to any other separate place of residence or
business, even though such separate place of residence or business may be occupied by a relative of the person in whose name the electric account is
carried; provided, however, that any such residence or place of business which is excluded by this section shall have the right to subscribe to the
supplemental ambulance service provided for in this chapter in the same manner and with the same effect as if such person were a nonresident of the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 46/269
City and elected to pay for and receive supplemental ambulance service, and such places of residence or business may make such written election in
the same manner as a nonresident.
B. Hospitals, medical clinics, nursing homes and other similar organizations or institutions caring for the ill or infirm are excluded from the service offered
by this chapter, unless the person for whom emergency treatment is needed is otherwise provided ambulance service by the provisions of this chapter.
C. Nursing homes. Where a person for eligible ambulance service pursuant to this chapter is transported to or from a nursing home for illness or injury,
such person shall be charged and be liable for such amount as is allowed by Medicare under the Social Security Act for such transportation, regardless
of destination, which charge the person being transported shall be obligated to pay whether such person is insured by Medicare or not. Furthermore,
whomsoever shall request transportation by ambulance in behalf of another person shall, by having requested the same, be deemed to have agreed to
pay therefor and shall be obligated for such charge. (1991 Code § 11-17)
5-4-8: ELECTION TO SUBSCRIBE TO AMBULANCE SERVICE:
All persons residing within the area in which the City of Skiatook provides ambulance service, whether in its licensed service area or the area in which the
City of Skiatook is the primary provider of ambulance service, and who do not receive electric service from the City, are hereby granted the right and
privilege to subscribe to such ambulance service as follows: (Ord. 2013-08, 6-11-2013)
A. By filing at annual intervals, on a form to be furnished by the City, a written request for ambulance service and payment of the sum of eighty four dollars
($84.00), or such sum as is later amended by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, which sum shall constitute the payment for the ambulance
service from the date of such payment to the following June 30. The yearly subscription fee shall be due on or before July 1 of each year, and the
subscription period shall end on June 30 of the following year. (Ord. 2017-04, 6-13-2017)
B. By payment of subscription fees through a third party public utility provider, upon written agreement with the City, which assesses and collects the
ambulance service subscription monthly, which said monthly fee amount shall be the yearly subscription amount payable in twelve (12) equal
installments, and remits the same to the City of Skiatook, as agreed between the City of Skiatook and the public utility provider.
C. The City Manager is authorized to enter into agreements with third party public utility providers to assess, collect and remit monthly ambulance service
subscription fees to the City of Skiatook for ambulance service subscribers residing outside of the Municipal limits of the City of Skiatook, but who
reside or whose business is located within its licensed service area or the area in which the City of Skiatook is the primary provider of ambulance
service. The subscription fees may be assessed without written consent of the subscriber, but the subscriber shall be allowed to elect not to participate
or "opt out" as set forth in subsection D of this section.
D. Any ambulance service subscriber located outside of the corporate or Municipal limits of the City of Skiatook and who remits subscription payments
monthly pursuant to a surcharge on a third party public utility bill and who does not wish to subscribe for ambulance services, either before or after the
subscription period begins, shall be entitled to elect not to participate or "opt out" on forms prescribed and approved by the City Manager and Fire
Chief. Any ambulance service subscriber, not within the corporate or Municipal limits of the City of Skiatook who elects not to participate or to "opt out"
of the ambulance service subscription shall not be billed the monthly subscription fee beginning with the following billing cycle for that particular utility
provider, and shall be deemed to be a subscriber until the last day of the month in which the final ambulance surcharge is assessed on the utility bill.
(Ord. 2013-08, 6-11-2013)
5-4-9: TERMINATION OF ELECTRIC SERVICE:
If electric service shall for any reason be discontinued or terminated to any resident of the City or any other person eligible for supplemental ambulance
service, such person shall be entitled to receive ambulance service by making application for membership to the City and paying the sum of eighty four
dollars ($84.00) per year for the service. (Ord. 2017-04, 6-13-2017)
5-4-10: SERVICE FOR OTHERS:
Ambulance service furnished for persons who are not provided supplemental ambulance service as set forth in this chapter or who do not subscribe as set
forth in this chapter will be served on a call basis at rates and charges prescribed by the City Council, which rates and charges shall be a base charge and,
in addition, a charge for mileage and medical supplies. (1991 Code § 11-20)
5-4-11: WATER SUBSCRIBERS:
All persons residing within the corporate limits of the City who are furnished water by the City of Skiatook and/or Skiatook Public Works Authority, but not
electric service, will be provided supplemental ambulance service as set forth in this chapter, and, with respect to such persons, the monthly charge for
water is hereby increased by the sum of seven dollars ($7.00) per meter, as a surcharge on the monthly utility billing. With respect to persons residing
outside the corporate limits of the City who receive water from the City of Skiatook and/or Skiatook Public Works Authority, but not electric service, such
persons shall be eligible to subscribe to the ambulance service as set forth in this chapter, and upon subscription to the ambulance service, the water rates
for such person shall, upon subscription, be increased by the sum set forth in this section as a monthly surcharge. (Ord. 2017-04, 6-13-2017)
5-4-12: RATES FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE:
Rates for ambulance service may be set by the City Council at any time by ordinance or resolution. The rates set forth in this chapter are subject to
increase or decrease by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2017-04, 6-13-2017)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 47/269
5-4-13: SUBROGATION AND ASSIGNMENT OF BENEFITS:
All persons subscribing to the City's supplemental ambulance service shall be deemed to have agreed to an assignment to the City of all their rights and
entitlement to the benefits of any insurance attributable to ambulance service provided by the City pursuant to this chapter. Similarly, all residents of the
City subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be obligated to pay for ambulance service a sum equivalent to their insurance coverage. Any person
receiving insurance benefits who fails to pay them to the City shall be liable for the same. (1991 Code § 11-23)
5-4-14: LIMITATION OF CITY OBLIGATION:
Under no condition shall the City be obligated to pay any sums of money to any person eligible for the benefits conferred by this chapter, and when any
person elects to use any ambulance service other than that provided by the City, the City shall have no liability or obligation to pay such person any
benefits therefor. When the City is unable for any reason to provide ambulance service as contemplated by this chapter, no person being refused
ambulance service at such time shall be entitled to make any claim or demand against the City or receive any benefits from the City. The operation of the
ambulance service by the City is hereby declared to be a governmental function of the City for the health and welfare of all persons for whom benefits are
provided by this chapter. (1991 Code § 11-25)
5-4-15: ESTABLISHMENT OF SOLE SOURCE PROVIDER:
The City of Skiatook, through its Fire Department/ambulance service/emergency medical service ("SFD" hereinafter), pursuant to 63 Oklahoma Statutes
section 2515 is hereby established as the "sole source provider" for ambulance service transports originating within the Municipal limits of the City of
Skiatook, Oklahoma. No other ambulances or ambulance services may respond to emergency medical calls originating within the City of Skiatook except
upon mutual aid requests from SFD or with the consent of the City of Skiatook/SFD, or except as set forth in subsection A of this section.
A. Exceptions: No ambulance or ambulance service may transport patients to or from the Municipal limits of the City of Skiatook, Oklahoma, or otherwise
respond to medical calls within the Municipal limits of the City of Skiatook, Oklahoma, except as provided by the following:
1. On a mutual or automatic aid request from SFD during such times as SFD cannot promptly and adequately respond to a request for emergency
medical services;
2. By request of City of Skiatook/SFD or with the consent of the City of Skiatook/SFD;
3. Any ambulance owned or operated by, or under contract to perform ambulance transport services for, the Federal or State government, or any
agency thereof;
4. Any ambulance owned and operated by a hospital and in use to transport a patient of the owner hospital, which patient has been admitted to and not
been discharged from the owner hospital, to or from another hospital or medical care facility at which the patient receives a diagnostic or therapeutic
procedure not available at the owner hospital;
5. Any ambulance engaged in a routine transport call to transport a patient from a hospital, nursing home, or dialysis center located within the Municipal
limits of the City of Skiatook to any location outside the Municipal limits of the City of Skiatook;
6. Any ambulance engaged in the transport of a patient from a location outside the Municipal limits of the City of Skiatook to a location inside the
Municipal limits of the City of Skiatook;
7. Any ambulance engaged in the interstate transport of a patient.
B. Mutual Aid Agreements Not Affected: Mutual aid agreements between the City of Skiatook/SFD and surrounding ambulance services/emergency
medical services are not affected by this section. (Ord. 2012-12, 10-30-2012)
Title 6
PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCES
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a police department for the city, the head of which shall be the chief of police. (2011 Code)
6-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Appointment; Term: The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and is removable by the city manager. The chief of
police is an officer of the city. (Ord. 2013-20, 9-24-2013)
6-1-3: POLICE OFFICERS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 48/269
A. Appointment: One or more police officers may be appointed by the chief of police upon approval by the city manager. All police officers are officers of
the city. (Ord. 2013-20, 9-24-2013)
6-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF CHIEF AND OFFICERS:
A. Powers Generally: The chief of police and all police officers shall possess the powers, and be subject to the liabilities possessed and conferred by law
upon municipal police officers, in executing the orders of the city council, or enforcing the provisions of this code. All police officers shall be considered
officers of the city.
B. Enforcement Duties; Serve Warrants: It shall be the duty of the chief of police and/or all police officers to bring to justice all violators of city ordinances
and federal and state laws, and to turn such violators over to the proper authorities. The chief of police shall be responsible for the service of all
warrants, writs, executions and other processes, properly directed and delivered.
C. Other Duties: The chief of police and each police officer shall perform all other duties prescribed by law or ordinance. (2011 Code)
6-1-5: COMPENSATION:
The chief of police and each police officer shall be paid such compensation as the city council may prescribe. (2011 Code)
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MUNICIPALITY: One which has qualified to participate in the firemen's relief and pension fund.
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT: One which has in its employ not more than two (2) full time salaried firefighters.
VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER: One who is enrolled as a member of a fire department and who serves in said capacity without receiving a regular salary.
(1991 Code § 1-202)
6-2-2: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENTS:
A. Department Established; Scope Of Regulations: There is hereby established a fire department for the city providing officers therefor, defining their
duties, and defining the duties and powers of the members of the fire department, and establishing rules and regulations for the work of the fire
department, and the use of the firefighting equipment, and providing for a penalty for violation of any of the provisions hereof. (1991 Code § 1-201)
B. Fire Chief: The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and is removable by the city manager.
C. Assistant Fire Chief And Members: Assistant fire chief, and all members of the fire department, including volunteers, of the city may be appointed by the
fire chief upon approval by the city manager. (Ord. 2013-20, 9-24-2013)
6-2-3: ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT:
The fire department shall consist of a chief of the department and two (2) assistant chiefs, and as many firefighters of the age of eighteen (18) years and
not more than forty (40) years old at the time of their election to membership, and who are citizens and residents of the city, as are or may be elected and
be approved by the city council; however, under no circumstances shall there be more than a total of twenty (20) members. (1991 Code § 1-204)
6-2-4: FIRE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEFS:
A. General Powers And Duties:
1. Powers And Duties Of Chief:
a. The chief shall be at the head of the department, subject to the laws of the state of Oklahoma, ordinances of the city and the rules and regulations
herein adopted.
b. The chief shall be held responsible for the general condition and efficient operation of the department, the training of members, and the
performance of all other duties imposed upon him.
c. The chief may inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the department, the fire hydrants, cisterns and other sources of water supply at
least twice a year.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 49/269
d. The chief shall maintain a library or file of publications on fire prevention and fire protection and shall make use of it to the best of advantage of all
members.
e. The chief shall make every effort to attend all fires and direct the officers and members in the performance of their duties.
f. The chief shall see that the citizens are kept informed on fire hazards in the community and on the activities of the department.
g. The chief shall see that each fire is carefully investigated to determine its cause, and, in the case of suspicion of incendiarism, shall notify the
proper authorities and secure and preserve all possible evidence for future use in the case.
2. Assistant Chief, Duties: In the absence of the chief, the assistant chief on duty shall command the department and be held responsible therefor in all
respects with the full powers and responsibilities of the chief. (1991 Code § 1-205)
B. General Supervisor: The chief of the fire department shall have the general supervision of the department when it is not in actual duty at a fire, which
supervisor shall be subject to, and not conflict with, such rules and bylaws for the government and management of the department as may from time to
time be adopted by the board of fire officers, as herein provided. (1991 Code § 1-223)
6-2-5: COMPANY OFFICERS:
A. Qualifications: The company officers shall be selected upon their ability to meet the following requirements:
1. Their knowledge of firefighting,
2. Their leadership ability,
3. Their knowledge of firefighting equipment. (1991 Code § 1-206; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Secretary And Treasurer:
1. One member elected by the fire department shall be secretary. His duties shall consist of the following:
a. Calling the roll at the opening of each meeting,
b. Keeping the minutes of each meeting,
c. Reporting once each month to the board of fire officers in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be established by said board.
If the secretary of any company neglects or refuses to make such report, the board of fire officers shall immediately prefer charges against such
delinquent secretary in accordance with the rules and regulations of said board.
2. One member elected by the fire department shall be treasurer. His duties shall consist of the following:
a. Collect any money due the department by the members,
b. Pay any bills owed by the firemen's fund as authorized by the fire board,
c. Report monthly to the firefighters, the status of their fund. (1991 Code § 1-207)
6-2-6: FIRE COMPANIES:
A. Division Into Companies: When the membership is large enough, the firefighters shall be divided into companies, such to consist of not more than
twenty (20) members of which not less than ten (10) must be employed in the city. (1991 Code § 1-219)
B. Transfer Membership Between Companies: When more than one company is formed, any member desiring to transfer his membership from one
company to another shall present to the board of fire officers a certificate in writing signed by the foremen and secretaries of both the companies
showing the consent of each company to the transfer. Upon receipt of such certificate, the board of fire officers shall permit or deny such transfer, their
decision being final and conclusive. (1991 Code § 1-220)
C. Company Officers: When more than one company is formed, each of the companies of the department shall and may choose from their own number a
foreman, assistant foreman and a secretary, in such manner and at such time or times as the board of fire officers may, in its rules and bylaws for the
government of the department, provide and prescribe. (1991 Code § 1-221)
D. Company Duties: It shall be the duty of said companies, so often as any fire shall break out, to respond immediately upon the alarm thereof to their
respective firehouses and to convey their apparatus to the place where the fire shall happen, unless otherwise directed by the chief or other officer who
may be in charge; and upon such direction, they shall return their apparatus well washed and cleaned to their several places of deposit. (1991 Code
§ 1-222)
6-2-7: BOARD OF FIRE OFFICERS:
A. Membership; Authority: The chief and assistant chiefs shall constitute a board of fire officers, who shall meet monthly or more frequently for the
transaction of all business of the department, which board shall have entire and absolute control over and management of the department and its
government, when such department is not upon active duty, subject to the approval of the city council, to which approval the acts of said board of fire
officers shall only be subject as herein particularly and specifically provided. (1991 Code § 1-214)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 50/269
B. Adoption Of Bylaws And Rules: The board of fire officers is hereby authorized, empowered and required from time to time to adopt a code of bylaws
and rules for the control, management and government of the department, and for the regulating of the proceedings and business of the said board,
which code or codes of bylaws and rules, after adoption by such board, shall not become effective and operative until presented to and approved by
the city council. (1991 Code § 1-216)
C. Inspection Of Buildings: The board of fire officers is hereby authorized, empowered and required to inspect from time to time, but at least twice annually,
all buildings and premises where accumulations of combustible materials or other hazardous conditions are liable to exist and to order such changes or
removals as in their opinion are necessary to allow safety from fire. For purposes of inspection, they are hereby empowered to enter any and all
buildings and premises at any reasonable hour. (1991 Code § 1-217)
D. Keeping Records: The board of fire officers is required to devise forms or methods of keeping records and shall see that records are kept of all alarms
of fire, fire losses, methods of extinguishment, drills, hose, apparatus, minor equipment, condition of hydrants, starting of motors and inspections. (1991
Code § 1-218)
6-2-8: BYLAWS OF DEPARTMENT:
The bylaws of the department shall include:
A. All volunteer firefighters are required, when notified, to respond to alarms of fire and other emergencies.
B. Volunteers are required to be present at all regular meetings, call meetings, and schools presented for the benefit of the firefighters.
C. There shall be at least one regular business meeting each month.
D. Any volunteer firefighter having two (2) unexcused absences in succession or three (3) unexcused absences in a period of three (3) months, will be
dropped from the fire department rolls.
E. Volunteer firefighters leaving city for an extended period of time will be required to notify the chief.
F. Any volunteer firefighter refusing to attend training classes provided for him will be dropped from the fire department rolls.
G. Any volunteer member of the fire department shall be dropped from the rolls for any of the following offenses:
1. Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
2. Any act of insubordination;
3. Neglect of duty;
4. Any violation of rules and regulations governing the fire department; or
5. Conviction of a felony. (1991 Code § 1-209)
6-2-9: COMPENSATION AND SALARIES:
A. Salary Of Chief And Assistant Chiefs: The chief and assistant chiefs of the fire department shall receive compensation as provided by the city council.
Such compensation will be in addition to the hourly rate as paid to all firefighters. (1991 Code § 1-210)
B. Compensation For Volunteer Members: Volunteer members of the fire department shall receive reimbursement for expenses incurred on a per call
basis as determined by the city manager for reporting to all called fires, assistance in automobile accidents when required, and certain other fires
located outside the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-28-2014)
6-2-10: MEMBERSHIP REGULATIONS:
A. Propositions To Membership: The names of all persons elected to membership in the company or companies and proposed as members of the
department shall be presented through the board of fire officers in writing, signed by the foreman or secretary of the company in which they are so
elected, to be approved by the said board of fire officers previous to being presented, and no name not so approved shall be presented to the city
council for confirmation. (1991 Code § 1-212)
B. Resignation: All resignations from the department shall take the same course as elections and propositions to membership as provided for in subsection
A of this section. (1991 Code § 1-213)
C. Retirement: Any member of the department is eligible for retirement as provided under subsection 1-6-3B of this code. (1991 Code § 1-215)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 51/269
6-2-11: COMMAND IN ABSENCE OF CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEFS:
Should the chief of the fire department and the assistant chiefs be absent from a fire, the person having charge of the apparatus first arriving at the fire
shall assume the duties of the chief until the arrival of his superior officer. (1991 Code § 1-225)
6-2-12: DEPARTMENTAL AUTHORITY, REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFIC DUTIES:
A. Control At Scene Of Fire: In all cases of fire, the chief of the fire department or, in his absence, an assistant, shall have full power and absolute control
and command and cause the several pieces of apparatus to be worked in the most advantageous manner. (1991 Code § 1-224)
B. Monthly Report To City Council: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to report monthly to the city council the condition of the various
pieces of apparatus and appurtenances, the number of hydrants and the condition of same, the number of fires during the month, their location, cause,
date of same and loss occasioned thereby; the number of members in each company and the total number of active members in the department, and
resignations and expulsions passed upon by the board of fire officers. (1991 Code § 1-226)
C. Authority: The chief of the fire department and his assistants or officers in command at any fire are hereby clothed with full and complete authority as
prescribed by law and are hereby authorized and directed to require and secure the removal of any and all obstructions from in front of and around fire
hydrants, and for such purpose are hereby authorized to call upon the head of any of the municipal departments for aid and assistance in securing
such removal of obstructions. (1991 Code § 1-227; amd. 2011 Code)
D. Care Of Fire Hoses:
1. Washing And Drying: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to see that company officers have all hoses thoroughly washed and dried
after use at fires and drills, and that no wet or dirty hose is placed on the apparatus. (1991 Code § 1-228)
2. Maintenance: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to see that company officers have all hoses on apparatus changed every thirty
(30) days if not otherwise used, and have water run through hoses every sixty (60) days. (1991 Code § 1-229)
3. Testing Of Hoses: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to see that all new hoses are subjected to a test of two hundred (200)
pounds' hydrostatic pressure and that all hoses are tested annually at a hydrostatic pressure of one hundred fifty (150) pounds. (1991 Code § 1-232)
E. Operation Of Motors Of Vehicles: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to see that company officers have the motors of all automobile
apparatus "turned over" and operated for five (5) minutes at least once each day and that a permanent record is kept of such operation at the company
quarters. (1991 Code § 1-230)
F. Heating Of Firehouse: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to see that the company officers have the firehouses heated during the
winter season. (1991 Code § 1-231)
G. Report Defective Fire Hydrants:
1. It shall be the duty of the company officer in charge of his company at a fire or drill to report to the chief of the fire department all fire hydrants that
are found frozen, out of order, leaky, or that are set in such a manner as to make it difficult to connect thereto. (1991 Code § 1-233)
2. It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to make a permanent record of all reports of defective, inoperative or improperly set fire
hydrants, and he shall submit a report to the city council giving the location of the hydrant, name of the maker, with a specification of the troubles.
(1991 Code § 1-234)
H. Record Of Drill Service: It shall be the duty of the foreman of each company to keep a permanent record of the fire and drill service of each member of
his company. A copy of this record shall be submitted to the board of officers at the close of each year. (1991 Code § 1-235)
I. Appointment Of Drivers And Mechanics:
1. Drivers: It shall be the duty of the board of fire officers to appoint five (5) drivers for the automobile apparatus, who shall be thoroughly instructed in
the operation of the apparatus to which they are assigned. (1991 Code § 1-236)
2. Mechanics: It shall be the duty of the board of fire officers to appoint two (2) mechanics to each company, who shall be charged with the duty of
maintaining all the apparatus of the company in good condition and ready for immediate service. (1991 Code § 1-237)
J. Fire Apparatus:
1. Tampering With: No member of any company shall be permitted to tamper with, or fix, or repair any of the apparatus unless so directed by the chief
of the fire department or, in his absence, the assistant chief. (1991 Code § 1-238)
2. Driving: No member of any company shall drive the automobile apparatus except the regularly appointed drivers unless directed to do so by the
company officer or one of the chiefs, and then only in case of an emergency. (1991 Code § 1-239)
3. Unauthorized Handling: No person shall be allowed to enter any firehouse or handle any apparatus or implements belonging to the department
unless accompanied by an active member of the department. (1991 Code § 1-244)
4. Moving: No fire apparatus, during any fire or the report of any fire, shall be taken or moved out of its house unless the foreman, assistant foreman or
at least one member of the company to which the same shall belong shall be present and assent thereto. (1991 Code § 1-245)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 52/269
5. Hiring Out: No apparatus shall be let out for hire, or let in any case, except upon consent of the city and of the chief of the fire department and then
only in the case of a fire in an adjacent or neighboring municipality. (1991 Code § 1-246)
K. Attend Drills: It shall be the duty of each and every member to attend all drills of his company. Any member finding it impossible to drill, who makes
application prior to the drill hour, may be excused by his company officer, provided not more than one excuse is asked for consecutive drills, except in
case of sickness or disability. Absence from four (4) consecutive drills, except for the above causes, shall constitute a dismissal from the department.
Officers and call members will be fined one dollar ($1.00) for failure to report at fires and drills unless due notice has been given in advance, and such
money will be turned into the treasurer of the firemen's fund. (1991 Code § 1-241)
6-2-13: REQUEST FOR REPAIRS OR SUPPLIES:
All requests for repairs or supplies for the various companies of the department shall be presented to the board of fire officers for the approval or
recommendation of said board by the secretary of such companies at the time the monthly report mentioned in subsection 6-2-12B of this chapter is
presented, but in case any apparatus shall become so disabled that immediate repairs are necessary, the foreman or acting foreman of the company
operating such apparatus shall immediately report the condition of the same to the chief who is hereby empowered to have the same repaired at once.
(1991 Code § 1-240)
6-2-14: PRACTICE DRILLS:
A. Duty Of Chief To Call: It shall be the duty of the chief to call out for practice drill one or more companies of the department, and the said chief may,
whenever he deems it necessary, call out any or all such company or companies for such drills when and where he may think advisable, but each
company shall be drilled and trained not less than once each month except during the winter season. For any company, officer or member who is
reported to the board of fire officers for refusal or failure to respond to any such order, such company, officer or member shall be liable to a fine or to
suspension or expulsion as provided for by the rules and regulations of the board of fire officers. (1991 Code § 1-249)
B. Procedure: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to arrange the drills and training so that they will include the proper and efficient use of
all appliances and apparatus, the quick handling, laying and raising of hose, handling of streams, use of shutoff nozzles, siamese connections, forcible
entry tools, salvage work, ladder work, lifesaving and modern methods of extinguishment. (1991 Code § 1-250)
6-2-15: REFUSAL TO OBEY ORDERS:
A. Foreman, Assistant Foreman: Any foreman, assistant foreman, or the member having charge of any fire company, while on fire duty, who shall refuse or
voluntarily neglect to obey or execute any orders from the officer in charge of any fire, shall, for such offense, be subject to a fine or suspension or
expulsion from the department by the board of fire officers in such manner and upon such hearing or trial as may be prescribed or provided by the
bylaws and rules of the board of fire officers. (1991 Code § 1-242)
B. Officers Or Members: Any officer or member of the department or any company or companies of the department who shall refuse or voluntarily neglect
to obey or execute any orders from the officer in charge of any fire, or who shall violate or wilfully neglect or refuse to be controlled, governed, or
managed by any of the rules and bylaws of the board of fire officers that may be adopted from time to time as herein provided, shall be subject to
suspension or expulsion from the department by the board of fire officers in such manner and upon such hearing or trial as may be prescribed or
provided by the bylaws and rules of the board of fire officers; the suspension or expulsion of any company member being subject to the approval of the
city council. (1991 Code § 1-243)
6-2-16: EXPULSION OR SUSPENSION OF MEMBERS:
A. Vote To Expel Or Suspend: If any of the companies shall vote for expulsion or suspension of any of its members, the result of such vote shall be
reported to the board of fire officers at their next meeting. (1991 Code § 1-247)
B. Appeal: The expelled or suspended member shall have the right to appear before the said board of fire officers and state cause (if any) why such
penalty should not be confirmed; and in case of the nonappearance, or in case his appeal is not sustained, the chief shall report his name to the city
council as expelled or suspended, as the case may be. (1991 Code § 1-248)
6-2-17: FAILURE TO PERFORM DUTY:
A. Charges; Trial: All charges for offenses or neglect of duty or insubordination while on duty at a fire that may be preferred against any company, officer or
member of the department shall be tried and determined by the board of fire officers, subject, however, to an appeal from such decision to the city
council who shall either confirm the action of the board of fire officers or refer the same back to them for retrial. (1991 Code § 1-251)
B. Retrial: In event of a retrial being ordered by the city council, the decision arrived at by the board of fire officers at such retrial shall be final, conclusive
and not subject to appeal. (1991 Code § 1-252)
6-2-18: FIRE RUNS WITHIN AND OUTSIDE SERVICE AREA:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
CENTER OF SKIATOOK: The Skiatook municipal building.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 53/269
FIRE PROTECTION: Providing fire extinguishing equipment and personnel for extinguishing fires, which service is also referred to in this service as
"fire runs".
SERVICE AREA: That territory as set forth by resolution 2013-11, passed and approved on April 30, 2013, by the city council of the city of Skiatook,
Oklahoma, and as may later be amended by resolution. (1991 Code § 1-275; amd. Ord. 2013-6, 4-30-2013)
B. Providing Fire Protection Service: Subject to the limitations set forth in this section, the city shall make fire runs within the service area when requested
to do so, subject, however, to the availability of equipment and personnel. (1991 Code § 1-276)
C. Priority Of Service: It shall be the policy of the city to grant priority in making fire runs to the corporate limits of the city of Skiatook, and fire protection
service will be provided in the event of a conflict to that area constituting the corporate limits of the city of Skiatook, to the exclusion, if necessary, of the
service area lying outside the corporate limits of the city. (1991 Code § 1-277)
D. Condition For Providing Service Outside Corporate Limits: The extension of fire protection service to the service area lying outside the corporate limits
of the city is expressly conditioned upon the availability of equipment and personnel, and be establishing the policies set forth in this section. The city
assumes no liability of any nature by reason of any inability to provide fire protection service to the area lying outside the corporate limits of the city.
(1991 Code § 1-278)
E. Nature Of Service: When fire runs are made to the service area lying outside the corporate limits of the city, the service provided shall consist only of
exercising the best efforts to extinguish the fire, and the service provided will not include remaining at the fire site until all smoldering debris and
embers are extinguished. (1991 Code § 1-279)
F. Incorporated Municipalities: Incorporated municipalities shall not be included in the service area; provided, however, that the city will continue to offer to
municipalities located with the service area aid and assistance upon request as it is able to do so. (1991 Code § 1-280)
G. Charges:
1. Charges for fire runs made to the service area lying outside the corporate limits of the city shall be in such sums as may hereinafter by established
by the city council by resolution; provided, however, that no emergency will be declined because of the inability of the person summoning help to pay
or because of the lack of any insurance coverage.
2. Until otherwise established by the city council, the minimum charge for fire runs to the service area lying outside the corporate limits of the city shall
be one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00). (1991 Code § 1-281)
6-2-19: FIRE SERVICE SUBSCRIPTION; HAZARDOUS WASTE REMOVAL:
A. Subscription For Fire Service: Persons residing outside the corporate city limits and within the Skiatook fire department "service area", as defined in
subsection 6-2-18A of this chapter, may subscribe for fire service provided by the Skiatook fire department, subject to the following conditions and
limitations:
1. Fees created by this section may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
2. Fees are due annually, on July 1, unless the fee is paid monthly through a surcharge on a utility bill as approved by the city council, nor shall the
subscription fee be prorated.
3. One subscription shall afford fire service to one individual residence and the real property on which the residence is situated, and contiguous
acreage owned in common, and shall be nontransferable to any other residence, property, structure or territory.
4. A current subscription shall allow the property covered by the subscription fire calls at no charge, other than what can be recovered from any
applicable insurance policy. (Ord. 2013-23, 11-12-2013)
B. Fees:
1. All fire runs, except those covered under subsections A4 and B2 of this section, shall be billed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per hour per unit
for all units deemed appropriate by the fire chief.
2. Mutual aid requested by other organized fire services shall not be billed.
3. Incidents involving hazardous materials shall be billed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per hour per unit, local personnel, and all costs, plus ten
percent (10%) administrative fees, for outside contractors and mutual aid of other services.
C. Hazardous Materials:
1. Definitions: For the purpose of this subsection C, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein:
HAZARDOUS WASTES: a. Waste that is subject to regulation as a hazardous waste under the federal resource conservation and recovery act, 42
USC section 6901 et seq., and regulations adopted pursuant thereto;
b. Waste that is subject to regulation as a hazardous waste under the Oklahoma hazardous waste management act1; or
c. Waste that is ignitable, corrosive, reactive or toxic as determined by testing for the characteristics of ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity or toxicity as
provided in 40 code of federal regulations sections 261.21 through 261.24.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 54/269
WASTES: At least twenty eight (28) gallons or two hundred twenty (220) pounds, whether liquid or solid, of discarded materials and byproducts
including, but not limited to, trash, refuse, garbage by all medical wastes, sewage, ash, sludge, deleterious substances, oil field wastes, commercial
and industrial wastes, and chemical wastes.
2. Liability Of Responsible Person: Whenever the fire department of the city is reasonably required or called upon to remove, clean up, dispel, wet
down or protect others or property from the hazards of wastes or hazardous wastes, any person, firm or corporation having a proprietary interest in,
or having control of, the waste shall be liable at the rate of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per hour per unit for all units dispatched to assist in
such cleanup or protection without regard to negligence or care.
D. Earmarking:
1. All revenues from subscriptions for fire service shall be accounted for in a capital improvements fund for the fire department.
2. All billed fire run revenues in excess of labor, cost and contract expenses, subsection B3 of this section, shall be accounted for at the end of the
city's fiscal year, and surpluses shall be placed in the capital improvements for the fire department. (Ord. 94-13, 10-11-1994)
ARTICLE A. FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU; PROTECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
6-2A-1: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
A. Bureau Established: A bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city is hereby established which shall be operated under the supervision of
the chief of the fire department. (1991 Code § 1-253)
B. Chief Inspector Of Bureau: The chief of the department shall designate an officer (or member) of the department as chief inspector of the bureau, who
shall hold this office at the pleasure of the chief of the department. (1991 Code § 1-254)
C. Assistant Inspectors: The chief of the department may also designate such number of assistant inspectors as shall from time to time be authorized by
the city council. (1991 Code § 1-255)
D. Duties And Powers:
1. It shall be the duty of the officers of the bureau of fire prevention to enforce all laws and ordinances of the state, county, and city covering the
following:
a. The prevention of fires.
b. The storage and use of explosives and inflammables.
c. The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment.
d. The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
e. The means and adequacy of exits in case of fire, from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters,
amphitheaters, and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose.
f. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
2. Such officers of the bureau shall have such powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this article, and as may be
conferred and imposed from time to time by law. (1991 Code § 1-256)
6-2A-2: DELEGATION OF POWERS:
The chief of the fire department (fire marshal) may delegate any of his powers or duties under this article to the chief inspector. (1991 Code § 1-257)
6-2A-3: RECOMMEND ORDINANCES:
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to investigate and to recommend to the city council such additional ordinances as he may deem
necessary for safeguarding life and property against fire. (1991 Code § 1-258)
6-2A-4: CHIEF TO INSTRUCT INVESTIGATORS:
The chief of the fire department (fire marshal) shall prepare instructions for the chief inspector and his assistants and forms for their use in the reports
required by this article. (1991 Code § 1-259)
6-2A-5: BUREAU TO INVESTIGATE FIRES:
A. Investigation: The bureau of fire prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has
been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 55/269
be begun immediately upon the occurrence of such fire by the assistant in whose district the fire occurs, and if it appears to the officer making such
investigation that such fire is of suspicious origin, the chief of the fire department shall be immediately notified of the fact and he shall take charge
immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further
cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case.
B. Report: Every fire shall be reported in writing to the bureau of fire prevention within two (2) days after the occurrence of the same, by the officer in
whose jurisdiction such a fire has occurred. Such report shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the chief of the fire department, and shall
contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin, and circumstance of such fire, the extent of the damage thereof, and the insurance upon
such property, and such other information as may be required. (1991 Code § 1-260)
6-2A-6: LICENSE FOR INFLAMMABLE MATERIALS:
Before licenses may be issued for the keeping, storage, use, manufacture, sale, handling, transportation, or other disposition of highly inflammable
materials and rubbish, crude, petroleum or any of its products, gun or blasting powder, dynamite, or explosives, the chief of the fire department, the chief
inspector, or his assistants, shall inspect and approve the receptacles, vehicles, buildings or storage places to be used for any such purposes. (1991 Code
§ 1-261)
6-2A-7: ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF CHIEF:
A. Inspection Of Hazardous Processes, Materials: The chief of the fire department, chief inspector, or an assistant specially designated thereto, shall
inspect, as often as may be necessary, but not less than four (4) times a year, all specially hazardous manufacturing processes, storage or installations
of acetylene or other gases, chemicals, oils, explosive and inflammable materials, all interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler systems, and such
other hazards or appliances as the chief of the fire department shall designate and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of
the laws and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life and property from fire.
B. Inspection Of Buildings And Premises: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect, or cause to be inspected by the bureau of fire
prevention, or by the fire department officers and members as often as may be necessary, but not less than twice a year in outlying districts and four
(4) times a year in the closely built portions of the city, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of the private dwellings, for
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected, any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any ordinances of
the city affecting the fire hazard. (1991 Code § 1-262)
6-2A-8: PROCEDURE UPON DISCOVERY OF FIRE HAZARD:
A. Order For Removal: Whenever any inspector, as described in section 6-2A-7 of this article, shall find in any building or upon any premises or other
place combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or rubble or unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings,
or any highly inflammable materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property; or shall find obstructions to or on fire
escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants, in case of fire, he
shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or
buildings, subject to appeal within twenty four (24) hours to the chief of the fire department as provided in subsection 6-2A-9B of this article. (1991
Code § 1-263)
B. Penalty For Failure To Comply With Order: Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of said
order shall be liable to a penalty as hereinafter provided. (1991 Code § 1-264)
C. Service Of Such Order: The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a
copy of same to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such
person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the said premises. Whenever it
may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of the premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the said
person a copy of the said order, or, if such owner is absent from jurisdiction of the officer making this order, by mailing such copy to the owner's last
known post office address, by certified mail. (1991 Code § 1-265)
6-2A-9: INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS; APPEAL:
A. Inspection Upon Complaint; Voluntary Inspection: The chief of the fire department or inspector of the bureau of fire prevention, upon the complaint of
any person, or whenever he or they shall deem it necessary, shall inspect all buildings and premises within their jurisdiction. Whenever any of said
officers shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of or insufficient fire escapes, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or
fire extinguishing equipment or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as
to endanger other property or the occupants thereof, and whenever such officer shall find in any building combustible or explosive matter or
inflammable conditions dangerous to the safety of such buildings or the occupants thereof, he or they shall order such dangerous conditions or
materials to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings. If such
order is made by the chief inspector or any of his assistant inspectors, such owner or occupant may, within twenty four (24) days, review such order
and file his decision thereon, and unless by his authority the order is revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be complied with within the
time fixed in said order or decision of the chief of the department. (1991 Code § 1-266)
B. Appeal From Order:
1. Provided, however, that any such owner or occupant may, within five (5) days after the making or affirming of any such order by the chief of the
department, file his petition with the municipal judge, praying a review of such order, and it shall be the duty of such court to hear the same within not
less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days from the time the petition is filed, and to make such order in the premises as right and justice may
require, and such decision shall be final.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 56/269
2. Such parties so appealing to the municipal judge shall file with said judge within two (2) days a bond in an amount to be fixed by the court, to be
approved by the judge, conditioned to pay all costs of such appeal in case such appellant fails to sustain his appeal of the same to be dismissed for
any cause. (1991 Code § 1-267)
C. Power To Enter Any Building: The chief of the fire department, the chief inspector, or any assistant inspector may, at all reasonable hours, and with the
consent of the owner or occupant, enter any building or premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which,
under the provisions of this article, he or they may deem necessary to be made. (1991 Code § 1-268; amd. 2011 Code)
D. Assistance Of City Attorney In Investigation Of Fire: The city attorney, upon request of the bureau of fire prevention, shall assist the inspector in the
investigation of any fire which, in their opinion, is of suspicious origin. (1991 Code § 1-269)
6-2A-10: SCHOOL FIRE DRILLS:
It shall be the duty of the chief of the department to require teachers of public, private, and parochial schools and educational institutions to have one fire
drill each month and to keep all doors and exits unlocked during school hours. (1991 Code § 1-270)
6-2A-11: KEEPING RECORDS OF FIRES:
A. The chief of the department shall keep in his office of the bureau of fire prevention, a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning same, including
statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what
amount.
B. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the inspectors under the provision of this article. All such records shall be public. (1991 Code
§ 1-271)
6-2A-12: ANNUAL REPORT OF BUREAU:
The annual report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made on or before June 30, and transmitted to the city council. Such report shall contain all
proceedings under this article, with such statistics as the chief of the department may wish to include therein. The chief of the department shall also
recommend any amendments to this article which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. (1991 Code § 1-272)
6-2A-13: FAILURE TO PERFORM DUTIES:
Any officer referred to in this article who refuses or neglects to perform the duties herein imposed upon him shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1991 Code § 1-273)
6-2A-14: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article, or neglecting to comply with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall forfeit and pay a fine of not more than fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each
offense, and in addition thereto a fine of not more than fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each day that said violation is permitted to exist beyond a reasonable
period after service of notice is provided. (1991 Code § 1-274)
ARTICLE B. OUTDOOR AND OPEN BURNING REGULATIONS
6-2B-1: PURPOSE:
The following provisions are intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the city of Skiatook due to the hazards attendant to open burning and outdoor burning. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. This article applies to all outdoor burning and open burning within the city of Skiatook, regardless of zoning classification.
B. This article does not apply to grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
C. This article does not apply to burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or animal habitation.
D. This article does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or
maintenance activities. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 57/269
6-2B-3: SEVERABILITY:
Should any portion of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this article shall not be
affected or invalidated. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CAMPFIRE: A small outdoor fire intended for recreation or cooking but not including a fire intended for disposal of waste wood or refuse.
CLEAN WOOD: Natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with preservatives;
and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE: Building waste materials, including, but not limited to, waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated wood,
painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house, commercial
or industrial building, or other structure.
FIRE CHIEF: The chief of the Skiatook fire department or other person designated by the fire chief.
MUNICIPALITY: The incorporated city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
OPEN BURNING: Kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack
or a chimney. This includes burning in a burn barrel.
OUTDOOR BURNING: Open burning or burning in an outdoor wood fired boiler or patio wood burning unit.
OUTDOOR WOOD FIRED BOILER: A wood fired boiler, stove or furnace that is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or
domestic animals.
PATIO WOOD BURNING UNIT: A chimenea, patio warmer, other portable wood burning device, or permanent outdoor fireplaces and barbecues used for
outdoor recreation and/or heating.
REFUSE: Any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-5: GENERAL PROHIBITION ON OPEN BURNING, OUTDOOR BURNING, AND REFUSE BURNING:
Open burning and outdoor burning are prohibited in the city of Skiatook unless such burning is specifically permitted by this article. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-
2013)
6-2B-6: OPEN BURNING OF REFUSE:
A. Open burning of refuse from a commercial or industrial establishment is prohibited.
B. Open burning of refuse from and at a one- or two-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling is prohibited.
C. Open burning of the following materials is prohibited:
1. Construction and demolition waste;
2. Hazardous substances including, but not limited to, batteries, household chemicals, pesticides, used oil, gasoline, paints, varnishes, and solvents;
3. Furniture and appliances;
4. Tires;
5. Any plastic materials including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers;
6. Newspapers or magazines;
7. Corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper;
8. Treated or painted wood including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or
treated with preservatives. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-7: OPEN BURNING OF TREES, LOGS, BRUSH, STUMPS, LEAVES, AND GRASS CLIPPINGS:
A. Open burning of leaves and grass clippings is prohibited.
B. Open burning of trees, logs, brush, vegetative ground cover, and stumps is allowed only in accordance with all of the following conditions:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 58/269
1. Open burning may occur only on agriculturally zoned tracts of three (3) acres or more.
2. Except for barbecue, gas, and charcoal grills, no open burning shall be undertaken during periods when the governor of the state of Oklahoma or
board of county commissioners for the applicable county has issued a burning ban applicable to the area.
3. All allowed open burning shall be conducted in a safe, nuisance free manner, when wind, of twelve (12) miles per hour or less, and weather
conditions minimize adverse effects and do not create a health hazard on roadways or airfields. Open burning shall be conducted in conformance
with all local and state fire protection regulations.
4. Open burning under this section shall only be conducted at a location at least one hundred feet (100') from the nearest building which is not on the
same property for small campfires and at least two hundred fifty feet (250') from the nearest building which is not on the same property for all other
fires.
5. Except for campfires, open burning shall only be conducted between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
6. Open burning shall be constantly attended and supervised by a competent person of at least eighteen (18) years of age until the fire is extinguished
and is cold. The person shall have readily available for use such fire extinguishing equipment as may be necessary for the total control of the fire.
7. No materials may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter or sidewalk.
8. Except for barbecue, gas, and charcoal grills, no burning shall be undertaken within twenty five feet (25') from any combustible material, combustible
wall or partition, exterior window opening, exit access or exit unless authorized by the fire chief.
9. No open burning may be conducted on days when the department of environmental quality has declared an "ozone alert" for Tulsa, Osage, or
Washington County. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-8: OUTDOOR WOOD FIRED BOILERS:
No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor wood fired boiler within the city of Skiatook. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-9: PATIO WOOD BURNING UNITS:
A patio wood burning unit may be installed and used in the city of Skiatook only in accordance with all of the following provisions:
A. The patio wood burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse.
B. The patio wood burning unit shall burn only clean wood.
C. The patio wood burning unit shall be located at least one hundred feet (100') from the nearest structure which is not on the same property as the patio
wood burning unit.
D. The patio wood burning unit shall not cause a nuisance to neighbors. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-10: FIRE SUPPRESSION TRAINING:
Notwithstanding sections 6-2B-5 and 6-2B-6 of this article, structures and other materials may be burned for fire prevention training by the Skiatook fire
department only in accordance with all of the following provisions:
A. Burning must be exclusively for fire suppression training. The burning shall not be used as a means to dispose of waste material, including tires and
other hazardous materials.
B. Any standing structure that will be used in fire suppression training must be inspected by a licensed asbestos inspector. A notification of this inspection
shall be submitted to the Oklahoma department of environmental quality at least ten (10) business days prior to burning a standing structure.
C. All asbestos must be removed from a structure prior to conducting the fire suppression training. If the structure is a residential dwelling, the owner may
remove the asbestos or have it removed by a licensed abatement contractor. If it is a commercial building, all asbestos must be removed by a licensed
abatement contractor.
D. All ash shall be disposed of in an approved landfill or at an alternate location approved by the Oklahoma department of environmental quality.
E. Asphalt shingles and asphalt or plastic siding shall be removed prior to the fire suppression training unless the fire chief determines that they are
necessary and beneficial for training.
F. At least seven (7) days before a planned practice burn, residents within two thousand feet (2,000') of the site of the proposed burn shall be notified.
G. All fire suppression training should conform to the guidelines established by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standard on live fire
evolutions (NFPA 1403). (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 59/269
6-2B-11: BURNING NOTIFICATION:
A. Any person desiring to burn trees, logs, brush, or other vegetative debris under section 6-2B-7 of this article shall notify the Skiatook fire department of
their intent to burn, and shall furnish their name, the location of the open burning and telephone number to the Skiatook fire department.
B. When weather or safety conditions warrant, the fire chief may temporarily suspend open burning. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-12: LIABILITY:
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by
the fire. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-13: RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION:
The fire chief, fire marshal, police officer or any authorized officer or agent of the city of Skiatook may inspect any property either prior to, during or after an
occurrence of open burning or outdoor burning for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
6-2B-14: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
A. The fire chief, fire marshal and Skiatook police department are authorized to enforce the provisions of this article.
B. Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or governmental entity who violates any of the provisions of this article or fails to comply with a
duly authorized order issued pursuant to this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, such offense shall be punishable pursuant to
section 1-4-1 of this code.
C. Upon conviction of an offense in violation of this article, the offender shall pay costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the city
of Skiatook has incurred in connection with the municipal infraction. In addition, the city shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with the provisions of this
article. Each day that a violation of this article exists shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2013-11, 6-25-2013)
Chapter 3
CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CIVIL DEFENSE: The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which primary responsibility is assigned
elsewhere by federal, state, or local law or ordinance, to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve lives and property, in the city of
Skiatook, Oklahoma, during any emergency resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from any flood, drought, fire, hurricane,
earthquake, storm or other catastrophe in or near the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma, and involving imminent or actual peril to life and property in the city of
Skiatook, Oklahoma. The functions include administration, organization, planning, recruiting, training, education, information, welfare service, police
service, warden service, fire service, rescue service, medical service, health service, transportation service, communication service, streets and sewers
service, utilities service, general engineering service, plant protection service, supply service, mutual aid, mobile support, evacuation, and all other
functions necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.
The term "civil defense", when used in this chapter, shall be synonymous with the term "emergency management".
ENEMY CAUSED EMERGENCY: Any state of emergency caused by actual or impending attack, sabotage or other hostile action, anywhere within the
United States, and involving imminent peril to lives and property in the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma. Such emergency shall be deemed to continue to exist
until the foregoing mayor shall declare its termination by public proclamation, or until the city council shall declare its termination by resolution.
NATURAL EMERGENCY: Any state of emergency caused by any actual or impending flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake, storm, or other
catastrophe in or near the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma, and involving imminent peril to lives and property in the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma. Such
emergency shall be deemed to exist and to be terminated under the same condition as prescribed for an "enemy caused" emergency. (1991 Code § 1-
700; amd. 2011 Code)
6-3-2: CIVIL DEFENSE AUTHORITY:
There is hereby established within the executive branch of the city government a civil defense administration. This office shall consist of:
A. Director: A director of civil defense, who shall be appointed by the governing body and shall serve at their pleasure or until the repeal of this chapter.
The director shall be the executive head of the office of civil defense, and shall be responsible to the city council for carrying out the civil defense
program of the city. He shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for civil defense within the city, and shall maintain liaison with and cooperate
with civil defense agencies and organizations of other governmental units both within and without the state of Oklahoma, and of the federal
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 60/269
government, and shall have such additional authority, duties, and responsibilities as may be authorized under this chapter, or amendments thereof.
(1991 Code § 1-701; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Advisory Committees: Such other volunteer civil defense advisory committees as may be created by the director, for the evaluation of technical,
professional, or other phases of the work of the office of civil defense, and which may provide advisory assistance on any matters pertaining to the
city's civil defense. (1991 Code § 1-701)
6-3-3: DIRECTOR OF CIVIL DEFENSE:
A. Responsibilities: The director of civil defense shall have general direction and control of the office of civil defense, and shall be responsible for carrying
out the provisions of this chapter. In so carrying out the provision of this chapter, the director is expressly authorized to cooperate, insofar as permitted
by other appropriate legislation, with the federal government, the governments of Oklahoma, and its subdivisions, with other states and their
subdivisions and with private agencies, in all matters pertaining to civil defense in the city. (1991 Code § 1-703)
B. General Powers: Prior to an emergency as defined in this chapter, the director shall have the following powers:
1. To make recommendations to the city council with respect to orders, rules and regulations for the purpose of accomplishing the purposes of the
office of the civil defense director, having due consideration to the plans and powers of the federal government, the government of Oklahoma and
other public and private agencies and organizations empowered to act in either enemy caused emergencies or natural emergencies.
2. To prepare for consideration by the city council comprehensive plans for the civil defense of the city in both enemy caused and natural emergencies,
such plans and programs of the federal government, of the government of Oklahoma, and of other public and private agencies and organizations
empowered to act in either enemy caused or natural emergencies.
3. To make recommendations to the city council for public warning systems and other acceptable warning devices.
4. To establish and carry out recruitment and training programs as may be necessary to develop an adequate, qualified civil defense volunteer corps.
5. To conduct drills, exercises, and similar programs as may be necessary to develop a well trained, alert, fully prepared civil defense organization.
6. To make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources, and facilities of the city as he deems necessary to ascertain its capabilities for civil
defense, and plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof.
7. To recommend to the city council the formation of mutual aid arrangements with surrounding communities.
8. To delegate any administrative authority vested in him under this chapter and to provide for the subdelegation of any such authority.
9. To take any other action proper and lawful under his authority to prepare for either an enemy caused or natural emergency. (1991 Code § 1-704)
C. Enemy Caused Emergency Powers: In the event any actual enemy caused emergency, as proclaimed by the mayor, the civil defense director, with the
approval of the mayor, may exercise, during such emergency, the power to enforce all rules and regulations relating to civil defense, and acting under
the authority of statutes now in force or to be enacted, or under the authority of the mayor as an agent of the governor of the state of Oklahoma, may
take control of all means of transportation and communications, all stocks, fuel, food, clothing, medicine, and supplies, and all facilities including
buildings and plants, and exercise all powers necessary to secure the safety and protection of the civilian population. In exercising such powers, he
shall be guided by regulations and orders issued by the federal government and the governor of the state of Oklahoma, relating to civil defense and
shall take no action contrary to orders which may be issued by the governor under similar emergency powers. (1991 Code § 1-705)
D. Natural Emergency Powers: In the event of any natural emergency as proclaimed by the mayor, the director of civil defense, with the approval of the
mayor and acting under his instructions, shall coordinate in every way proper the activities of the civil defense organization. He is specifically charged
in such emergency with the collection, evaluation and dissemination of information to all agencies, both public and private, participating in the city's civil
defense organization or cooperating in any such emergency. He shall, as director, have the power to recommend appropriate action, but he shall not
otherwise have control over the participating agencies. He shall also recommend to the mayor the allocation of any funds received from the federal or
state governments or from any other source to alleviate distress and aid in restoring normal conditions. (1991 Code § 1-706)
6-3-4: NONLIABILITY DURING EMERGENCY:
Neither the city, nor any officer or member of the civil defense organization provided for in this chapter, shall be liable for personal injury or property
damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a volunteer civil defense worker or member of any agency engaged in civil defense activity prior
to or during either an enemy caused or natural emergency. Nor shall the city or any such officer or member be liable for the death or injury of any person,
or damage to property, resulting from such civil defense activity prior to or during either an enemy caused or natural emergency. (1991 Code § 1-707)
6-3-5: ACCEPTANCE OF SERVICES, GIFTS:
Whenever the federal government or the state of Oklahoma, or any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the city any services, equipment, supplies,
materials, or funds by way of gift, grant, or loan, for purposes of civil defense, the mayor may accept such offer and may authorize the director of civil
defense to receive same subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. (1991 Code § 1-708)
6-3-6: OFFICE SPACE, FURNITURE AND SUPPLIES:
Appropriate office space, furniture, equipment, and supplies as required shall be provided for the office of civil defense. Expenditures for these purposes,
within the appropriations therefor, shall be made only on the authority of the city council. The director shall also, within the appropriations therefor,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 61/269
establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers, as he deems necessary to serve during an enemy caused or a natural emergency. (1991
Code § 1-702)
6-3-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall fail to carry out any of the provisions of this chapter or to comply therewith, or with
any of the orders, rules, or regulations made under the authority hereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code. (1991 Code § 1-709; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 3A
PUBLIC SAFETY CAPITAL FEE
6-3A-1: PUBLIC SAFETY CAPITAL FEE ESTABLISHED:
A. There is hereby established a public safety capital fee effective February 1, 2014, in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) per month, per utility customer
of the city of Skiatook/Skiatook public works authority lying within the municipal limits of the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma, whether such customer
receives electric service, water service, sanitary sewer service, refuse collection service, or any combination of utility services.
B. The public safety capital fee shall be assessed monthly to every residential utility customer, multi-family dwelling utility customer, commercial or
industrial utility customer. The public safety capital fee is to be charged and collected by the city of Skiatook/Skiatook public works authority in the same
manner as existing electric, water, sewer, refuse, and other utility fees and charges.
C. Only one monthly public safety capital fee shall be assessed per each separate utility bill regardless of the utility service, or any combination thereof,
received by the customer. Customers having multiple utility accounts shall be assessed the public safety capital fee for each separate utility bill. (Ord.
2013-24, 12-30-2013)
D. Public utility providers which have multiple utility accounts and receive a separate utility bill for electrical service, the sole purpose of which is to provide
electricity to power equipment related to the provision of public utilities, shall not be assessed an additional public safety capital fee on such separate
utility bill. This exception shall not be deemed to exclude the public safety capital fee assessed on other utility accounts or utility bills of the public utility
provider under this chapter which do not fall under this exception.
E. Wholesale water customers, including, but not limited to, statutory rural water districts which purchase potable water from the Skiatook public works
authority and/or city of Skiatook pursuant to contract and receive water purchased through a master water meter and then resell such potable water to
its customers, shall not be assessed an additional public safety capital fee on such billing for wholesale water. This exception shall not be deemed to
exclude the public safety capital fee which would otherwise be assessed on other utility accounts or utility bills of the wholesale water customer under
this chapter which do not fall under this exception. (Ord. 2014-14, 5-13-2014)
6-3A-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY CAPITAL FUND:
A. There is hereby created a separate revenue fund denoted as the public safety capital fund. Only funds collected by the monthly public safety capital fee
shall be deposited into the public safety capital fund. The city of Skiatook/Skiatook public works authority shall deposit at least monthly, the public
safety capital fees remitted. (Ord. 2013-24, 12-30-2013)
6-3A-3: EXPENDITURES AUTHORIZED:
The public safety capital fund is to be utilized only for the purchase of equipment, vehicles, and apparatus for police and fire departments, ambulance/EMS
service, and any repairs or improvements to the same, or for any capital expenditure related to the provision of emergency services. All expenditures from
the public safety fund, regardless of amount, must be authorized and approved by the city council. (Ord. 2013-24, 12-30-2013)
Chapter 4
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
6-4-1: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES:
A. Adoption: The city hereby adopts by reference the following state statutes:
1. Title 21: All misdemeanor offenses now contained or hereafter contained in 21 Oklahoma Statutes.
2. Title 47: All misdemeanor traffic offenses now contained or hereafter contained in 47 Oklahoma Statutes.
3. Title 37: All misdemeanor offenses now contained or hereafter contained in 37 Oklahoma Statutes.
4. Title 63: All misdemeanor offenses now contained or hereafter contained in 63 Oklahoma Statutes.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 62/269
B. Penalty For Violation: The violation of any section of any such statutes hereby adopted by reference constitutes an offense against the city and, upon
conviction thereof, the guilty person shall be subject to punishment as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this code. (2011 Code)
6-4-2: INVESTIGATION OF OFFENSES BY POLICE:
A. Definition: "Police officer" shall mean any duly appointed and sworn full time officer of the regular police department whose duties are to preserve the
public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime, serve warrants, enforce all laws and municipal ordinances, and who is authorized to bear arms in
the execution of such duties; provided, however, that any person in the regular police department who is a member of the police pension and
retirement system on the effective date hereof shall remain a member thereof subject to all conditions prescribed for membership in the system.
B. Duty To Investigate: It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate offenses of the city ordinances, state and federal laws, and to arrest and
to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law. (2011 Code)
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS OR GOVERNMENT
6-4A-1: ESCAPE OR AIDING ESCAPE:
A. Escape: It is unlawful for any person confined in the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or working upon the streets or other public places
of the city in pursuance of any judgment, or otherwise held in legal custody by authority of the city, to escape or attempt to escape from any such jail,
prison, or custody.
B. Aiding Escape Or Providing Contraband: It is unlawful for any person, in any unlawful manner, to set at liberty, rescue, or attempt to set at liberty or
rescue, any prisoner or prisoners, from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of the same or from the city jail or other place of
confinement by the city; to assist such prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody; to convey to a prisoner any instrument or thing
which could facilitate his escape; to bring contraband into the municipal jail or to furnish to a prisoner any alcoholic beverage or narcotics; or to loiter
about the city jail or other place where prisoners are held without consent of the officer in charge. (2011 Code)
6-4A-2: REFUSAL TO ASSIST:
A. Calling For Assistance: An officer of the city making or about to make an arrest, or executing or about to execute a warrant or other process, in
accordance with the ordinances of the city or with state or federal law, or suppressing or about to suppress a riot, affray, or unlawful assembly, may call
upon a person or persons to assist him in making such arrest, executing such process, or suppressing such riot, affray, or unlawful assembly.
B. Failure To Assist: It is unlawful for any person lawfully called upon to assist an officer of the city to refuse or fail to do so. (2011 Code)
6-4A-3: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING OFFICER:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or wilfully to resist, oppose, or obstruct the chief of police, any other police officer, the municipal judge, or other
officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties; or, by threats or otherwise, to intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such officer or
employee from the discharge of his official duties; or to assault or beat, or revile, abuse, be disrespectful to, or use abusive or indecent language toward or
about, any such officer or employee while such officer or employee is in the discharge of his official duties. (2011 Code)
6-4A-4: IMPERSONATING OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE:
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or exercise
or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions, or powers of an officer or employee of the city without being duly authorized to do so. (2011 Code)
6-4A-5: FALSE INFORMATION OR ALARMS:
A. False Information: It is unlawful for any person or any agent or employee thereof, knowingly to make any material misrepresentation to any officer,
employee, or agency of the city government in any official application to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer or agency; or to commit
perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city.
B. False Alarm: It is unlawful for any person to turn in a false fire alarm, or in any manner to deceive or attempt to deceive the fire department or any officer
or employee thereof with reference to any fire alarm or reported fire, or knowingly to cause the fire department or its officers or employees to make a
useless run.
C. False Reporting Of Crime: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, knowingly and without probable cause make a false report to any person of any
crime, which report causes or encourages the exercise of police action by any law enforcement officer. (2011 Code)
6-4A-6: EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 63/269
A. Purpose: While recognizing the value of effective alarm systems in deterring crime and preventing fire loss, and while encouraging the use of such
alarm systems, it is the purpose of this section to prohibit excessive false alarms and to reduce, insofar as possible, the misuse of emergency public
services.
B. Definition: As used herein, "excessive false alarm" means:
1. Four (4) police responses to false alarms at the same location within one calendar month;
2. More than four (4) police responses to false alarms at the same location within a six (6) month period; or
3. More than six (6) police responses to false alarms at the same location within a twelve (12) month period.
C. False Alarm Described: For the purpose of this section, a "false alarm" includes those calls by the following:
1. Error or mistake. Any action by any person, firm, corporation or other entity, or agent thereof, owning or occupying any dwelling, building or place
which results in the activation of any alarm system while no emergency exists.
2. Malfunction. Any activation of any alarm system caused by a flaw in the normal operation, design, installation, maintenance of the system, faulty
equipment, or a change in the environment or premises upon or within which the alarm system is operating.
3. Intentional misuse. Any intentional activation of an alarm system when no burglary, robbery, vandalism, fire or other emergency is in progress.
D. Alarms Not Considered False Alarm: For the purpose of this section, an alarm shall not be considered a false alarm if it is determined that the alarm
was caused by any of the following:
1. Natural or manmade catastrophe or act of God, including tornadoes, floods, earthquakes or similarly violent conditions.
2. Vandalism causing physical damage to the premises.
3. Telephone line outage.
4. Attempted entry of a location causing visible physical or other evidence of damage to such location.
5. Severe weather causing physical damage to the premises.
6. The testing of a local/audible alarm system by a licensed alarm business agent or employee who is present at the premises, servicing, repairing, or
installing the alarm when such testing does not result in the alarm being activated for an uninterrupted period exceeding sixty (60) seconds.
E. Violation: It is a violation of law for a facility to have excessive false alarms. In such an event, the occupant and/or owner of the facility shall be guilty of
an offense against the city.
F. Good Faith Effort Considered: In the event of a violation of this section, the municipal judge shall consider good faith efforts to prevent future violations
prior to imposing sentence for the violation hereof. (2011 Code)
6-4A-7: BARRICADE REMOVAL:
It is unlawful for any person, except by proper authority, to remove any barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off any
pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. (2011 Code)
6-4A-8: OBSTRUCTING OR TAMPERING WITH HYDRANTS:
A. Obstructing: No person shall place or cause to be placed upon or about any fire hydrant any rubbish, plant, building material, fence or other obstruction
of any character whatsoever, nor shall any person fasten to a fire hydrant any guyrope, cable, or brace, nor park any vehicle nearer than fifteen feet
(15') to a fire hydrant.
B. Tampering With: No person shall, without authority, turn on any water plug or fire hydrant, as the same is generally known and designated, nor shall in
any way damage, injure, tamper with, or interfere with any such water plug or fire hydrant. (2011 Code)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON, PUBLIC PEACE
6-4B-1: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
A. Definitions: As referred to in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
ASSAULT: Any wilful and unlawful attempt or offer, with force or violence, to do a corporal hurt to another.
BATTERY: Any wilful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another, except as qualified in subsection B of this section and subject to
the exceptions and qualifications contained herein.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 64/269
B. Force Against Another Allowed In Certain Instances: To use or attempt to offer to use force or violence upon or toward the person of another is not
unlawful in the following cases:
1. When necessarily committed by a public officer in the performance of any legal duty, or by any other person assisting him or acting by his direction.
2. When necessarily committed by any person in arresting one who has committed any felony and delivering him to a public officer competent to
receive him in custody.
3. When committed either by the party about to be injured or by any other person in his aid or defense, in preventing or attempting to prevent an
offense against his person, or any trespass or any other unlawful interference with real or personal property in his lawful possession; provided, the
force or violence used is not more than sufficient to prevent such offense.
4. When committed by a parent or authorized agent of any parent, or by any guardian, master, or teacher in the exercise of lawful authority to restrain
or correct his child, ward, apprentice, or scholar, provided restraint or correction has been rendered necessary by the misconduct of the child, ward
apprentice, or scholar, or by his refusal to obey the lawful command of such parent, authorized agent, guardian, master, or teacher, and the force or
violence used is reasonable in manner and moderate in degree.
5. When committed by a carrier of passengers, or the authorized agent or servants of such carrier, or by any person assisting him at their request in
expelling from any carriage, railroad car, or other vehicle any passenger who refuses to obey a lawful and reasonable regulation prescribed for the
conduct of passengers, if such vehicle has first been stopped and the force and violence used is not more than sufficient to expel the offending
passenger with a reasonable regard to his personal safety.
6. When committed by any person in preventing a person who is impaired by reason of mental retardation or developmental disability, a mentally ill
person, insane person, or other person of unsound mind, including persons temporarily or partially deprived of reason, from committing an act
dangerous to himself or to another, or enforcing such restraint as is necessary for his restoration to health, during such period only as is necessary to
obtain legal authority for the restraint or custody of his person. (2011 Code)
6-4B-2: PREVENTING WITNESS FROM GIVING TESTIMONY:
Every person who wilfully prevents any person from giving testimony or threatens physical or mental harm through force or fear with the intent to prevent
the witness from appearing in municipal court to give his testimony, or to alter his testimony, is guilty of an offense against the city. (2011 Code)
6-4B-3: DESTROYING EVIDENCE:
Every person who, knowing that any book, paper, record, instrument in writing, or other matter or thing, is about to be produced in evidence upon any trial,
proceeding, inquiry or investigation whatever, authorized by law, wilfully destroys the same, with intent thereby to prevent the same from being produced,
is guilty of an offense against the city. (2011 Code)
6-4B-4: POSSESSION OR USE OF LASER POINTING DEVICE:
A. Injury To Another: It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser beam directly or indirectly on another person or animal in such a
manner as to harass, annoy or injure said person or animal.
B. Possession By Minor Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess a laser pointing device. A person
shall not be in violation of this section if his possession of a laser pointing device is necessary for his employment, trade or occupation and it is
necessary for the pointer to be carried on his person. (2011 Code)
6-4B-5: DISTURBING RELIGIOUS MEETINGS:
A. Acts Constituting Disturbance: The following are the acts deemed to constitute disturbance of a religious meeting:
1. Uttering any profane discourse, committing any rude or indecent act, or making any unnecessary noise, either within the place where such meeting
is held, or so near it as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting.
2. Exhibiting, within one mile, any shows or plays without a license by the proper authority.
3. Engaging in, or aiding or promoting within the like distance, any racing of animals or gaming of any description.
4. Obstructing in any manner, without authority of law, within the like distance, the free passage along any highway to the place of such meeting.
B. Disturbing Religious Worship Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully disturb, interrupt or disquiet any assemblage of people met for religious
worship, by any of the acts or things enumerated in subsection A of this section. (2011 Code)
6-4B-6: USE OF PROFANE OR ABUSIVE LANGUAGE:
It is unlawful for any person to make use of any profane, violent, abusive or insulting language toward or about another person, in the presence or hearing,
which language, in its common acceptation, is calculated to arouse to anger the person about or to whom it is spoken or addressed, or to cause a breach
of the peace or an assault. Every such person shall be deemed guilty of a breach of the peace. (2011 Code)
6-4B-7: NOISE DISTURBANCES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 65/269
A. Disturbing The Peace: It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously disturb, either by day or night, the peace and quiet of the city, family or
person by loud or unusual noise, or by abusive, violent, obscene or profane language, whether addressed to the parties so disturbed or to some other
person, or to threaten to kill, do bodily harm, or injure, destroy property, fight or quarrel, or challenge to fight, or shoot off any firearms, or brandish the
same.
B. Animal Noises; Penalty For Violation: It is unlawful to allow the habitual howling, yelping, barking or other annoyance by the owner, keeper or possessor
of any dog or other animal. Upon determination that an individual is in violation of this section, such individual shall be given an oral warning that such
noise is a violation of law. A warning to any one occupant of a residence is considered to be a warning to all residents or occupants of the premises. A
subsequent violation within the next fourteen (14) days may result in a citation being issued. Upon the first conviction for the violation of this section,
the maximum penalty is a suspended sentence. Upon conviction for subsequent violations of this section, a fine shall be imposed not to exceed fifty
dollars ($50.00).
C. Investigation And Arrest: It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate all disturbances of the peace, to arrest where, in the officer's
judgment, it is proper and lawful to arrest, and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of this section.
D. Issuance Of Citation: Upon the arrest of a citizen within the limits of the city on a disturbance of the peace charge, the arresting officer may take the
violator's name, address and other appropriate information and issue to him in writing a citation to answer to the charge against him at the municipal
court if the accused gives his promise in writing to appear voluntarily. In all other instances, the arresting officer is authorized to arrest the accused
pursuant to regular procedure.
E. Payment Of Fine: Any person who has received any citation to appear in answer to a disturbance of the peace charge under the ordinances of the city
may, within the time specified in the citation, answer at the municipal court clerk's office to the charge set forth in such citation, by paying a fine of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs, or such person may appear before the municipal court, or, in case of violation of subsection B of this
section, may pay a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus court costs, or appear before the municipal court.
F. Question Of Guilt: No person shall pay a fine at the municipal court clerk's office in accordance with subsection E of this section where such person
questions his guilt of the offense charged. Upon any question of guilt, the accused must appear before the municipal court. (2011 Code)
6-4B-8: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an unlawful assembly for a person to assemble or act in concert with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of
engaging in conduct constituting the crime of riot, or to remain at the scene of a riot, after being instructed to disperse by law authorities. (2011 Code)
6-4B-9: WEAPONS:
A. Throwing Or Shooting: It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot, snowball, or other object into or across any street or alley, or in
any place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or shoot any stone, shot, snowball or other object at any
person, vehicle, structure, electric light, or other property of another (whether public or private), except in case where such is done in defense of
oneself, of another person, or of property.
B. Carrying Weapons, Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his person, or in his portfolio or purse, any pistol, revolver,
dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, switchblade knife, spring type knife, sword cane, knife having a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure
applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle of the knife, blackjack, loaded cane, billy, hand chain, metal knuckles, or any other offensive
weapon, except as otherwise provided by Oklahoma law. Provided further, that this section shall not prohibit the proper possession of guns and knives
for hunting, fishing or recreational purposes, nor shall this section be construed to prohibit any possession of weapons in a manner otherwise permitted
by statute.
C. Bows And Arrows:
1. No person shall shoot with, or use out of doors, a bow and arrow, the bow of which has a pull of ten (10) pounds or over.
2. No person shall use any arrow with a steel pointed tip or a hunting point affixed to the tip.
3. The city administrator or his designee may grant an exemption to subsections C1 and C2 of this section for the operation of an archery range or
other supervised event if it is duly determined that such exemption will not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
D. Firearms; Reckless Conduct: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in reckless conduct while having in his possession any shotgun, rifle or
pistol, such actions consisting of creating a situation of unreasonable risk and probability of death or great bodily harm to another and demonstrating a
conscious disregard for the safety of another person.
E. Transporting Loaded Firearm: Except as otherwise provided by the provisions of the Oklahoma self-defense act1, sections 1 through 25, or other
provision of law by the state, it shall be unlawful to transport a loaded pistol, rifle, or shotgun in a landborne motor vehicle over a public highway or
roadway. However, a rifle or shotgun may be transported when clip or magazine loaded and not chamber loaded when transported in an exterior locked
compartment of the vehicle or trunk of the vehicle.
F. Prohibition Of Firearms On City Property:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 66/269
1. No person shall possess a firearm on any city property or in any city owned structure with the following exceptions:
Duly authorized law enforcement personnel.
2. For purposes of this section only, city streets, alleys, and parking lots serving city buildings are not considered city property. (2011 Code)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALITY
6-4C-1: ACTING AS DOORKEEPER OR LOOKOUT:
It is unlawful for any person in the city to act as doorkeeper or lookout for any room or building where any crime is carried on, or to use any signal, electric
bell, or other apparatus, or in any manner to obstruct or hinder any police officer attempting to prevent or discover violations of this chapter or to discover
or arrest persons violating same. (2011 Code)
6-4C-2: HOUSES OF ILL FAME OR PROSTITUTION:
A. Keeping:
1. No person, either as owner or agent, shall, within the limits of the city, keep any bawdyhouse, house of ill fame, or house of assignation or
prostitution, or any other house for persons to visit for the purpose of unlawful sexual intercourse, or for any lewd, obscene, or indecent purpose.
2. No person shall keep any disorderly house or house of public resort by which the peace, comfort, or decency of the immediate neighborhood is
disturbed.
B. Person Frequenting: It shall be unlawful for any person to reside in, enter or remain in any house, place, building, vehicle, trailer or other conveyance for
the purpose of lewdness, prostitution or assignation. (2011 Code)
6-4C-3: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
A. Definition: "Lewd" means licentious, lecherous, dissolute, debauched, impure, salacious or pornographic.
B. Prohibition: Every person who wilfully either lewdly exposes his person, or private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where there are
present other persons to be offended or annoyed thereby, or procures, counsels, or assists any person to lewdly expose himself, or to make any other
exhibition of himself to public view, or to the view of any number of persons such as is offensive to decency, or is adapted to excite vicious or lewd
thoughts or acts, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. (2011 Code)
6-4C-4: LEWD CONDUCT:
Every person who conducts himself in a lewd manner, or in any manner suggestive of lewdness, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. (2011 Code)
6-4C-5: OBSCENE, THREATENING OR HARASSING TELEPHONE CALLS:
A. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person who, by means of a telephone, wilfully either:
1. Makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent;
2. Makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, with intent to put the party called in fear of physical harm or death;
3. Makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass any
person at the called number;
4. Knowingly permits any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section; or
5. In conspiracy or concerted action with other persons, makes repeated calls or simultaneous calls solely to harass any person at the called
number(s).
B. Use Described: Use of a telephone facility under this section shall include all use made of such a facility between the points of origin and reception. Any
offense under this section is a continuing offense and shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place of origin or the place of reception.
(2011 Code)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOL AND DRUGS
6-4D-1: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
A. Consumption: Any person who shall, in any public place or in any vehicle, drink or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor containing more than three
and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol measured by weight, except as authorized by the Oklahoma beverage control act1, or any other intoxicating
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 67/269
substance, or intoxicating compound of any kind; or inhale glue, paint or other intoxicating substance, shall be guilty of an offense.
B. Intoxication In Public Place: Any person who shall be drunk or intoxicated in or upon any public or private road, in any vehicle, any public place or
building, at any public gathering, place accessible to the public or open to being viewed by others, from drinking or consuming such intoxicating liquor,
intoxicating substance, or intoxicating compound; or from the inhalation of glue, paint, or other intoxicating substances, shall be guilty of an offense.
C. Disorderly Conduct: Any person who shall be drunk or intoxicated from any cause and who disturbs the peace of any person, or to be drunk or in a
state of intoxication and disorderly in any private house or place to such an extent to jeopardize any person or property as to be injurious to the public
morals shall be guilty of an offense.
D. Private Residences: It shall not be a violation of subsection B of this section for any person to be intoxicated on the premises of a private residence with
the consent of the owner or any bona fide resident.
E. Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating any offense included in this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(2011 Code)
6-4D-2: CERTAIN SALES PROHIBITED:
No licensee of the ABLE commission shall:
A. Authority: Receive, possess, or sell any alcoholic beverage except as authorized by the Oklahoma alcoholic beverage control act and by the license or
permit which he holds.
B. Employees: Employ any person under the age of twenty one (21) in the selling or handling of alcoholic beverages. Provided, that a mixed beverage,
beer and wine caterer, special event or bottle club licensee may employ servers who are at least eighteen (18) years of age, except persons under
twenty one (21) years of age may not serve in designated bar or lounge areas, and a mixed beverage, beer and wine caterer, special event or bottle
club licensee may employ or hire musical bands who have musicians who are under twenty one (21) years of age if each such musician is either
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or has on their person, to be made available for inspection upon demand by any ABLE commission officer
or law enforcement officer, a written, notarized affidavit from the parent or legal guardian giving the underage musician permission to perform in
designated bar or lounge areas.
C. Give Alcohol As Prize: Give any alcoholic beverage as a prize, premium or consideration for any lottery, game of chance or skill or any type of
competition.
D. Happy Hours: Advertise or offer "happy hours" or any other means or inducements to stimulate the consumption of alcoholic beverages, including:
1. Deliver more than two (2) drinks to one person at one time;
2. Sell or offer to sell to any person or group of persons any drinks at a price less than the price regularly charged for such drinks during the same
calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public;
3. Sell or offer to sell to any person an unlimited number of drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to
the public;
4. Sell or offer to sell drinks to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except
at private functions not open to the public;
5. Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such drink during
the same calendar week; or
6. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
Provided, that the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit the advertising or offering of food or entertainment in licensed establishments.
E. Open Containers: Permit or allow any patron or person to exit the licensed premises with an open container of any alcoholic beverage. Provided, that
this prohibition shall not be applicable to closed original containers of alcoholic beverages which are carried from the licensed premises of a bottle club
by a patron, closed original wine containers removed from the premises of restaurants, hotels, and motels, or to closed original containers of alcoholic
beverages transported to and from the place of business of a licensed caterer by the caterer or his employee. (2011 Code)
6-4D-3: DISTRIBUTE OR DISPENSE CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES:
Except as provided by the uniform controlled dangerous substances act of the state2, it shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, dispense or possess
with intent to manufacture, distribute or dispense, a controlled dangerous substance, or to create, distribute or possess with intent to distribute, a
counterfeit controlled dangerous substance; or to distribute any imitation controlled dangerous substance except when authorized by the food and drug
administration of the United States department of health and human services. All definitions and other provisions of the uniform controlled dangerous
substances act of the state are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. (2011 Code)
6-4D-4: BEING UNDER INFLUENCE OF DRUGS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 68/269
No person who is noticeably under the influence of any drug taken for other than strictly medicinal purposes shall be or remain upon any street, avenue,
alley, other thoroughfare, or other public place; and any person who disturbs the peace of any person, or is drunk or in a state of intoxication and disorderly
in any private house or place to such an extent to jeopardize any person or property as to be injurious to the public morals shall be guilty of an offense
within the limits of the city. (2011 Code)
6-4D-5: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
Except as otherwise provided by the uniform controlled dangerous substances act of the state, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess drug
paraphernalia. All of the provisions of the uniform controlled dangerous substances act of the state pertaining to drug paraphernalia and the factors used in
determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. (2011 Code)
6-4D-6: LOW POINT BEER:
A. Definition: "Low point beer" means and includes beverages containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume, and not more than
three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
B. Possession In Public: It is unlawful and an offense for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be in possession of any low point beer
while such person is upon any public street, road or highway, or in any public building or place.
C. Transporting Within Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport in any moving vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any
low point beer containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol
by weight except in the original container which shall not have been opened and from which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed,
unless the opened container be in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck,
or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion.
D. Purchase: It is unlawful and an offense for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to purchase any low point beer.
E. Prohibiting Sale To Minors: It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any person under twenty one (21) years of age any low point beer.
(2011 Code)
ARTICLE E. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
6-4E-1: DESTRUCTION:
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear, or molest any structure, building, outbuilding, fence, or any other property, real or
personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use; or
to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner or any other person entitled to its use. (2011 Code)
6-4E-2: TRESPASS:
A. Place Of Lodging: It is unlawful for any person to use or occupy as a place of lodging or to erect dwelling houses, tents or structures of any kind
whatsoever upon any land, lots or tracts of land situated within the limits of any public property owned or controlled by the city.
B. Private Property: It is unlawful for any person to trespass upon the private property of any person within the city.
C. Businesses:
1. Every person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity engaged in any public business, trade or profession, of any kind wherein merchandise,
goods or services are offered for sale, may forbid the entry or presence of any person upon the premises of the place of business, if the person has
been convicted of a crime involving entry onto or criminal acts occurring upon any real property owned, leased or under the control of such person,
partnership, corporation or other legal entity. Such crimes shall include, but are not limited to, shoplifting, vandalism, and disturbing the peace while
upon the premises of any place of business of the person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
2. In order to exercise the authority conferred by subsection C1 of this section, the owner or an agent of the owner of a public business, trade or
profession must notify the person whom the owner or agent desires to prohibit from such owner's place of business.
3. No person shall wilfully enter or remain upon the premises after being expressly forbidden to do so in the manner provided for in this section. Any
person convicted shall be guilty of trespass and shall be punished in accordance with law. (2011 Code)
6-4E-3: LARCENY:
A. Personal Property: It is unlawful and larceny, as used in this section, for anyone to take personal property by fraud or stealth, with intent to deprive
another thereof.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 69/269
B. Lost Property: One who finds lost property under circumstances which give him knowledge or means of inquiry as to the true owner, and who
appropriates such property to his own use, or to the use of another person who is not entitled thereto, without having first made such effort to find the
owner and restore the property to him as the circumstances render reasonable and just, is guilty of larceny. (2011 Code)
6-4E-4: THEFT OF SERVICES:
A. Offenses Described:
1. "Theft of services" is obtaining services from another by deception, threat, coercion, stealth, tampering or use of false token or device.
2. "Services", within the meaning of this section, includes, but is not limited to, labor, professional service, cable television service, public or municipal
utility or transportation service, telephone service, lodging, entertainment and the supply of equipment for use.
3. "Tampering", within the meaning of this section, includes, but is not limited to:
a. Making a connection of any wire, conduit or device, to any service or transmission line owned by a public or municipal utility, or by a cable
television service provider;
b. Defacing, puncturing, removing, reversing or altering any meter or any connections, for the purpose of securing unauthorized or unmeasured
electric, natural gas, water, telephone service or cable television service;
c. Hindering and/or preventing any such meters from properly measuring or registering;
d. Knowingly taking, receiving, using or converting to such person's own use, or the use of another, any electricity, water or natural gas which has not
been measured; or any telephone or cable television service which has not been authorized; or
e. Causing, procuring, permitting, aiding or abetting any person to do any of the preceding acts.
B. Prima Facie Proof Of Violation: In any prosecution of this section, the existence of any of the connections of the meters, alterations or use of
unauthorized or unmeasured water, electric, natural gas, telephone service or cable television service, specified in subsection A3 of this section, shall
be prima facie evidence of intent to violate the provision of this section by the person or persons using or receiving the direct benefits from the use of
the water, electric, natural gas, telephone service or cable television service passing through such connections or meters, or using the electric, natural
gas, water, telephone service or cable television which has not been authorized or measured. (2011 Code)
6-4E-5: OBTAINING PROPERTY BY DECEPTION:
Every person who, with intent to cheat and defraud, shall obtain or attempt to obtain from any person, firm or corporation, any money, property or valuable
thing, of the value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00), by means or by use of any trick or deception, or false or fraudulent representation or statement or
pretense, or by any other means or instruments or device, commonly called the "confidence game", or by means or use of any false or bogus checks, or
by any other written, printed or engraved instrument or spurious coin, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. (2011 Code)
6-4E-6: POSSESSION OF BURGLAR'S IMPLEMENTS:
Every person who has in possession a dangerous offensive weapon or instrument whatsoever, or any picklock, crow, key, bit, jack, jimmy, nippers, pick,
betty or other implement of burglary, with intent to break and enter any building or part of any building, booth, tent, warehouse, railroad car, vessel or other
structure or erection, and to commit any crime therein, is guilty of an offense against the city. (2011 Code)
6-4E-7: ENTERING BUILDINGS WITH CERTAIN INTENT:
A. Definitions: The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
DWELLING: Includes every house, trailer, vessel, apartment or other premises, any part of which has usually been occupied by a person lodging
therein at night, and any structure joined to and immediately connected with such house, trailer or apartment.
DWELLING HOUSE: Includes any house or edifice, any part of which has usually been occupied by any person lodging there at any time, and any
structure joined to and immediately connected with such a house or edifice.
B. Prohibited Acts:
1. Every person who, under circumstances not amounting to any burglary, enters any building or part of any building, booth, tent, warehouse, railroad
car, vessel, or other structure or erection with intent to commit any felony, larceny, or malicious mischief, is guilty of an offense against the city.
2. Every person who, without the intention to commit any crime therein, shall wilfully and intentionally break and enter into any building, trailer, vessel,
or other premises used as a dwelling without the permission of the owner or occupant thereof, except in the cases and manner allowed by law, shall
be guilty of an offense against the city. (2011 Code)
6-4E-8: INTENT TO DEFRAUD:
Whenever, by any of the provisions of this chapter, an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute any offense, it is sufficient if any intent appears to
defraud any person. (2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 70/269
6-4E-9: DEFRAUDING RESTAURANTS, HOTELS:
It shall be an offense for any person to obtain food, lodging, services or other accommodations at any restaurant, hotel, inn, boarding house, motel or auto
camp with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper thereof. (2011 Code)
6-4E-10: LOITERING IN OR INJURING MOTOR VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter in or upon any automobile or motor vehicle, or to deface or injure such automobile or motor vehicle,
or to molest, drive, or attempt to drive any automobile, for joyriding or any other purpose, or to manipulate or meddle with any machinery or appliances
thereof without the consent of the owner of such automobile or motor vehicle. (2011 Code)
6-4E-11: SMOKING WITHIN CITY FACILITIES:
A. For purposes of this section, "smoking" means the carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device.
B. Smoking in any enclosed, indoor facility owned by the city is hereby prohibited.
C. This section shall not prohibit smoking in a private, enclosed room or office occupied exclusively by a smoker or smokers, even if the room or enclosed
office may be visited by a nonsmoker.
D. The city administrator is authorized to promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this section. (2011 Code)
6-4E-12: OFFENSES WITHIN OSAGE GARDENS CEMETERY1:
A. Prohibited Acts: It is an offense for any person to commit any of the following acts in any area of Osage Gardens Cemetery:
1. To operate any motor vehicle in excess of five (5) miles per hour or to fail to conform to any posted speed limit.
2. To park any motor vehicle in any area other than the designated streets within the cemetery.
3. To destroy, break, deface, mar or remove any tree, shrub, plant, flower, building, fence, light fixture, tombstone or equipment of any type.
4. To dump or scatter trash, garbage or litter of any kind at any place except in designated containers.
5. To use firearms, fireworks, BB guns, air rifles or slingshots.
6. To throw stones or other dangerous hard objects.
7. To permit dogs, cats or other pets to run loose.
8. To climb trees, fences, light posts, gazebos, mausoleums and other hazardous structures.
B. Hours: Osage Gardens Cemetery, unless otherwise provided for by cemetery regulations, shall be closed to the public from nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. until
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. each day, and it is unlawful for any person to trespass or loiter on any cemetery property when the same is closed to the public.
(2011 Code)
ARTICLE F. OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
6-4F-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to sections 6-4F-3 through 6-4F-8 of this article:
GUARDIAN: A parent, stepparent, legal guardian, foster parent, or anyone who, by virtue of a living arrangement, is placed in an apparent position of
power or authority over a minor.
JUVENILE/MINOR: Any individual who is under the age of eighteen (18).
PARENT: A biological mother, an adoptive parent, or a man to whom the biological mother was married at the time of conception or birth or who has been
found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be the biological father of the juvenile. (2011 Code)
6-4F-2: ORIGINAL JURISDICTION OF MUNICIPAL COURT IN CERTAIN JUVENILE CASES:
The municipal court may elect to have and possess original jurisdiction to hear and adjudicate any offenses committed by persons under the age of
eighteen (18) years and penalize juveniles found guilty as allowed by Oklahoma law. Nothing found within the juvenile code shall be construed to prevent
the imposition of any penalty as otherwise specified in the ordinances of the city. (2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 71/269
6-4F-3: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
A. Curfew Hours: It shall be unlawful for any minor to be upon the streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, public places and vacant lots, or to ride in or
upon, drive or otherwise operate or be a passenger of any automobile, bicycle, or other vehicle in, upon, or over or through the streets, or other public
places within the city of Skiatook, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., Sunday through Thursday, and twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., Friday and Saturday. This subsection also provides for a daytime curfew to apply to these same
circumstances, during the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and two thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. Monday through Friday. Additionally, it shall be unlawful for
any parent to permit a minor to be in those places during the specified hours. The daytime curfew only applies when school is in session. (Ord. 2011-
06, 8-30-2011)
B. Defense:
1. It shall be a defense to subsection A of this section if the minor is:
a. At any time accompanied by a parent, or responsible adult, authorized by a parent to take the parent's place, to accompany the minor for a
designated period of time and purpose, within a specified area.
b. An "emancipated minor", which is defined as a person who no longer has a parent-child relationship as a result of marriage, or as a result of being
recognized as an adult by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
c. Either engaged in an employment activity, or for the period of time forty five (45) minutes after work; provided, that circumstances suggest the
minor is returning from work to a place of residence.
d. Attending or traveling between home and an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, a religious organization, a public or private school, or any entity that takes responsibility for the minor; provided, that the
activity has not concluded for more than forty five (45) minutes.
e. At any time on a legitimate parentally approved errand.
f. In any motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
g. At any time the minor is required to leave the residence because of an emergency.
h. At any time the minor is engaged in an activity that is protected by the first amendment to the United States constitution, such as the freedom of
speech, religion or expression.
2. If the juvenile falls within any classification, as listed in subsection B1 of this section and the officer has no other charges to consider against the
juvenile, the juvenile shall be released and no further action shall be taken.
3. Officers coming into contact with a juvenile seventeen (17) years of age or younger shall (within the bounds of good judgment and common sense)
detain that juvenile and issue the juvenile a citation for curfew violation. The juvenile will then be released to a parent or legal guardian. The parent or
legal guardian will also be required to sign the citation. (2011 Code)
6-4F-4: ALLOWING OR ENCOURAGING MINOR TO COMMIT OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or wilfully aid, abet, allow, encourage or, by omission of a duty, encourage or assist a minor to commit any
municipal, state, or federal offense. (2011 Code)
6-4F-5: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES; FAILURE TO CONTROL:
It shall be unlawful for any parent to fail to control a minor that is under the parent's supervision by, after notification of a prior offense committed by the
minor, failing to prevent the minor from committing the same offense, or more than one other offense within one year of the date the minor committed the
first offense. (2011 Code)
6-4F-6: COMMISSION OF CRIME IN PRESENCE OF MINOR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any municipal, state or federal offense in the presence of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(2011 Code)
6-4F-7: PERMITTING CRIMES OR DISORDERLINESS ON PREMISES:
No owner, operator, proprietor, manager or employee of any place shall permit minors who have congregated on the premises to commit any offense, or to
carouse, make unnecessary noise, disturb, disrupt or annoy the people residing or carrying on business in the immediate neighborhood or so as to disturb
the peace. Furthermore, no owner, operator, proprietor, manager or employee of any place shall permit minors to loiter, litter, or cause any disturbance on
the property of a neighboring resident or business. (2011 Code)
6-4F-8: TRUANCY:
A. Attendance Compulsory; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person having custody of a child who is over the age of six (6)
years, and under the age of eighteen (18) years, to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child to attend and comply with the rules of some public,
private or other school, unless other means of education are provided for the full term the schools of the district are in session or the child is excused
as provided in this section.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 72/269
1. If any such child is prevented from attending school by reason of mental or physical disability, to be determined by the board of education of the
district upon a certificate of the school physician or public health physician, or, if no such physician is available, a duly licensed and practicing
physician.
2. If any such child is excused from attendance at school, due to an emergency, by the principal teacher of the school in which the child is enrolled, at
the request of the parent, guardian, custodian or other person having control of such child.
3. If any such child who has attained his or her sixteenth birthday is excused from attending school by written, joint agreement between:
a. The school administrator of the school district where the child attends school, and the parent, guardian or custodian of the child. Provided, further,
that no child shall be excused from attending school by such joint agreement between a school administrator and the parent, guardian or custodian
of the child unless and until it has been determined that such action is for the best interest of the child and/or the community, and that said child
shall thereafter be under the supervision of the parent, guardian or custodian until the child has reached the age of eighteen (18) years; or
b. If any such child is excused pursuant to subsection B of this section.
B. School District Excusing Student: A school district shall excuse a student from attending school for the purpose of observing religious holy days if before
the absence, the parent, guardian or person having custody or control of the student submits a written request for the excused absence. The school
district shall excuse a student pursuant to this subsection for the days on which the religious holy days are observed and for the days on which the
student must travel to and from the site where the student will observe the holy days.
C. Valid Excuse For Absence Required: It shall be an offense for a parent, guardian or custodian of such child to allow such child to be absent from school
without a valid excuse for four (4) or more days or parts of days within a four (4) week period or to be absent without valid excuse for ten (10) or more
days or parts of days within a semester. (2011 Code)
6-4F-9: CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF MINOR:
It shall be unlawful, except as otherwise provided by law, for any person who shall knowingly or wilfully cause, aid, abet or encourage a minor to be, to
remain, or to become a delinquent child. (2011 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-01 - YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO. Go to new ordinance.
6-4F-10: PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO:
A. Findings And Intent: The city council members find that youth addiction to tobacco products is a public health problem with grave health consequences.
In recognition that almost ninety percent (90%) of all smokers begin smoking by the age of eighteen (18), action is needed to curtail the easy access of
minors to cigarettes and other addictive tobacco products. Furthermore, the city council members find that the Oklahoma state legislature has limited
the powers granted to local governments to address the problem of youth access to tobacco. Therefore, the intent of this section is to: 1) implement the
strictest and most enforceable system allowed under Oklahoma state law to prevent the illegal sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products to minors;
2) periodically amend and update this section as necessary to best utilize any applicable powers which may return to Oklahoma municipalities in the
future; and 3) educate, encourage and assist underage tobacco users in ceasing all use of addictive tobacco products, preferably before daily use of
such products is initiated.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or association, however formed.
PROOF OF AGE: A driver's license, license for identification only, or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as
eighteen (18) years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on its face to be valid.
SAMPLE: A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for the purpose of promoting the product.
SAMPLING: The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public place.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption.
C. Distribution And Sales; Identification; Fines:
1. It is unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish in any manner any tobacco product to another person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, or
to purchase in any manner a tobacco product on behalf of any such person. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under eighteen (18) years of age
to handle tobacco products when required in the performance of the employee's duties.
2. A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary
person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser may be under eighteen (18) years of age. If any individual
engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products has demanded proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under
eighteen (18) years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a violation of this subsection.
3. If the sale is made by an employee of the owner of a store at which tobacco products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the violation
and shall be subject to the fine.
4. Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon proof of age, shall be a defense to any action brought pursuant to this
section.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 73/269
5. For the purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or business operations in multiple locations for any violation of
subsection C1 or C2 of this section, each individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a separate entity.
6. Any person who violates any provision of subsection C1 or C2 of this section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within a two (2) year
period, not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a third offense within a two (2) year period following the first offense, or not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for the fourth or subsequent offense within a two (2) year period following the first offense.
7. Upon failure of any person to pay any fine authorized by this subsection C within ninety (90) days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the
court clerk or his/her designee shall notify the Oklahoma department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a
driver's license to the person until proof of payment has been provided.
D. Distribution Of Tobacco Product Samples Restricted; Fines:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person or retailer to distribute tobacco products or product samples to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. No person shall distribute tobacco product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk, or park that is within three hundred feet (300') of any
playground, school, or other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
3. Any person who violates any provision of subsection D1 or D2 of this section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense, and not more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for the third or subsequent offense.
4. Upon failure of any person to pay any fine authorized by this subsection D within ninety (90) days of the day of assessment of such fine, the court
clerk or his/her designee shall notify the Oklahoma department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver's
license to the person until proof of payment has been provided.
E. Sale Of Tobacco Except In Original, Sealed Packaging Prohibited; Fines:
1. It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
2. Any person who shall violate subsection E1 of this section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
F. Purchase, Receipt Or Possession By Minors Prohibited; Falsifying Proof Of Age; Punishment; Remedial Activities; Expungement Of Conviction:
1. It is unlawful for a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase, receive or have in their possession a tobacco product, or to present
or offer any person any purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product.
2. Any person who violates any provision of subsection F1 of this section shall be guilty of an offense and may be assessed a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense, not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense and subsequent offenses within a
one year period following the first offense. However:
a. The court may, upon conviction of an individual for an offense under subsection F1 of this section, suspend execution of the sentence and, if so,
shall require the defendant to attend a tobacco education program at the expense of the defendant. The defendant's parent or guardian must also
attend the tobacco education program with the defendant.
b. If access to the tobacco education program is not readily available, the court shall require the defendant to perform eight (8) to twelve (12) hours of
tobacco related community service instead of attending a tobacco education program.
c. The tobacco education program and the tobacco related community service are remedial and are not punishment.
d. No later than the ninetieth day after the date of conviction under subsection F1 of this section, the defendant shall present to the court, in a
manner required by the court, evidence of satisfactory completion of the tobacco education program or the tobacco related community service.
e. On receipt of the evidence required under subsection F2d of this section, the court shall:
(1) If the defendant has been convicted of a previous offense under subsection F1 of this section, which offense occurred within one year prior to
the offense for which the defendant is currently charged, execute sentence, and at the discretion of the court, assess a fine of not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(2) If the defendant has not been convicted of a previous offense under subsection F1 of this section, which offense occurred within one year prior
to the offense for which the defendant is currently charges, dismiss the complaint and discharge the defendant.
f. If the court dismissed the complaint under subsection F2e(2) of this section, the defendant is released from all penalties and liabilities resulting
from the offense, except that the defendant is considered to have been convicted of the offense if the defendant subsequently convicted of the
same charge if such a repeat offense occurs within one year of the dismissed offense.
g. Any person convicted of an offense under subsection F1 of this section may apply to the court to have the conviction expunged. If the court finds
that the individual has satisfactorily completed the tobacco education program or tobacco related community service ordered by the court and that
there has been no subsequent offense for a period of at least one year after the date of the offense for which the person was convicted, the court
shall order the conviction and any complaint, verdict, sentence or other document relating to the offense to be expunged from the individual's
record and the conviction may not be shown or made known for any purpose.
h. If the defendant does not provide the evidence required under subsection F2d of this section within the period specified by that subsection or upon
failure of the defendant to pay any fine authorized by this section within ninety (90) days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the court clerk
or his/her designee shall notify the Oklahoma department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver's
license to the person until proof of payment has been provided. (2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 74/269
G. Reporting: The city clerk or his/her designee shall furnish any information or reports required or requested by the Oklahoma alcoholic beverage laws
enforcement (ABLE) commission in the form, manner and time as may be determined by the ABLE commission. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
H. Nonretaliation: No person shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment or customer
because such employee, applicant, or customer reported violations of any provision of this section. (2011 Code)
6-4F-11: PROVIDING ALCOHOL TO MINORS IN SOCIAL HOST SETTING:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOL: Shall include any type of substance classified under Oklahoma law as containing alcohol or low point beer.
GATHERING: A party, gathering or event where a group of three (3) or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or
social activity.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.
MINOR: Any person less than twenty one (21) years of age.
PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent or stepparent of another person.
PREMISES: Any residence or other private property, place or premises, including any commercial or business premises.
RESPONSE COSTS: The costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering,
including, but not limited to:
1. Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent
responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative costs attributed to such response(s);
2. The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding
to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering;
3. The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or
leaving the scene of a gathering; and
4. Any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this section.
B. Consumption Of Alcohol By Minor In Public Place, Place Open To Public, Or Place Not Open To Public: Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful
for any minor to:
1. Consume at any public place or any place open to the public alcoholic beverages; or
2. Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
C. Hosting, Permitting Or Allowing Party, Gathering Or Event Where Minors Consuming Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited:
1. It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps are controlling access to
alcoholic beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending
the gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic
beverages while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
2. It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at
least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an
alcoholic beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to
prevent the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in subsection C1 of this section.
3. This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or
legal guardian.
4. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the use of alcohol to
immediate family members within supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated and is found
in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a nonfamily gathering.
5. Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a
religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a
nonreligious gathering.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 75/269
D. Penalty: Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, plus all court costs and statutory penalties.
E. Reservation Of Legal Options: Violations of this section may be prosecuted by the city, criminally, civilly, or through both processes. The city may seek
administrative fees and response costs associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance,
or law. This section shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct
regulated by this section, nor shall they limit the city's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances
necessitating the application of this section. (2011 Code)
ARTICLE G. NUISANCES
6-4G-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
The city adopts all of the applicable provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes and any amendments made thereto concerning the general powers of
municipalities, and 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-1011 and any amendments made thereto concerning health nuisances, specifically dealing with the
prohibition and abatement of nuisances as defined in this chapter. (2011 Code)
6-4G-2: CODE ENFORCEMENT AND OTHER HEARINGS; ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
A. Hearings Before Administrative Hearing Officer:
1. Whenever a hearing is afforded before the city council by the provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 22-111 (cleaning and mowing of property;
summary abatement; ordinances; definitions; application), 22-112 (condemnation; procedures; administrative officer or body; definitions; nuisances;
damages or loss of property; agricultural property), 22-112.1 (boarding and securing dilapidated buildings; definitions), or any ordinance of the city or
other state statute, the city council may, unless the ordinance or statute provides otherwise, by resolution, direct that such hearing be conducted
before and held by the administrative hearing officer to be designated by the city council. The city council may, by resolution, prospectively decree
that all such hearings shall be held before a designated administrative hearing officer.
2. The administrative hearing officer shall be possessed of all authority in the conduct of such hearing as is vested by law or ordinance in the city
council. Hearings before the administrative officer shall be conducted in the manner provided by law or ordinance.
3. All proceedings before the administrative hearing officer shall be conducted in an orderly fashion and consistent with due process of law. Any person
guilty of conduct before such officer during the course of such a hearing which would be contemptuous if committed before a judicial tribunal of the
state shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and the administrative officer may issue to such person a citation for such offense. (2011 Code)
B. Appeals To City Council; Municipal Court Jurisdiction:
1. The property owner, mortgage holder or other adversely affected person, as the case may be, shall have the right to appeal any decision of the
administrative officer to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the
administrative order is rendered. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or diminish the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city in criminal proceedings brought for
violation of any penal ordinances of the city.
C. Interim Administrative Hearing Officer: Until the city council shall otherwise designate an administrative hearing officer by resolution, the city manager
shall serve as the administrative hearing officer, and all such hearings to be conducted after the effective date hereof shall be before him; and this
section shall have the effect of a formal resolution by the city council designating the city manager as such hearing officer. (2011 Code)
6-4G-3: PORTABLE BUILDINGS, LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any portable structure as a primary structure in areas of the city zoned as any class of office zoning (OL, OM),
commercial zoning (CS, CG, CH), and industrial light (IL) as described in title 11, chapters 5, 6 and 7 of this code, except for the following permitted areas:
A. Golf courses, pitch and putt courses, and miniature golf courses.
B. Temporary buildings used in connection with engineering and construction projects not used for dwellings and not used for a period exceeding the
completion of construction or engineering.
C. Accessory buildings used only incidental to the use of the primary structure.
D. Portable buildings used incidental to municipal or community recreation centers.
E. Police or fire stations.
F. Public buildings and buildings operated in the public interest and not for profit including art galleries, post offices, libraries, and museums.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 76/269
G. Auditoriums, stadiums, arenas, or armories.
H. Community play fields and parks.
I. Public utility and service uses, including electric substations, gas regulator stations, electric, gas, telegraph, telephone, and water transmission, meeting
and distribution equipment and structures, microwave relay towers, water reservoirs or pumping stations, and other similar facilities.
J. Uses incidental to the operation and maintenance of public schools and hospitals.
K. Portable buildings used for office or storage purposes only for a period not exceeding twenty (20) days for such purpose and for no other purpose.
(2011 Code)
6-4G-4: SAWMILL LOCATION, OPERATION:
Both the location and the operation, or either, of a sawmill within the corporate limits of the city, in Tulsa and Osage Counties, are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and are prohibited. (2011 Code)
6-4G-5: WEEDS AND OTHER NUISANCES:
A. Weeds: It shall be and constitute a nuisance for any person owning or occupying any real estate within the corporate limits of the city, in Tulsa and
Osage Counties, to permit the rank growth of any weeds or other obnoxious plants thereon, or on any abutting street or alley, and the same is hereby
prohibited.
B. Health Nuisances:
1. The city code enforcement officer shall have the authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises to remove from such premises, at
the owner's or occupant's own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might
contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within twenty four (24) hours, or within such
other time as might be reasonable. Failure to comply with the order shall be a violation of this code.
2. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, or a copy thereof
may be left at the last usual place of abode of such owner, occupant or agent, if known and within the city. If the premises are unoccupied and the
residence of such owner, occupant or agent is unknown, or is without the city, such order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises,
or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the county.
C. Trash And Filth Deposits:
1. Trash In Public Places: No person shall throw any animal or vegetable substance, offal, hay, straw, ashes, soot, glass, or other articles whatsoever in
any street, alley, or public place of the city, or from his or her premises upon any property contiguous thereto.
2. Disposal Of Filth: No person shall conduct into any street, alley, or other public place in the city, any filth, sour or useless water, or offal or waste of
any kind, from his or her kitchen, house, or tenement, or to suffer any such to escape from his or her premises upon any such places or upon
property contiguous thereto.
3. Cleaning Gutters: No person shall allow any filth, dirt, or other obstructions of any kind to accumulate in the gutter in front of his or her premises, and
all owners or occupants of property are required to keep the gutter in front of their premises open, free, and clear from trash, and all obstructions to
the easy and rapid flow of water through such gutters.
4. Sidewalks: No person shall deposit dirt, sweepings, or rubbish of any kind in or upon any of the sidewalks, gutters, streets, alleys or public places, in
or around their place of business or residence or permit or suffer the same to be done. (2011 Code)
D. Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage on residential property under the conditions as set forth in subsections D1 through D9 of this section is prohibited
and shall constitute a nuisance, unless enclosed by a sightproof screening fence at least six feet (6') in height and erected so as to make such
prohibited outdoor storage invisible from outside the premises:
1. The storage of vehicle or automotive parts which are not going to be used within the next three (3) days.
2. The storage of household furniture or appliances which are customarily located indoors.
3. The storage of building materials which are not currently being utilized in the course of normal construction, repair or remodeling on the subject
property.
4. Personal property displayed for sale or stored in a front yard, side yard or driveway, located either on the ground or arranged on tables for more than
three (3) days concurrently (commonly referred to as a "garage sale" or "yard sale").
5. The storage of junk, dismantled or inoperative lawn mowers, bicycles or children's toys.
6. The storage of junk, dismantled or inoperative charcoal, wood or gas grills customarily manufactured and utilized for cooking food.
7. Any pickup truck, trailer, or similar vehicle containing trash, rubbish, refuse or junk which is parked, placed, stored or kept in such a manner that the
trash or junk is in view of the public for a period of more than three (3) days.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 77/269
8. The storage of commercial or agricultural trailers.
9. The storage of firewood which is not neatly stacked. (Ord. 2013-10, 6-25-2013)
E. Sight Obstructions Along Streets: All trees, hedges, signs or other sight obstructions, or any portion of such obstruction, located within a sight distance
triangle which prevent persons driving vehicles approaching an intersection of streets from having a clear view of traffic approaching such intersection
shall constitute a public nuisance. "Sight distance triangle" shall be defined as the area within an imaginary triangle formed at a street corner as follows:
Extend the curb lines (or the edge of the pavement where no curb exists) into the street to a point where those lines intersect; from that point of
intersection, measure along both curb lines (or edges of pavement) to two (2) points, each of which is thirty five feet (35') from the point of intersection;
the connecting of these three (3) points shall form the "sight distance triangle". The city is authorized to abate sight obstructions along streets within a
sight distance triangle if necessary to protect public health and safety.
F. Tree Limbs, Branches And Shrubbery Abutting Streets, Alleys And Sidewalks:
1. The owner of any property or premises abutting any street, alley or sidewalk within the city shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing between the
sidewalks and street, or adjacent to any sidewalk, street or alley so that the free and convenient passage and travel along said streets, alleys and
sidewalks is not obstructed, according to the requirements set forth in this subsection F. When such property or premises is occupied by some
person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinafter required of the owner.
2. All tree limbs, tree branches or shrubbery which project over or overhang a public street, alley or sidewalk and which said branches, limbs, or
shrubbery, or any part thereof, are less than eight feet (8') above the surface of the sidewalk or which are less than twelve feet (12') above the
surface of a residential street or alley, shall constitute a public nuisance.
3. All tree limbs, tree branches or shrubbery which are adjacent to a sidewalk or project into a sidewalk, and which are less than one foot (1') from
either edge of a sidewalk, roadways, measured horizontally, though such tree limbs, branches or shrubbery are not overhanging such sidewalk, shall
constitute a public nuisance.
4. All tree limbs, branches, or shrubbery which project over or overhang a nonresidential public street or alley, "nonresidential" being defined as a
public street or a part thereof along which the use of the property abutting said street or alley is primarily commercial, industrial, or other
nonresidential nature, and which said branches, limbs, or shrubbery, or any part thereof, are less than fourteen feet (14') above the surface of the
nonresidential street or alley, shall constitute a public nuisance.
5. Any owner or nonowner occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim trees, branches, limbs or shrubbery as provided in this subsection so as to
abate a nuisance as defined herein, after receiving ten (10) days' notice from the code enforcement officer or the city manager to do so, shall be
guilty of an offense. Every day that the owner or occupant shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim the trees, branches, limbs or shrubbery, after the
expiration of the ten (10) days' notice, shall be a separate offense. If abatement is required immediately to ensure public safety, then the city may
abate the public nuisance and trim any trees, limbs, branches or shrubbery which constitutes a nuisance, upon notice, if possible to the owner of
such tree or shrubbery or nonowner occupant or the premises on which the tree or shrubbery is located. The penalty for violation of this subsection is
as set forth in subsection G, "Penalty", of this section. (Ord. 2014-20, 10-28-2014)
G. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this code. The city of Skiatook may also take any additional lawful action, including nuisance abatement proceedings or seeking an
injunction or restraining order from a court of competent jurisdiction, in order to restrain further violation of this section and to ensure compliance
therewith. (Ord. 2013-10, 6-25-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-20, 10-28-2014)
6-4G-6: SIGNS ON UTILITY POLES:
No person, firm or corporation shall place, install, maintain, or permit to be kept or maintained upon any utility pole, traffic control device, sign or structure
supporting the same which is located upon any street or public or municipal easement or right of way, any sign, placard, notice, paper, advertisement or
display of any nature. Each day a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. (2011 Code)
6-4G-7: FIREWORKS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings specified below:
DISTRIBUTOR: Any person who sells fireworks to other distributors, wholesalers or retailers for resale.
FIREWORKS: Shall mean and include any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation and which is defined as common or special fireworks by the United States department of transportation (DOT). Fireworks are
further classified in this law as 1.4G, UN0336 consumer fireworks (formerly "class C") or 1.3G, UN0335 display fireworks (formerly "class B"). The term
"fireworks" shall not include toy cap pistols and caps, blank cartridges, railroad flares and model rockets.
1.3G, UN0335 Display Fireworks (Formerly "Class B" Display Fireworks Or DOT Special Fireworks): All articles of larger fireworks designed primarily to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion or explosion. "1.3G (class B) display fireworks" include, but are not limited to, firecrackers and salutes
containing more than two (2) grains (130 mg) of explosive composition and other exhibition display items that exceed the limits for classification as
1.4G (class C) consumer fireworks according to the department of transportation.
1.4G, UN0336 Consumer Fireworks (Formerly "Class C" Fireworks Or DOT Common Fireworks): Any devices suitable for use by the public that
conform with the requirements of the United States consumer products safety commission and are designed primarily to produce visible effects by
combustion, and some small devices designed to produce an audible effect.
MANUFACTURER: Any person engaged in the making or construction of fireworks.
PERSON: Shall include any corporation, association, partnership or one or more individuals.
RETAILER: Any person who purchases fireworks for resale to consumers only.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 78/269
WHOLESALER: Any person who purchases fireworks for resale only to retailers and consumers.
B. Storage Of Fireworks: 1.4G (class C) consumer fireworks may be legally stored and sold in the city with the exception and conditions specified under
the provisions of this section. No other type of fireworks may be possessed, stored, sold or used within the city, unless specifically authorized herein.
C. Sale Of Fireworks; Regulations, License And Fee:
1. License Required; Fee; Location Approval: The following license fees shall be due and payable to the city on or before June 1 of each year: (Ord.
2012-07, 5-29-2012)
Any person operating a retail location where fireworks are sold shall be required to purchase a retail fireworks license. The retail license fee shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00) annually and must be purchased from the city clerk prior to June 1 of that year, after approval of the proposed location by the fire
chief. Upon application for the license, the applicant shall provide the fire chief with the location of the retail outlet, proof of age of applicant, and
evidence of all licenses required under state law. The fire chief shall refuse to approve any proposed location if, using accepted standards, he
determines the location because of its proximity to other activities or structures would create a significant risk of harm to persons or property. (Ord.
2012-07, 5-29-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
2. Retail License Holder And Salesclerk Requirements:
a. The retail license holder shall be responsible for the safe operation of retail sales to the public. The retail license holder shall be at least sixteen
(16) years of age.
b. A salesclerk over sixteen (16) years of age must be on duty to serve the consumer at the time of purchase. All fireworks offered for retail sale must
be protected from direct contact and handling by the public at all times. Entry within that structure from which sales are made shall be forbidden to
the public.
3. Direct Contact And Handling By Public: Fireworks offered for retail sale must be protected from direct contact and handling by the public at all times.
Self-serve or marketing where retail customers are allowed to move among stocks of fireworks or serve themselves from fireworks stocks or displays
is strictly prohibited. Mail order sales to consumers are prohibited through any medium of either interstate or intrastate commerce. Sales of fireworks
may only be made at properly licensed retail locations within the city. A salesclerk must be on duty to serve the consumer at the time of purchase.
4. Sales Within Buildings; Public Access: Fireworks shall not be sold or displayed to the public within any building or portion thereof or within any
vehicle that allows entry by any persons other than employees within such building or vehicle unless the fireworks are kept where they cannot be
reached or handled by those persons. An enclosed building used for sale of fireworks to the public shall have adequate exits as determined by the
fire chief. The use of tents or nonrigid shelters for the sale or storage of fireworks where the public may move about under or within the confines of a
shelter is prohibited.
5. Sales Permitted In Certain Zoning Districts: The retail sale of 1.4G (class C) consumer fireworks shall be permitted only in those portions of the city
which have been zoned agricultural and commercial. Sales elsewhere are prohibited.
6. No Smoking Signs: All fireworks storage and sales areas shall be conspicuously posted with signs reading:
Fireworks - No Smoking.
7. Dates When Sales Allowed: No person shall offer fireworks for sale to residents of the city at retail before June 15 or after July 6, and before
December 15 or after January 2 in each year.
8. Bottle Rockets And Stick Rockets Prohibited: The sale, gift, distribution or use of skyrockets with sticks as defined by the United States department
of transportation is hereby prohibited within the city. This prohibition shall include, but not be limited to, explosive devices commonly known as "bottle
rockets" or "stick rockets".
9. Proper Labeling Required: Any and all items of 1.4G (class C) consumer fireworks not properly labeled according to the United States consumer
product safety commission and identified with the "DOT" 1.4G (class C) consumer fireworks marking on each retail sale unit is prohibited under the
provisions of this section.
10. Freestanding Structure: The sale of fireworks shall be made only from a freestanding structure which in all cases shall be located no less than one
hundred feet (100') from any permanent structure and one hundred feet (100') from any roadway. Said structure shall be a rigid structure, the sale of
fireworks from tents and/or nonrigid structures being expressly forbidden.
D. Discharge Of Fireworks Prohibited; Exceptions: The discharge, firing or use of firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, roman candles, or other fireworks or
substances designed and intended for pyrotechnic display and of pistols, canes, cannons, or other appliances, using blank cartridges or caps
containing chlorate of potash mixture, is hereby prohibited, unless any of the following exceptions apply:
1. The city council may, by order or resolution, authorize display and discharge of fireworks, including 1.3G (class B) display fireworks, by properly
qualified individuals or organizations when such display is deemed for the enjoyment of the populace at large and is conducted and located in such a
manner and under circumstances that the city council is satisfied that the discharge or firing thereof will not be hazardous to surrounding property or
endanger any person or persons;
2. Persons within the city limits may use or otherwise discharge permissible 1.4G (class C) consumer fireworks only from three o'clock (3:00) P.M. to
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on July 3 and July 4, provided the following conditions are met:
a. Such fireworks must be discharged on a noncombustible surface of sufficient size to contain the entire ground portion of the display and not closer
than twenty five feet (25') to any permanent structure. Except: It shall be unlawful to explode or ignite fireworks within five hundred feet (500') of
any church, hospital, asylum, unharvested flammable agricultural crop, public school or where fireworks are stored, sold, or offered for sale. No
person shall ignite or discharge any permissible articles of fireworks within or throw the same from a motor vehicle; nor shall any person place or
throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at such a motor vehicle or at or near any group of people.
b. An adult person (age 18 or over) must obtain a permit from the city at a cost of twenty dollars ($20.00). Said permit must identify the adult in
charge of this use by name and address, and also identify the proposed location on or near the permit holder's property. Applications for said
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 79/269
permits shall be made available during normal business hours (excluding holidays) from April 1 through July 3 of any given year and permits are
valid only for the year of issuance.
c. The possession or the sale of any fireworks to or by any individual under the age of twelve (12) years shall be unlawful within the city, unless under
the immediate and direct supervision of a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult in possession of a current permit.
d. The adult permit holder in charge of the use must be physically present for any household member to use the fireworks and said use shall be
within sixty feet (60') of the front door of the permitted residence. The permit shall be accessible for examination by any law enforcement officer.
The permit holder is further responsible for cleaning up any debris caused by any person discharging fireworks under the permit holder and such
debris must be cleaned up and removed within twenty four (24) hours of the same day the fireworks are discharged. Failure to remove the debris
shall be punished by a fine of two hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00) plus costs.
e. Private persons may not use or discharge fireworks within any city or county park, nor on any highway, turnpike, or any street that has paving in
excess of twenty six feet (26') wide, such as an arterial street, or collector street.
E. Emergency Fireworks Ban: In the event that the governor of the state of Oklahoma, or the board of county commissioners of Tulsa, Osage, and/or
Washington Counties calls a red flag fire alert or burn ban for the area encompassing the city of Skiatook and/or the city of Skiatook fire department
determines that the city of Skiatook is in fire danger due to the weather conditions, the city council may declare an emergency and cause the use of
fireworks to be terminated and declare them to be illegal during the emergency period. Any fireworks used during this emergency is a violation of this
section.
F. Violation: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Violation of this section shall also be grounds for revocation or suspension of any license granted. Each violation
shall be deemed as a separate offense. (Ord. 2012-07, 5-29-2012)
6-4G-8: PROHIBITING OCCUPANCY AFTER DISCOVERY OF METHAMPHETAMINE MANUFACTURING ACTIVITY:
A. Purpose And Scope:
1. The purpose of this section is to protect occupants of real property from hazardous and contaminated living environments by requiring owners of real
property to remediate gross contamination of property caused by methamphetamine manufacturing activity prior to occupancy pursuant to the
standards described in this section.
2. Although other types of synthetic drugs may be manufactured in clandestine drug laboratories, this section is specifically intended to remediate the
contamination and environmental dangers associated with methamphetamine manufacturing activity.
B. Report Of Methamphetamine Manufacturing Activity: Upon discovery that an owner's property is, or has been, the location for any type of
methamphetamine manufacturing activity, an owner shall immediately report such activity to local law enforcement.
C. Prohibition On Occupancy: Until a contractor experienced in hazardous waste removal and remediation, as prescribed in this section, assesses the
contaminated property, cleans up any contamination and prepares a final report, as prescribed in this section, which shows that the levels of
contamination in the property meet the acceptable levels listed in subsection F of this section, use of the property for human habitation is prohibited.
D. Public Notice Of Contamination: Within twenty four (24) hours of discovery, an owner or the owner's designee shall display on the contaminated
structure(s), a public notice of contamination with the following information:
1. The word "Warning" in bold type on the notice.
2. The address of the contaminated property or, if the property has multiple structures upon it, the address of each contaminated structure in bold type
on the notice.
3. A statement with the following language: "Hazardous Substances, Toxic Chemicals, Or Other Waste Products May Be Present On The Property" in
bold type on the notice.
4. An additional warning with the following language "Any Person Who Enters The Structure(s) Without Permission Of The Owner Or Law Enforcement
Will Have Committed A Trespass And May Be Held Criminally And/Or Civilly Liable. Owner Name: ; Owner Contact Number: ; Skiatook Police
Department Contact Number: 918-396-2424" in bold type on the notice.
E. Assessment And Remediation:
1. Upon discovery that an owner's property is or has been the location for any type of methamphetamine manufacturing activity, an owner, prior to
occupancy of the property and after the removal of methamphetamine manufacturing materials and equipment by law enforcement, shall retain the
services of a contractor who is experienced in hazardous waste removal and remediation to assess the level of contamination within the property and
provide a written report documenting the level of contamination. At a minimum, such contractor shall have completed forty (40) hours of hazardous
waste operation and emergency response training pursuant to 29 CFR 1910.120 and shall have received certification pursuant to this training. The
owner shall obtain a copy of the contractor's 29 CFR 1910.120 certification before allowing the contractor to begin the assessment.
2. If, upon the completion of the assessment, the contractor determines:
a. The level of contamination does not exceed the acceptable contamination levels, as defined in subsection F of this section, and then the owner
shall require the contractor to prepare a final report as prescribed in subsection H of this section. Once the final report is prepared and delivered to
the owner, the owner shall remove the notice to the public as described in subsection D of this section. A copy of the final report shall be delivered
to the city manager and upon receipt of the final report by the city manager, the real property may be occupied.
b. The level of contamination exceeds the acceptable levels defined in subsection F of this section, then the owner shall not allow use of the property
for human habitation until a contractor (who has completed 40 hours of hazardous waste operation and emergency response training pursuant to
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 80/269
29 CFR 1910.120 and shall have received certification pursuant to this training) has: 1) cleaned up any contamination and remediated the property
according to the standards of subsection G of this section, and 2) conducted another assessment which shows that contamination levels are
acceptable pursuant to subsection F of this section. Once the level of contamination meets the acceptable standards defined in subsection F of
this section, then the owner shall require the contractor to prepare a final report as prescribed in subsection H of this section. Once the final report
is prepared and delivered to the owner, the owner shall remove the notice to the public as described in subsection D of this section. A copy of the
final report shall be delivered to the city manager and upon receipt of the final report by the city manager, the real property may be occupied.
F. Acceptable Levels:
1. The owner shall require the certified contractor to test the levels of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), pH, mercury, lead, and methamphetamine in
both the initial assessment and the postremediation assessment.
2. Acceptable levels for each are the following:
a. VOCs: 0.9 parts per million or below.
b. pH: Surface level of 7 or below.
c. Mercury: 0.3 micrograms per cubic meter of mercury in air or below.
d. Lead: Twenty (20) micrograms per square foot or below.
e. Methamphetamine: 0.1 microgram per one hundred (100) square centimeters or below.
G. Cleanup And Safety Standards: Contractors hired by an owner to engage in removal and remediation shall conduct assessments and cleanup pursuant
to the relevant standards and guidelines proposed or adopted by the Oklahoma drug enforcement agency, the federal drug enforcement agency, the
Oklahoma department of environmental quality, and the environmental protection agency and shall follow safety procedures mandated by the relevant
federal and state agencies governing hazardous waste.
H. Final Report:
1. All inspections and assessments conducted by a contractor during the removal and remediation process shall be fully documented in writing. The
report shall include the dates that activities were performed and the names and signatures of the people and/or companies who performed the
activities. The final report shall include any other types of relevant documentation, including, but not limited to, photographs, video recordings,
drawings, and charts. Such additional documentation shall likewise be signed and dated. The owner shall immediately provide a copy of the final
report to the city manager upon receipt from the contractor.
2. The final report, at a minimum, shall include:
a. A case narrative, site description, and site assessment.
b. Physical address of property, number and type of structures on property, and description of adjacent and/or surrounding properties.
c. Law enforcement reports, documented observations, and preremediation sampling results that provide information regarding the manufacturing
method, chemicals present, cooking areas, chemical storage areas, and observed areas of contamination or waste disposal.
d. Name of cleanup contractor(s) and the contractor's qualifications, experience, and copy(ies) of any certification(s).
e. The signature of the contractor who prepared the report.
f. A copy of the contractor's 29 CFR 1910.120 certification.
3. Where property is remediated, final reports shall also include:
a. Worker safety and health information.
b. Decontamination and encapsulation procedures for each area that was decontaminated.
c. Documentation that the structure was cleaned to acceptable levels, including, but not limited to, the location and results of postdecontamination
samples, description of analytical methods used, and the location(s) of laboratory(ies) used.
I. Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided in section 1-4-1, "General Penalty", of this code.
J. Each Day A Separate Offense: Each day a violation of this section continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense, punishable by fine and costs as
provided in section 1-4-1, "General Penalty", of this code. (Ord. 2011-03, 6-28-2011)
Chapter 5
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BOARDING AND SECURING OR BOARDED AND SECURED: Closing, boarding or locking of any or all exterior openings so as to prevent entry into the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 81/269
structure.
DILAPIDATED BUILDING: A. A structure which, through neglect or injury, lacks necessary repairs or otherwise is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such
an extent that the structure is a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public;
B. A structure which is unfit for human occupancy due to the lack of necessary repairs and is considered uninhabitable or is a hazard to the health,
safety, and welfare of the general public;
C. A structure which is determined by the city council to be an unsecured building, as defined by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-112.1, more than
three (3) times within any twelve (12) month period;
D. A structure which has been boarded and secured, as defined by 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-112.1, for more than thirty six (36) consecutive
months; or
E. A structure declared by the city council to constitute a public nuisance.
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer.
UNSECURED BUILDING: Any structure which is not occupied by a legal or equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or equitable owner, and into
which there are one or more unsecured openings such as broken windows, unlocked windows, broken doors, holes in exterior walls, holes in the roof,
broken basement or cellar hatchways, unlocked basement or cellar hatchways or other similar unsecured openings which would facilitate an unauthorized
entry into the structure. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
6-5-2: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY:
The city manager may from time to time designate either the fire chief, assistant fire chief or the code enforcement officer to perform those tasks assigned
to him under this chapter. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
6-5-3: CONDEMNATION OF DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS:
The city manager is hereby authorized to cause dilapidated buildings within the city limits to be torn down and removed in accordance with provisions of
this chapter: (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
A. Notice To Property Owner: At least fifteen (15) days' notice that a building is to be torn down or removed shall be given to the owner of the property
before the city manager takes action or holds a hearing. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be affected. In addition, a copy of the
notice shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt requested to the property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the office
of the county treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any mortgage holder as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of Osage or
Tulsa County. If neither the owner nor the mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by publication, as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1-102. Such notice may be published once not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the city pursuant to the provisions of this
section, or in the alternative, notice may be given by first class mail to the property owner and mortgage holder. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. 2011
Code)
B. Hearing To Determine Dilapidation: A hearing may be held by the city manager to determine if the property is dilapidated and has become detrimental to
the health, safety, or welfare of the general public and the community, or if the property creates a fire hazard which is dangerous to other property.
C. Procedure Upon Finding Property Constitutes Detriment:
1. Pursuant to a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefited by the removal of
such conditions, the city manager may cause the dilapidated building to be torn down and removed. The city manager shall fix reasonable dates for
the commencement and completion of the work. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
2. The city clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property, the findings of the city at the hearing, and stating
that the city claims a lien on the property for the destruction and removal costs. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
3. The agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the property for the performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the
city if the property owner does not perform the work within the dates fixed by the city manager.
D. Assessment Of Costs:
1. The city manager shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal of dilapidated buildings and any other expenses that may be
necessary in conjunction with the dismantling and removal of the buildings, including the cost of notice and mailing. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
2. The city clerk shall forward a statement of the actual cost attributable to the dismantling and removal of the buildings and a demand for payment of
such costs, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to the property owner. In addition, a copy of the statement shall be mailed to any mortgage
holder at the address provided for in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
3. If the city dismantles or removes any dilapidated buildings, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance
and equipment required for the dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings.
4. If dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings are done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best
bidder. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 82/269
E. Payment Of Costs; Lien For Nonpayment:
1. When payment is made to the city of costs incurred, the city clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual cost of the
dismantling and removal of the building is not made within six (6) months from the date of the mailing of the statement, the city clerk shall forward a
certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer of the county in which the property is located. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord.
2013-3, 2-12-2013)
2. The cost shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as are other taxes authorized by law. The cost and the interest thereon
shall be a lien against the property from the date the notice of the lien is filed with the county clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad
valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property.
3. The treasurer shall collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each parcel of property. The fee shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the
county.
4. At any time prior to collection as provided for in this subsection, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest
thereon. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
5. Upon receiving payment, the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and direct discharge of the lien.
F. Property Owner Right To Appeal: The property owner shall have the right to appeal to the city council from any order of the city manager entered in
respect of the foregoing. Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the city manager's
order is rendered. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
6-5-4: BOARDING AND SECURING OF DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS:
After a building has been declared dilapidated as provided in section 6-5-3 of this chapter, and before commencement of the tearing down and removal of
a dilapidated building, the city manager may authorize that such building be boarded and secured in accordance with the following procedure:
A. Notice To Property Owner: Before the city manager orders such action, at least ten (10) days' notice that such unsecured building is to be boarded and
secured shall be given by certified mail with return receipt requested to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in 11 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 22-112 and 22-112.1. A copy of the notice shall also be posted on the property to be affected. However, if neither the property owner
nor mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by publication, as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-102. Such notice shall be
published one time, not less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the city pursuant to the provisions of this section, or in the alternative,
notice may be given by first class mail to any property owners and mortgage holders.
B. Written Consent Of Owner; Waive Right To Hearing: The owner of the property may give his written consent to the city authorizing the boarding and
securing of such unsecured building and to the payment of any costs incurred thereby. By giving the written consent, the owner waives his right to a
hearing by the city manager.
C. Determination Hearing; Standards Considered:
1. If the property owner does not give his written consent to such actions, a hearing may be held by the city manager to determine whether the
boarding and securing of such unsecured buildings would promote and benefit the public health, safety, or welfare. Such hearing may be held in
conjunction with a hearing on the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass on the premises of such unsecured building held pursuant to
the provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-111, subsection A, paragraph 3.
2. In making such determination, the city manager shall apply the following standard: The city manager may order the boarding and securing of the
unsecured building when the boarding and securing thereof would make such building less available for transient occupation, decrease a fire hazard
created by such building, or decrease the hazard that such building would constitute an attractive nuisance to children.
3. Upon making the required determination, the city manager may order the boarding and securing of the unsecured building. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
D. Lien For Costs: After the city manager orders the boarding and securing of such unsecured building, the city clerk shall immediately file a notice of lien
with the county clerk describing the property, stating the findings of the city at the hearing at which such building was determined to be unsecured, and
stating that the city claims a lien on the property for the costs of boarding and securing such building. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
E. Right Of Entry Of City Agents: Pursuant to the order of the city manager, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the property for the
performance of the boarding and securing of such building and for the performance of all necessary duties as a governmental function of the city. (Ord.
99-06, 3-30-1999)
F. Determination Of Costs; Demand For Payment: After an unsecured building has been boarded and secured, the city manager shall determine the actual
costs of such actions and any other expenses that may be necessary in conjunction therewith. The city clerk shall forward a statement of the actual
costs attributable to the boarding and securing of the unsecured building and a demand for payment of such costs, by certified mail with return receipt
requested, to any property owners and mortgage holders as provided in 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 22-112 and 22-112.1. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999;
amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
G. Actions By City Or Private Contract: If the city boards and secures any unsecured building, the cost to the property owner shall not exceed the actual
cost of the labor, materials and equipment required for the performance of such actions. If such actions are done on a private contract basis, the
contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 83/269
H. Payment Of Costs:
1. When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city clerk shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual costs of the
boarding and securing of the unsecured building is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of such
property, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the costs to the county treasurer of the county in which the property is
located. The costs shall be authorized by law. The costs and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the notice of the
lien is filed with the county clerk. The lien shall be coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and shall be
prior and fully paid. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
2. At any time prior to collection as provided for in this subsection, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest
thereon. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
3. Upon receiving payment, the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of the lien. (Ord. 99-
06, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
I. Property Owner Right Of Appeal: The property owner or mortgage holder shall have a right of appeal to the city council from any order of the city
manager relating to the foregoing. Such appeal shall be taken by filing of written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the
administrative order is rendered. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
6-5-5: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
Nothing in the provisions of this chapter shall prevent the city from abating dilapidated buildings as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police powers to
protect the health, safety or welfare of the general public. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with the provisions of 11 Oklahoma
Statutes sections 22-112 and 22-112.1, which constitute the legislative grant of authority for the enactment of this chapter. (Ord. 99-06, 3-30-1999)
Chapter 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, including article A, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ANIMAL: Any "large animal" or "small animal", as defined in this section.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The person or persons employed by the city as the officer charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter
and others relating to the control of animals.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any premises designated by action of the city council or the animal control officer for the purpose of impounding and caring for
animals and fowl.
AT LARGE: Any animal, fowl or reptile when it is off the property of its owner or keeper and not under the control of a competent person by leash, cord,
chain or other restraint of the same or greater efficiency.
DOMESTIC BIRDS: Canaries, parrots, parakeets, myna birds, peacocks, birds of paradise or other birds tamed to the household pertaining thereto.
EXPOSED TO RABIES: Any animal that has been bitten by or exposed to any other animal known to have been infected with rabies.
FOWL: Chickens, guineas, geese, ducks, turkeys, pigeons, chukars, pheasant and quail.
KEEPER: Any person, family, firm or corporation owning, keeping, harboring or regularly maintaining or nurturing any of the animals, fowl or reptiles
referred to in this chapter.
KENNEL: Any person, firm or corporation keeping on any premises any combination of four (4) or more dogs and cats more than six (6) months of age for
a period of more than ninety (90) days.
LARGE ANIMALS: Horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs or hogs, or any animal of similar size and stature.
LICENSE TAG AND FEES: The license issued by the city clerk and charges therefor.
NONRESIDENT OWNER: A person who owns, keeps, maintains or is charged with the care of any such animal and who resides outside the corporate
limits of the city of Skiatook.
RATPROOF: That state of construction which effectively prevents entry of rodents.
RESTRAINT: An animal is controlled by leash or tether beside a competent person and obedient to that person's command, or within any vehicle, trailer or
other conveyance being driven, pulled, parked on the street or confined within property limits of its owner or keeper.
SANITARY: Any condition of good odor and cleanliness, which precludes the probability of disease transmission, insect breeding and which preserves the
health of the city.
SMALL ANIMALS: Rabbits, hares, guinea pigs, chinchillas, mink, monkeys, hamsters, bats, or any other animal of similar size or stature.
VICIOUS DOG OR ANIMAL: A dog or animal which by history, training or breeding is known to have a propensity for fighting, violence or to attack without
provocation1. (1991 Code § 3-1; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 84/269
6-6-2: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
There is hereby created the position of animal control officer.
A. Duties:
1. The animal control officer is charged with the enforcement of this chapter and all other ordinances of the city relating to the control, leashing, tagging
and apprehension of animals, fowl and reptiles.
2. The animal control officer is hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of ordinances of the city relating to the control, restraint, abuse and
ownership of animals, fowl and reptiles. The animal control officer may not, except in the presence of a duly qualified police officer of the city, make
an arrest in which the person arrested is physically taken into custody.
B. Board Of Health: The animal control officer shall not be deemed to be a police officer nor shall he be entitled to participate in the police pension plan.
He shall have the authority conferred upon health officers, and shall also have the authority to cooperate with the boards of county commissions of
Tulsa County and Osage County pursuant to regulations made by those boards under the provisions of 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-508, with the
state board of health and other municipal and local agencies who regulate and control animals.
C. Authority Of Animal Control Officer: The animal control officer is hereby charged with and granted the duty and authority to issue citations and perform
all duties authorized by this chapter and any other ordinances relating to animals, fowl and reptiles; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit any regular police officer from enforcing such ordinances as may be enforced by the animal control officer.
D. Salary: The animal control officer shall receive a monthly salary to be fixed by the city council. (1991 Code § 3-2; amd. 2011 Code)
6-6-3: APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAWS TO CUSTODY OF ANIMALS:
A. No person owning or having in his custody any animal shall violate any laws, rules, or regulations of the state of Oklahoma applicable thereto. All
regulations promulgated by the state board of health relating to the quarantine, isolation, impounding, immunization and disposal of animals, dogs, cats
or other domestic pets pursuant to 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-508 shall apply and are hereby incorporated into this chapter.
B. Where the prohibitory and regulatory provisions of this chapter are less restrictive than the provisions of the laws of this state, the latter shall govern and
constitute the prohibitory and regulatory terms of this chapter, unless the state law is a felony in which case this chapter shall have no application
whatever. (1991 Code § 3-5)
6-6-4: REGULATIONS FOR KEEPING; PERMITS; COMMERCIAL PET STORES:
A. Compliance Required: No person shall keep, own, maintain, use or have possession of any animals within the city unless such animals are kept under
the conditions of this section.
B. Large Animals; Permit Requirements:
1. No person shall keep any large animal without first obtaining a permit.
2. Permits for the keeping of large animals shall be issued only to those applicants who provide facilities for the keeping of such large animals in
quarters as set out herein, which will confine the large animals within limits not closer than three hundred feet (300') to the exterior limits of any
dwelling resided in by anyone other than the applicant unless such other building is owned by the applicant.
C. Small Animals; Permit Requirements: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, permits for the keeping of small animals shall be issued only
to those applicants who provide facilities for the keeping of such small animals in enclosed quarters which will confine the small animals within such
structure not closer than three hundred feet (300') to the exterior limits of any dwelling resided in by anyone other than the applicant.
D. Exceptions And Conditions Regarding Small Animal Permit Issuance:
1. FFA Or 4-H Club Members: A permit to keep and raise small animals, not to exceed ten (10) in number, may be issued to a resident of the city under
the age of eighteen (18) years who is a member of an educational, benevolent youth group, such as FFA, 4-H Club or other similar club and has as
his or her project the raising or showing of such animals under the direct sponsorship of an adult representative or official of such club. Before a
permit shall be issued to such a youthful applicant, it shall first appear that the applicant is a member of such a club by verification with the club
sponsor of such club. The adult sponsoring such youthful person shall promise in writing to monitor the husbandry operation of such person to
assure that the operation is conducted in a clean and sanitary manner. (1991 Code § 3-16)
2. Humane Care; Notice Of Violation; Hearing: Should it ever appear that the animals being maintained under a permit issued under this subsection are
not being cared for in a humane, sanitary and clean condition, the city clerk shall immediately issue a notice of violation to the applicant, conduct a
hearing within five (5) days following service of the notice, and if it is found that the operation is not humane, safe and sanitary or is otherwise a
nuisance, the application shall be revoked; and the exception created by this subsection shall no longer apply.
3. Pet Stores: A permit may also be issued to a commercial pet shop where small animals are not permitted to breed and are kept in pens located
entirely within the walls of a commercial store located on a tract of property duly zoned CG or greater and are held for retail resale so long as it
appears to the city clerk that the same will not constitute a nuisance, as that phrase is defined at common law and by this code. A permit issued to
such a commercial pet store shall be subject to revocation should the operation ever be found to be a nuisance after notice and hearing as provided
in subsection D2 of this section. (1991 Code § 3-16; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 85/269
E. Nuisance Conditions Prohibited: It shall be the duty of the holder of any permit provided for in this section to maintain and operate the housing and
keeping of such animals in such a manner as not to create a nuisance as determined by this code and the common law of this state.
F. Feed Storage; Inspection: Every keeper of any such animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to be stored and kept in a ratproof, fly and insect tight
building, and the premises shall be subject to inspection by the animal control officer or any of his representatives at any reasonable hour of the day.
(1991 Code § 3-16)
G. Violation Cause For Permit Revocation: The failure of any keeper of such animals to comply with the provisions of this section or sanitation standards
shall be cause for the revocation of any such permit issued by the city clerk. (1991 Code § 3-16; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
6-6-5: DOG AND CAT LICENSING; REGULATIONS; IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Dog Or Cat License Required: No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog or cat within the city limits unless such dog or cat is licensed as provided
in this section. (1991 Code § 3-17)
B. Application For License; Fee; Rabies Vaccination:
1. Required Information: Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk. The application shall state the name and address of the person or
persons applying for said license, also the breed, age, sex, and color and name of the dog or cat. (1991 Code § 3-17; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
2. Payment Of Fee; Issuance Of Receipt And Tag: The license fee shall be paid at the time of making application for license. A numbered receipt shall
be given to the applicant and there shall be issued to said applicant a numbered metallic tag, stamped with the tag number and the year for which
issued.
3. Proof Of Rabies Vaccination: No license shall be issued for any dog or cat unless the owner thereof furnishes written proof that said dog or cat has
been vaccinated against rabies within the past twelve (12) months by a licensed veterinarian.
C. Fees Enumerated: The yearly license fee shall be one dollar ($1.00) for a male and spayed female, two dollars ($2.00) for an unspayed female, and
twenty five cents ($0.25) for each tag issued.
D. License Term; Tag Attached To Collar; Duplicate Tag: All licenses shall be issued for a period of one year, and every owner is required to see that the
tag is securely fastened to the collar or harness of the dog or cat and must be worn by the dog or cat at all times. In the event the tag is lost, the owner
can obtain a duplicate tag upon payment of a twenty five cent ($0.25) fee.
E. Right Of Entry To Check For Compliance: Any personnel authorized by the city or animal control officer may check any residence at any time and
demand proof of rabies shots and city animal license on any animal or animals kept by the people living at that residence. Any owner not possessing a
current license on an animal over six (6) months of age shall be guilty of an offense.
F. Keeping Animals Under Restraint: The owner or keeper shall keep his dog under restraint at all times and shall not permit such dog to be at large. Cats
must wear a municipal license at all times and are subject to the same regulations as dogs.
G. Impoundment Of Dogs And Cats; Disposition:
1. Any dog or unlicensed cat or other small animal kept as a house pet found running at large shall be picked up and immediately impounded in the
animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner.
2. Dogs and cats and other small animals not claimed by their owner or keeper before the expiration of seventy two (72) hours, exclusive of Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays, shall become the property of the city and shall be disposed of at the discretion of the city.
H. Notice Of Animals Running At Large Or Impoundment To Owners:
1. When dogs or cats are found running at large and their ownership is known to agents of the city, such dogs or cats need not be impounded, but the
agent may, at his discretion, cite the owner or keeper of such dog or cat to appear in court to answer to charges of violations of this section.
2. Immediately upon impounding dogs or cats or other animals, the agent of the city charged with the enforcement hereof shall make every possible
effort to notify the owners of such dogs, cats or other animals so impounded and inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain
custody of such animal or animals.
3. Small unlicensed animals, other than dogs or cats, shall be impounded when found running at large within the city limits and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of this section or other applicable laws.
I. Reclamation Of Impounded Animals:
1. The owner of impounded animals shall be entitled to resume possession of any dog or cat or other small animal kept as house pets, except as
hereinafter provided in the cases of certain dogs, cats, or other small animals kept as house pets upon compliance with the license provisions of this
chapter and payment of impoundment fees as provided.
2. Any small animal impounded under the provisions of this section may be reclaimed by the owner upon the payment of the impoundment fee as
provided. (1991 Code § 3-17)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 86/269
3. Any animal impounded under the provisions of this section and not reclaimed by its owner within seventy two (72) hours may be adopted. (1991
Code § 3-17; amd. 2011 Code)
J. Confinement Of Female Dog In Season:
1. Every female dog or cat in season (heat) shall be kept confined in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come in contact with other
animals, except for controlled breeding purposes.
2. Female animals picked up by the animal control officer which are in season (heat) shall be kept separate from male animals at all times.
K. Nuisance Conditions Prohibited; Humane Treatment Of Animals:
1. All dogs, cats and other small animals kept as house pets within the city limits shall be housed, fed and protected from the weather in such a manner
so as not to create a nuisance.
2. No person shall wilfully or maliciously beat, injure, maim, or mutilate any animal whether belonging to himself or another, or fail to provide an animal
with necessary food, drink and shelter. (1991 Code § 3-17)
6-6-6: KENNEL LICENSING AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required; Application:
1. No person shall own, maintain or operate a kennel within the city unless such kennel is licensed as herein provided and in accordance with
ordinances of the city in regard to operation of a business and location of said business applicable to all city codes. (1991 Code § 3-19)
2. Application for such licenses shall be made to the city clerk and shall state the name and address of the owner or operator of said kennel with the
street address and legal description of the property upon which the kennel is located. (1991 Code § 3-19; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. License Fee; Display Of License: A kennel license fee shall be required and such license shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on the premises.
The fee for kennel license shall be set by the city council.
C. Proof Of Rabies Vaccination: A kennel owner must show proof of rabies vaccination on all animals over six (6) months of age when applying for a
license.
D. Term Of License: A license shall be issued for a period of one year.
E. Sanitary Condition: Any person maintaining a kennel, whether for profit or not, shall maintain such kennel in a sanitary condition and shall be subject to
the provisions of this section. Nonconforming kennels shall be deemed a public nuisance. (1991 Code § 3-19)
6-6-7: CONDITIONS OF CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN DOGS, OTHER ANIMALS:
A. Dangerous Dogs: The owner or keeper shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every fierce, dangerous or vicious dog or other dangerous
animal2, and not take such dog or other animal out of such building or secure enclosure unless such animal is securely muzzled.
B. Wild Animals: No undomesticated wild animals shall be kept within the city limits; provided, however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition
purposes by a circus, zoo, and by educational institutions, and by medical institutions in accordance with such regulations as shall be established by
the city council by resolution.
C. Impoundment; Notice And Hearing: Any animal described in subsections A and B of this section found at large shall be impounded by the city and shall
not be redeemed by the owner until such redemption is authorized by a court having jurisdiction and, after a hearing by the city council upon
reasonable notice to the owner or owners, fierce, dangerous or vicious dogs or other animals may be destroyed.
D. Destruction Of Animals: When, in the judgment of the animal control officer, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not
be redeemed. (1991 Code § 3-14)
6-6-8: RABIES AND ANIMAL BITES:
A. Notice Of Biting; Quarantine: Every animal that bites or scratches a person shall be reported within four (4) hours or sooner to the chief of police or the
animal control officer and shall thereupon at the expense of the owner or keeper be securely quarantined at the veterinarian hospital of the keeper's or
owner's choice for a period of ten (10) days from the date the person was bitten, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by permission
of the chief of police or animal control officer of the city and the veterinarian in charge of the quarantined animal. Failure of the owner to quarantine his
animal will make him guilty of an offense.
B. Killing Or Removing Animal: No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any
animal biting or scratching a human, except as herein provided, nor shall a person remove the animal from the city limits without written permission
from the chief of police or the animal control officer of the city. (1991 Code § 3-18; amd. 2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 87/269
C. Failure To Surrender Animal: No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required when demand is made
therefor by an employee empowered to enforce this section. Such refusal shall be deemed an offense.
D. Interference With City Agent: No person shall interfere with, or hinder or molest any agent of the city in the performance of any duty of such agent, or
seek to release any animal in the custody of the city or its agents, except as provided by law. (1991 Code § 3-18)
6-6-9: DOGS AND CATS COMMITTING NUISANCES:
Any dog or cat which scratches, or digs into any flowerbed, garden, tilled soil, vines, shrubbery, or small plants, and in doing so, injures the same, or which
habitually prowls around or over any premises, not the property of its owner or keeper, to the annoyance of the owner or occupant of said premises, or
which overturns any garbage can or other vessel for waste products, or scatters the contents of same, or a dog which chases or kills any chicken or other
domestic fowl, or animal, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. This section is in addition to, and not in contravention of, any other ordinances relating to
dogs as a nuisance. (1991 Code § 3-3)
6-6-10: RESTRICTIONS ON KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS:
A. Location: It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for anyone to keep large animals, small animals (except dogs and cats), or fowl of any kind, in
the manner provided elsewhere in this chapter, or to maintain a place to keep the same at any point within the corporate limits of the city, which is
within three hundred feet (300') of a dwelling house occupied by another person.
B. Reptiles: It shall also be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for anyone to keep snakes or alligators or any other reptile within the corporate limits of the
city. (1991 Code § 3-4)
6-6-11: DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. Isolation Of Diseased Animals: Every person owning, keeping or having any animal under his charge within the city, which he knows or suspects has
been afflicted by any communicable disease, in particular by glanders, anthrax, or rabies, shall isolate the animal from other animals and shall report
the existence or suspected existence of such disease to the animal control officer.
B. Adoption Of State Statute: All rules and regulations of the state board of health adopted pursuant to the provisions of 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-
508, relating to the quarantine, isolation, impounding, immunization and disposal of animals, dogs cats and other domestic pets to prevent and control
rabies, are hereby adopted by and made a part of the animal and health codes of the city to the extent that they do not conflict with the provisions of
this chapter. (1991 Code § 3-7)
6-6-12: FASTENING ANIMALS TO TREES; IMPOUNDING:
A. Fastening Prohibited: No person shall at any time fasten any horse, large animal or small animal to any hydrant, tree, or to any box or case around such
tree, on any street, sidewalk, park or other public ground or passageway.
B. Impoundment; Penalty And Fee: The animal control officer, any police officer or other authorized person may impound any animal so fastened until any
penalty as may be provided by law and a fee in the sum of forty five dollars ($45.00) or such sum as may hereafter be fixed by the city council for
expenses reasonably incurred in keeping and caring for the animal are paid. If the fine and charges are not paid within seven (7) days, the animal shall
be deemed a stray and treated as provided for herein. (1991 Code § 3-8)
6-6-13: PROPERTY OWNER MAY IMPOUND ANIMAL:
Any person who finds an animal or fowl on his property to his injury or annoyance may:
A. Remove such animal or fowl to an animal shelter, public or private; or
B. Retain possession of such animal or fowl and, as soon as possible, notify the animal control officer or other appropriate existing agency of this custody,
giving a description of the animal and the owner's name, if known. (1991 Code § 3-9)
6-6-14: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Injuring Or Poisoning Animals:
1. No person who accidentally or otherwise strikes an animal with any vehicle and seriously injures or renders it unable to move freely shall leave the
scene without calling the police or animal control officer and informing them of the incident.
2. No person shall wilfully or negligently poison any animal. (1991 Code § 3-6)
B. Noisy Animals: No person shall keep any animal which causes frequent or long continued noise so as to disturb the comfort or repose of any person in
the vicinity. Any violation of this subsection is declared to be a nuisance. (1991 Code § 3-10)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 88/269
C. Hunting: No person shall hunt or discharge any firearm within the city limits, nor shall any person hunt upon or around any lake, lagoon or upon any
land owned, leased or operated by the city. (1991 Code § 3-11)
D. Killing Prairie Dogs: No person shall kill, ensnare, trap, chase or attempt to kill prairie dogs in or upon any city property; provided, that this subsection
shall not apply to employees of the city acting in their official capacities. (1991 Code § 3-12)
E. Fighting Animals Prohibited: No person shall keep, nor shall any permit be issued for any gamecocks, fighting cocks, or swine, pit bull or any dog bred
for the specific purpose of fighting. (1991 Code § 3-13)
6-6-15: KEEPING LARGE ANIMALS; ACREAGE REQUIREMENT:
A. Keeping Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a large animal upon any contiguous tract of real property within the city limits
unless the area of such contiguous tract of real property is at least one acre. (1991 Code § 3-23)
B. Acreage Requirement: No person shall maintain more than one large animal on any tract of land within the city unless such tract shall contain at least
one acre per large animal kept or maintained. (1991 Code § 3-24)
6-6-16: BIRDS:
A. City Designated As Sanctuary: The entire area embraced or hereafter included within the corporate limits of the city is designated as a bird sanctuary.
B. Trapping Or Shooting Prohibited: No person shall trap, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wildfowl or rob bird nests or
wildfowl nests in the city.
C. Nuisance Conditions: If starlings, pigeons, or similar birds are found to be constituting a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of
proper health authorities of the city, then in such event the city council or their designated representative(s) shall meet with the representatives of the
Audubon Society, bird clubs, garden clubs, or Humane Society for the purpose of finding a solution to alleviate the nuisance. If as a result of the
meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisances, then the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is
deemed advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police.
D. Housing Of Birds: The housing and keeping of birds shall be in such a manner as not to create a nuisance. (1991 Code § 3-20)
6-6-17: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
No "keeper" (as that term is defined in section 6-6-1 of this chapter) of an animal shall permit any animal to run "at large" (as defined in section 6-6-1 of
this chapter) within the corporate limits of the city. No keeper or person owning an animal who resides without the corporate limits of the city shall bring an
animal within the corporate limits of the city or permit the entry into the corporate limits of the city unless the same is securely fastened by a leash. (1991
Code § 3-21)
6-6-18: CERTAIN ADOPTIONS PROHIBITED3:
No animal may be adopted from the animal shelter by any employee of the animal shelter, for any reason. Any employee adopting, giving away or selling
any animal from the shelter, except in accordance with this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1991 Code § 3-15)
6-6-19: IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS:
A. Impoundment: Any animal running at large within the corporate limits of the city may, in the discretion of the animal control officer, be impounded.
B. Notify Owner: When such animal is impounded, the animal control officer shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner or keeper of such
animal of the impoundment.
C. Reclamation Fee: When such an animal is impounded, the owner of such animal or any other person claiming this animal shall not be entitled to the
same until payment is made to the city in the sum of forty five dollars ($45.00), which is hereby declared to be a reasonable charge for catching and
impounding such an animal.
D. Destruction Of Unclaimed Animal: Any animal impounded as provided in this chapter, and not reclaimed by its owner within seventy two (72) hours,
may be destroyed five (5) days after the same has been impounded. (1991 Code § 3-22)
6-6-20: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 3-25;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 89/269
amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE A. VICIOUS DOGS
6-6A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, organization or association possessing or harboring or having the care or custody of a dog.
UNCONFINED: A vicious dog is "unconfined" if the dog is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure
upon the premises of the owner of the dog. The pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If the pen or structure has
no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot (1'). All such pens or structures must be adequately
lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
VICIOUS DOG: A. Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals, excepting cats and vermin; or
B. Any dog which because of its size, physical nature, or vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans and which
would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required by this article; or
C. Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal; or
D. Any dog owned or harbored for the purpose of dogfighting, any dog trained for dogfighting or any dog trained to attack on command. (1991 Code
§ 3-37; amd. Ord. 2017-01, 1-10-2017)
6-6A-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Owners of vicious dogs must, within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof, provide proof to the City Clerk of public liability insurance in the amount of
at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by his or her vicious dog. Similar proof of insurance must
also be made within thirty (30) days of the date on which a person acquires a vicious dog. (1991 Code § 3-42; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
6-6A-3: CONFINEMENT; LEASH AND MUZZLE:
A. Confinement Required: The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go unconfined. (1991 Code § 3-38)
B. Leash And Muzzle: The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the dog is securely
muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash, and under the physical restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause
injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or animal. (1991 Code § 3-39)
6-6A-4: POSTING OF SIGNS:
The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious dog on
the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal. (1991 Code § 3-40)
6-6A-5: DOGFIGHTING:
No person, firm, corporation, organization or department shall possess or harbor or maintain care or custody of any dog for the purpose of dogfighting, or
train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging the dog to attack human beings or domestic animals. (1991 Code
§ 3-41)
6-6A-6: IMPOUNDMENT:
Any dog which is unconfined may be impounded in the manner provided for in subsections 6-6-5G and H, and section 6-6-19 of this chapter. Dogs
impounded pursuant to this article shall not be released to the owner until proof of insurance is made. (1991 Code § 3-44)
6-6A-7: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1991 Code § 3-43; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 7
EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 90/269
6-7-1: INTENT:
The general intention of the city council in the enactment of this chapter is as follows:
A. To secure for all residents of the city equal access to housing in all neighborhoods and areas of the city.
B. To preserve the public welfare, to provide for the preservation of public peace, health and safety. (1991 Code § 23-372.1)
6-7-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to commit any of the following acts:
A. To refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the title or other interest in any housing, or real property upon which residential housing is to
be constructed, to any person, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any residential housing unit, because of race,
color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or handicap.
B. To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental or leasing of any residential property, or to represent that such property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, because of such person's race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status,
or handicap.
C. To solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person owning any interest in residential housing to sell, rent or lease, or not to sell, rent or lease
such housing to any person on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons
because of race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, familial status, or handicap, either by direct solicitation or inducement or by the purchase
of other property in the neighborhood for the purpose of such inducement, to distribute, or cause to be distributed, material or make statements
designed to induce a residential property owner to sell or lease his property due to such change in neighborhood.
D. To file a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, with knowledge that such chapter is false in any material respect, or to file such complaint for the
sole purpose of harassment. (1991 Code § 23-372.2; amd. 2011 Code)
6-7-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing contained herein shall apply to the following:
A. To prohibit persons from giving preference to prospective buyers or tenants for reasons other than race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age,
familial status, or handicap. (1991 Code § 23-372.3; amd. 2011 Code)
B. To the sale of a dwelling which is, or was at the time when first offered for sale, the principal residence of its owner.
C. To the rental of rooms in an owner-occupied residence or in a dwelling used exclusively as a rooming house.
D. To the rental or leasing of a housing unit in a building containing less than four (4) housing units.
E. To the rental or leasing of a dwelling or housing units owned by a religious or fraternal organization, or private club used and occupied for such
organization purposes. (1991 Code § 23-372.3)
6-7-4: FAIR HOUSING COUNCIL:
A. Creation; Membership: There is hereby created a fair housing council of the city (hereinafter referred to as "council"). Said council shall be composed of
the members of the city council. All appointments to the council shall be the same as and run concurrently with the term of office of the said city council.
(1991 Code § 23-372.4)
B. Powers: The powers of the fair housing council shall be as follows:
1. Prescribe Rules: Have the power to prescribe such rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary or expedient for the conduct and carrying out of
its functions, and it shall have the power to revoke, suspend, or amend any rule or regulation as administered by said council, regardless of the
manner in which prescribed.
2. Settlement: Seek settlement and disposition of any complaint filed with said council by means of conferences and conciliation.
3. Investigation:
a. Have the power, either by itself or by any officer or person designated for the purposes by it, to investigate and to examine or inquire into the
affairs or operation of any person, firm, corporation or association within its jurisdiction; and further, when so authorized by the city council, said fair
housing council shall have the power to employ consultants and professional counsel to aid in such investigations, examinations, or inquiries.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 91/269
b. For the purposes of gathering evidence on any subject, the council shall have the power to subpoena and examine witnesses, books, papers, and
other effects.
4. Complaints: The council shall have the authority to initiate in its name, or to receive and initiate upon the filing of formal charges, complaints against
any person, firm, corporation or association violating any provisions of this chapter. (1991 Code § 23-372.5)
6-7-5: COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
A. Filing Of Complaint:
1. Any person aggrieved by any discriminatory practice as prohibited by this chapter may file with the fair housing council, a complaint in writing which
shall be filed under oath. Said complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved, and shall state the name and address of the person
alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter, and shall further set forth the particulars of said violation, and may include such other
information as may be required by the council.
2. Complaints filed under this section must be filed within thirty (30) days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within said time period shall be
considered a waiver of the application of this section.
3. The council may issue a complaint on its own initiative, at any time that it comes within the knowledge of the council that a person has violated any
of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Investigation, Conference And Conciliation:
1. The council shall investigate each complaint filed with the council, and shall attempt an adjustment of said complaint by means of conference and
conciliation. Sixty (60) days will be allowed for the purpose of investigation, conference, and conciliation.
2. Upon determination that a complaint is not well founded, the council shall dismiss said complaint and notify the complainant and respondent in
writing of said dismissal.
3. If the council takes no action within ninety (90) days of the filing of the complaint, it shall be considered as dismissed. (1991 Code § 23-372.6)
6-7-6: HEARING BY COUNCIL:
A. Serving Notice Of Violation: If the council is unsuccessful by means of conference or conciliation in securing compliance with this chapter by any
person, firm, corporation or association against which a complaint has been filed, then a notice in writing shall be served upon the person complained
against (hereinafter referred to as the "respondent"), notifying said respondent of the alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter and requesting
that said respondent answer charges of said complaint at a hearing before the council.
B. Notice Procedure: The council shall give notice of any such hearing at least ten (10) days before the date and time for which such hearing has been set.
Any and all notices required under the provisions of this chapter may be served personally on any person complained against, or by mailing a copy
thereof by certified registered mail, with return receipt requested, to the most current business or residential address of said person.
C. Content Of Notice: The notice shall contain the request for the respondent to appear at a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not a
violation of this chapter has been committed, which hearing shall be held at a certain time and place which shall be specified in said notice. The notice
shall advise the respondent that, upon failure to comply with the notice, said respondent shall be considered to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Hearing By Council:
1. At any such hearing, as provided for in this section, the complaint shall be heard by the council. At the hearing, the respondent, person, firm,
corporation, or association shall appear either in person, or by counsel, and shall be required to file a written answer to the complaint. The
complainant or person aggrieved by the actions of said person, firm, corporation or association may also appear in person or by counsel at said
hearing. The council will then proceed to hold a hearing to determine whether the respondent has committed an act in violation of the provisions of
this chapter and which act is detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public, the community, and the citizens of the city.
2. The council shall, when conducting any hearing, permit both the person aggrieved and the respondent to introduce any such witnesses, evidence,
testimony, or exhibits as either party deems necessary and prudent. Further, the council may at such time permit amendments to any written
complaint or answer as filed with the council, and all testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath. Either party represented at said hearing
shall have the right to request that the testimony be transcribed, or said testimony shall be transcribed at the direction of the council.
a. If the council finds at any such hearing that the respondent has engaged in discriminatory practices as prohibited by this chapter, it shall state its
findings of fact in written report form and forward said report to the city attorney for appropriate action.
b. If the council, upon hearing, finds that the respondent has not engaged in any discriminatory practices as prohibited herein, it shall so state its
findings in written form, and further shall issue and file an order dismissing the complaint.
E. Rules And Regulations: The council shall have the authority and right to promulgate such rules and regulations and shall govern, expedite, and assist
the foregoing procedures as it deems necessary. It shall further maintain all files as provided for herein. (1991 Code § 23-372.7)
6-7-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity which shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 23-372.8; amd. 2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 92/269
Chapter 8
ABANDONED, WRECKED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The city of Skiatook.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The officer or officers designated by the chief of police of the city of Skiatook to monitor compliance with this chapter
and other ordinances declaring certain conditions to be nuisances or detrimental to the public health and welfare.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any "motor vehicle", as defined in this section, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or
plates, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, or discarded. It also includes a motor vehicle
which has been damaged or wrecked to such an extent that the cost of repair exceeds the lesser of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or the
fair retail market value of the vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles,
buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not "public property" as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. (1991 Code § 14-280; amd. 2011 Code)
6-8-2: PARKING OR STORING RESTRICTED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
A. Restrictions; Removal Notice:
1. No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing, or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled condition whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the city
for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours. (1991 Code § 14-281)
2. No inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked or stored within the front or exterior side yards in any residential area for more than
seventy two (72) consecutive hours.
3. On property zoned for residential use, except that zoned for multi-family residential use, not more than one vehicle shall be parked for each six
hundred (600) square feet of area contained in a required front or exterior side yard. (1991 Code § 14-295)
B. Nuisance Declared; Abatement: The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or
parts thereof, on private or public property, is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a
business enterprise lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, or to
any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, or any vehicle retained by the owner
for antique collection purposes. (1991 Code § 14-281)
6-8-3: NOTICE TO REMOVE; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
A. Removal Notice: Whenever it comes to the attention of the code enforcement officer that any nuisance as described in section 6-8-2 of this chapter
exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then
upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal within the time specified in this
chapter. (1991 Code § 14-282)
B. Responsibility For Removal: Upon proper notice and an opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative
vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the
event of removal and disposition by the city, the owner or occupant of the private property where same is located shall be liable for the expense
incurred. (1991 Code § 14-283)
C. Notice Procedure: The code enforcement officer of the city shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where it is
located, at least ten (10) days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice, when a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place
upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private
property at his last known address or the address reflected for him by the records in the office of the county treasurer of the county in which the land
upon which the vehicle is located. (1991 Code § 14-284)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 93/269
D. Contents Of Notice: The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this chapter, and the notice shall advise that upon
failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner
or occupant of the property. (1991 Code § 14-285)
6-8-4: HEARING PROCESS:
A. Request For Hearing: The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a written request for hearing before the
city council or its designee within the ten (10) day period of compliance prescribed in subsection 6-8-3C of this chapter for the purpose of defending the
charges by the city. (1991 Code § 14-286)
B. Procedure: The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request, and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be
advised of the time and place of said hearing at least three (3) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the
notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. (1991 Code § 14-287)
6-8-5: REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PROPERTY; NOTICE:
A. Removal By City Officials:
1. If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the ten (10) day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a
hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the city council or its designee, the chief of police or his
designee shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of
removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. (1991 Code § 14-288)
B. Notice Of Removal: Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the code enforcement officer shall give notice to the registered owner of
the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed, that said vehicle has been
impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location of where the vehicle is stored, and the costs incurred by the city for
removal. (1991 Code § 14-289; amd. 2011 Code)
6-8-6: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES; PUBLIC SALE:
A. Disposition:
1. Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of section 6-8-5 of this chapter, the city shall, after ten (10) days, cause such vehicle to be appraised
by an organization or person familiar with the values of used motor vehicles.
2. If the vehicle is appraised at one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less, the chief of police shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing the
vehicle, including the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle. The chief of police, after complying with the
above, may summarily dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale.
3. If the vehicle is appraised at over one hundred dollars ($100.00), the chief of police shall give notice of public sale not less than ten (10) days before
the date of the proposed sale by posting such notice upon the bulletin board in the municipal building and in two (2) other public places within the
city. (1991 Code § 14-290)
B. Contents Of Public Sale Notice: The notice of sale shall state:
1. The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the city.
2. A description of the vehicle, including make, model, license number and any other information which will accurately identify the vehicle.
3. The terms of the sale.
4. The date, time, and place of the sale. (1991 Code § 14-291)
C. Public Sale: The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall execute a
certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which shall be given to the purchaser and the copy thereof shall be filed with the code enforcement officer
of the city. Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the city's liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price. (1991 Code § 14-292)
6-8-7: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or
destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the code enforcement officer of such sum as he may determine and fix for the actual and
reasonable expense of removal, and any preliminary sale advertising expenses, not to exceed seventy dollars ($70.00), plus five dollars ($5.00) per day
storage for each vehicle redeemed. (1991 Code § 14-293)
6-8-8: LIABILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT:
Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property on which abandoned vehicles have been removed by the city to pay the unrecovered expenses
incurred by the city in such removal, a lien shall be placed upon the property for the amount of such expenses. (1991 Code § 14-294)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 94/269
6-8-9: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions of this chapter are cumulative to and in addition to any other ordinances pertaining to the subject matter of this chapter. (1991 Code § 14-
296)
6-8-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each act in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. (1991 Code § 14-
296; amd. 2011 Code)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
STATE TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-1-1: STATE TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
A. Code Adopted: The Oklahoma highway traffic safety code1 is hereby adopted and incorporated in this title, as if set out at length herein, for the purpose
of establishing locally appropriate rules and regulations for the control of traffic within the city.
B. Definitions: The definitions of words used in this title shall be the same as those definitions in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-101 et seq., as amended.
(2011 Code)
C. Copy On File: The office of the city clerk shall maintain at least one copy of the current Oklahoma highway traffic safety code adopted by this section on
file in the office of said clerk. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this title, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACE: A parking space designated with an official traffic control device and is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
transporting handicapped persons.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in the city. (2011 Code)
7-1-3: STATE VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle of any kind upon a street of the city without a state vehicle license as may be required by law or to fail to display the state
vehicle license as may be required by law. (2011 Code)
7-1-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Authority To Install: The city shall place and maintain official traffic control devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make
effective the provisions of ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic control devices as may be deemed necessary to
regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or the state vehicle code.
B. Specifications: All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway department.
All signs and signals required under this title for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city.
All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this title shall be official traffic control devices.
C. Presumption Of Legality:
1. Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this section, such devices shall be
presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
2. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this section and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to
such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this section, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 95/269
D. Avoiding Traffic Control Devices: No driver shall drive through a driveway or private property so as to avoid use of a street or traffic control device. (2011
Code)
7-1-5: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
A. Authority To Designate: The city is hereby authorized to determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and shall place and maintain official traffic
control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective unless such devices are in place.
B. Restricting Direction Of Movement During Certain Periods: The city is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific
lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day,
and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city may erect signs temporarily
designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. (2011 Code)
7-1-6: OBSTRUCTED INTERSECTION:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed. (2011 Code)
7-1-7: DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (2011 Code)
7-1-8: RIDING REGULATIONS:
A. Prohibited Acts:
1. No person shall ride, stand, sit, or cling to or upon any outside part of any moving vehicle.
2. No driver shall permit passengers to stand on the open body of any truck unless such truck has a protective railing completely around the bed not
less than four feet (4') in height, nor permit passengers to ride with their legs across the rear of the truck body.
3. No driver shall permit any passenger to leave or board a vehicle while it is in motion. No person shall board or leave a vehicle while it is in motion.
4. No person operating a vehicle of any type shall permit another person to ride in or upon the vehicle unless the vehicle is equipped with proper seats,
handholds, or protective railings, and is in a mechanically safe condition.
5. No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor scooter, or motor bicycle while carrying a passenger less than ten (10) years of age unless that
passenger is a member of the operator's immediate family.
6. No driver shall permit any passenger on a lightweight motor vehicle.
7. No part of this subsection shall apply to the necessary operation of city vehicles by city employees performing health or public safety assignments.
8. No driver shall permit any passenger on a motorcycle, motor scooter, or motor bicycle unless the vehicle is factory designed for the purpose of
carrying additional passengers and is properly equipped with a passenger seat and is properly equipped with handholds and footrests.
9. No driver under sixteen (16) years of age shall permit any passenger on a motorcycle, motor scooter, or motor bicycle.
B. Unlawful Riding: No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall
not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(2011 Code)
7-1-9: PARADES AND FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
A. Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this section.
B. Drivers In Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall
follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe.
C. Escorts For Funeral Processions:
1. It shall be the motor vehicle escort guide's duty to stop oncoming vehicles at intersections where such escorted vehicle or vehicles are making turns.
2. Nothing herein excludes any motor vehicle escort guide or the driver of any vehicle being escorted from any part of this title that requires the
operator to obey the directions given by any police officer or requires the operator of any motor vehicle to yield the right of way to emergency
vehicles.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 96/269
3. No motor vehicle escort guide shall escort any funeral cortege unless he is wearing a uniform that has been approved by the chief of police or his
designee for the use of the motor vehicle escort agency by which he is employed.
4. Any motor vehicle used in performing escorts shall be subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police or his authorized representative.
D. Permit Required For Certain Parades Or Processions: No funeral, procession, or parade containing two hundred (200) or more persons or fifty (50) or
more vehicles, except the military forces of the United States and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street
except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth in this title which may apply. (2011 Code)
7-1-10: DRIVING OR PARKING IN PARKS, AIRPORT:
It shall be unlawful within the public parks and the Skiatook Municipal Airport to drive, park or otherwise permit any motorized vehicle elsewhere in any
park of the city or on land above described as the Skiatook Municipal Airport, other than upon improved roadways and parking areas within said parks,
except in the following situations:
A. Governmental units, utility companies or their agents while in the normal course of business.
B. Leaseholders of private property within the boundaries of the Skiatook Municipal Airport upon their own leased land or property.
C. Persons who are associated with special events authorized by the park board. Event examples include, but are not limited to, Pioneer Day, car shows,
picnics. Persons who lease a park for a specific event are hereby given authority to regulate traffic during such event. (2011 Code)
D. Persons who have shelter reservations from the city clerk's office may have access to shelters or band shells for loading and unloading equipment and
supplies. (2011 Code; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
E. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities act and resolution 2616, those persons who qualify are permitted to drive vehicles within the parks if
no hard surface is available. (2011 Code)
7-1-11: VEHICLES PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Injurious To Streets: No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a street shall be driven or moved on any street.
B. Obstructive And Dangerous: No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed, or so loaded as to cause delay or be likely to cause
delay in traffic, or as to constitute a hazard to persons or property, without authorization from the chief of police or his designee.
C. Width, Height, Length, Weight And Load: No person shall drive or convey through any street any vehicle the width, height, length, weight, or load of
which exceeds that authorized by state law, except in accordance with a permit issued by state or local authority.
D. Inspection: Police officers shall have authority to inspect and test any vehicle upon the streets of the city at any time to determine whether it is safe,
whether it is properly equipped, and/or whether its equipment is in proper adjustment and repair.
E. Repair And Service In Streets: No person shall repair, wash or service a vehicle in any street, alley, highway or roadway. (2011 Code)
7-1-12: COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street which is set aside as a play street as authorized herein. (2011 Code)
7-1-13: MOTORCYCLES, MINIBIKES, MOTORIZED BICYCLES AND SCOOTERS:
A. Participating In Parades: Parade units or groups participating in group parades, in instances in which parade permits have been issued, will be
permitted to wear ornamental headpieces.
B. Use Restriction On Pathfinder Parkway: No person shall operate any unauthorized motorized cycle, scooter, all-terrain vehicle or motor vehicle within or
upon the real property known as Pathfinder Parkway, such property being located within and through the city limits.
C. Motorized Bicycles: All other provisions relating to minibikes, motor driven cycles and motorcycles contained in this code are made applicable to
motorized bicycles. (2011 Code)
7-1-14: PROHIBITED VEHICLE SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 97/269
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
AUDIBLE: Any sound produced by a sound amplification system from within the vehicle, regardless of whether the vehicle is operating or occupied,
which can be heard at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight.
Words or phrases need not be discernible and base reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be in any public or private location.
SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM: Any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker, or other electronic device used for the amplification of
sounds including, without limitation, sounds created by human voice or musical instrumentation.
B. Loud Sound Prohibited: No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway shall operate or permit
the operation of any sound amplification system from the vehicle so that the sound is audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the vehicle.
C. Affirmative Defense: It is an affirmative defense to the charge under this section that the operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating
the sound amplification system, and that any of the following apply:
1. The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition.
2. The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle.
3. The vehicle was owned and operated by the city, or public or private utility company.
4. The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as parades, fireworks, sports events, or other activities which have been approved by the
chief of police.
5. The vehicle was a commercial vehicle such as, but not limited to, ice cream delivery trucks, etc.
D. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code, excluding costs and assessments. (2011 Code)
7-1-15: COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and an offense within the municipal limits of the city of Skiatook to operate vehicle or trailer brakes which create an
excessive or unusual noise, such as the use of engine compression release brakes or a dynamic engine braking device, or a jacobs engine brake
(commonly known as "jake brakes"), as braking power or to slow the rate of speed of a vehicle, except to avoid a collision or imminent danger or in the
case of an emergency.
B. Emergency Vehicles: This section shall not apply to use of such brakes prohibited in subsection A of this section by emergency vehicles.
C. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code, excluding costs and assessments. (Ord. 2015-02, 1-27-2015)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7-2-1: PUBLIC OFFICIALS TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, city, district, or any
other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exemptions as are set forth in this title or in the state vehicle code. (2011 Code)
7-2-2: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
A. It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws, to make arrests for traffic
violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said department by this title and the traffic ordinances of the
city.
B. Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal
in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
C. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (2011
Code)
7-2-3: TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 98/269
A. Investigation By Police Department: It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution
of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.
B. Reports: The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. (2011 Code)
7-2-4: RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS:
A. The police department or the court clerk thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of the state vehicle laws of
which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as
to show all types of violations and the total of each.
B. All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available
to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.
C. All such records and reports shall be public records. (2011 Code)
7-2-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Penalty For Violation: On admission of violation in the municipal court or before the court clerk of the municipal court of a minor traffic offense, there
shall be assessed a penalty not exceeding the maximum established by law. Upon conviction or upon entering a plea of guilty in the municipal court for
the violation of any provision of this title, there shall be assessed as punishment a fine not exceeding the maximum established by law.
B. Court Costs: The municipal judge may levy court costs, at his discretion, in an amount not exceeding the maximum established by state law for any
case before the court.
C. Failure To Pay Fine Or Costs: Upon a determination by the municipal judge that an individual is financially able but refuses or neglects to pay the fine or
costs, the judge may order the individual to satisfy the amount owed by working on the streets, alleys, avenues, areas, and public grounds of the city,
subject to the supervision of the appropriate city official at a rate per day of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for useful labor, until the fine or costs are
satisfied.
D. Penalties For Minor Traffic Violations: Upon receiving a citation for a minor traffic violation, the offender may pay the fine at the designated city payment
drop box, at the treasury cashier window, or by mail to the city of Skiatook, 110 N. Broadway, Skiatook, OK 74070.
E. Parking Offenses; Fines:
1. Determination Of Fine: The city council shall designate the fines to be paid for parking offenses. Such fines may be satisfied by payment at the city
administration building or by deposit in drop boxes provided for same at locations.
2. Penalties For Certain Violations: The penalties for parking violations shall be as follows:
a. Improper parking:
Fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within ten (10) days of issuance; or
Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid after ten (10) days.
b. Parking in a restricted zone:
Fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within ten (10) days of issuance; or
Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid after ten (10) days.
c. Parking over time limit posted:
Fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within ten (10) days of issuance; or
Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid after ten (10) days.
d. Parking over twenty four (24) hours:
Fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within ten (10) days of issuance; or
Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid after ten (10) days.
e. All other parking violations:
Fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within ten (10) days of issuance; or
Twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid after ten (10) days. (2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 99/269
Chapter 3
RULES OF THE ROAD
7-3-1: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
A. Position And Method: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
1. Right Turns: Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Left Turns: The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at an intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
Whenever practicable, when leaving a two-way roadway, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
B. Placement Of Devices Altering Normal Course For Turns: The city is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be
other than prescribed by law.
C. Placement Of Restricted Turn Signs: The city is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or Uturn,
and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted.
D. Restriction Compliance: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of any such sign.
E. U-Turns:
1. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the city except at an intersection. It
is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make such a turn at the following intersections:
a. Where traffic control signals are installed;
b. Where a police officer is directing traffic, except at the latter's direction; or
c. Where an official no U-turn sign has been placed and is maintained.
2. When otherwise permitted, a U-turn may be made only when it can be made in safety and without interfering with any other traffic.
3. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn that vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite or different direction upon the street, when such turn is made for
the purpose of parking said vehicle in a lawfully marked parking space on the opposite side of the street. (2011 Code)
7-3-2: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
A. Speed Limits Designated; Other Restrictions:
1. The speed limit in the city shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour on any residential street other than through streets and boulevards.
2. It is unlawful to disregard speed limits as designated on official traffic speed control signs.
3. A speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour is a violation in any business district unless official traffic control signs designate otherwise.
4. Any speed greater than that which will enable the driver of a vehicle to stop within the assured clear distance ahead is unlawful, and every driver
shall remain alert and allow enough distance between his vehicle and the vehicle ahead to enable him to stop and avoid a collision in the event of an
unexpected stop or slowing by the vehicle ahead.
5. When adverse weather conditions of snow, rain, ice, fog, or wind, or when blinding lights make driving hazardous or decrease normal visibility, all
drivers shall drive at a reduced speed that will permit complete control of their vehicles at all times.
6. It is an offense to accelerate or turn a vehicle so rapidly as to spin the wheels and produce a loud and annoying noise.
7. It is unlawful to enter into a drag race on the city streets with any vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter or motor bicycle. For the purpose of this section,
"drag race" is defined as a contest for speed as between two (2) or more drivers or operators starting either from a complete stop or slow speed and
rapidly accelerating for any distance.
B. School Zones:
1. No person shall operate a vehicle within three hundred feet (300') of any school at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour during the
time set forth in subsection B3 of this section; provided, that at those locations where traffic control signal devices are in operation, the speed of
vehicles in said areas shall be the speed indicated on the variable message traffic control signs.
2. For the purpose of this section, a "school zone" includes those portions of all roadways adjacent to any school and those portions of all roadways
within three hundred feet (300') of any school.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 100/269
3. The provisions of this subsection shall be applicable only for the period starting one hour before school starts and ending one hour after school is
dismissed and only on those days when school is in session.
C. Minimum Speed:
1. It is unlawful for any person to drive at such slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation.
2. All persons driving slower than the normal flow of traffic shall drive in the extreme right lane.
3. It is unlawful to drive at a speed less than twenty (20) miles per hour on a through street unless such reduced speed is necessary for safe operation.
D. State Speed Laws Applicable: The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city except where the
city, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, determines that other speed limits shall be applicable on specified streets or in certain
areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at speed in excess of any speed so determined when signs are in place
giving notice thereof.
E. Regulation Of Speed By Traffic Signals: The city is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an
orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (2011 Code)
7-3-3: EMERGENCY VEHICLE OPERATION:
A. Exemptions: The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle is making
use of audible and/or visual signals as required by law.
B. Safety: The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. (2011 Code)
7-3-4: INATTENTIVE DRIVING:
A. Every driver shall remain alert and give full attention to the safe operation of his vehicle while it is in motion.
B. No driver shall engage in any other activity, while driving, that interferes with the safe control of his vehicle.
C. Any driver that collides with another vehicle, person, or property because of driving error or negligent inattention is in violation of this section.
D. No person shall engage in any activity or do any act which interferes with a driver's safe operation of a vehicle. (2011 Code)
7-3-5: COMPOSING, SENDING, READING TEXT MESSAGE WHILE VEHICLE IN MOTION:
A. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of city ordinances for any person to operate a noncommercial motor vehicle on any street or highway within the city
of Skiatook while using a handheld electronic communication device to manually compose, send or read an electronic text message while the motor
vehicle is in motion.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00), exclusive of court costs and fees.
C. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply if the person is using the cellular telephone or electronic communication device for the sole
purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an imminent emergency situation:
1. An emergency response operator;
2. A hospital, physician's office or health clinic;
3. A provider of ambulance services;
4. A provider of firefighting services; or
5. A law enforcement agency.
D. For the purpose of this section:
CELLULAR TELEPHONE: An analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by the federal communications commission to operate in the frequency
bandwidth reserved for cellular telephones.
COMPOSE, SEND OR READ: With respect to a text message means the manual entry, sending or retrieval of a text message to communicate with
any person or device.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 101/269
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE: An electronic device that permits the user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means
other than through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include a device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor
vehicle or a voice operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a motor vehicle, or a hands free device that allows the user to write,
send or read a text message without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate or initiate a feature or function.
NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE: A class D motor vehicle as defined at 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-107.5, which said definition is made a
part hereof by reference.
TEXT MESSAGE: Includes a text based message, instant message, electronic message, photo, video or electronic mail. (Ord. 2015-12, 10-13-2015,
eff. 11-1-2015)
7-3-6: USE OF CELLULAR TELEPHONE OR ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE BY A PERSON OPERATING A
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE:
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of city ordinances for any person to operate a commercial motor vehicle or for a public transit driver to operate a
motor vehicle on any street or highway within the city of Skiatook while:
1. Using a cellular telephone or electronic communication device to write, send, or read a text based communication; or
2. Using a handheld mobile telephone while operating a commercial motor vehicle.
For the purposes of subsections A1 and A2 of this section, using a handheld mobile telephone is permissible by drivers of a commercial motor
vehicle when necessary to communicate with law enforcement officials or other emergency services.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00), exclusive of court costs and fees.
C. As used in this section:
CELLULAR TELEPHONE: An analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by the federal communications commission to operate in the frequency
bandwidth reserved for cellular telephones.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE: A class A commercial motor vehicle as defined at 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-107.1; a class B commercial
motor vehicle as defined at 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-107.2; or a class C commercial motor vehicle as defined at 47 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1-107.3, which said definitions are included herein by reference.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE: An electronic device that permits the user to manually transmit a communication of written text by
means other than through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include a voice activated global positioning or navigation
system that is affixed to a motor vehicle.
OPERATE: Operating on a street or highway, including while temporarily stationary because of traffic, a traffic control device or other momentary
delays. Operating does not include when the driver of a commercial motor vehicle has moved the vehicle to the side of or off a street or highway and
has halted in a location where the vehicle can safely remain stationary.
PUBLIC TRANSIT DRIVER: 1. Any operator of a public transit vehicle owned and operated by the state of Oklahoma, any public trust authority,
county, municipality, town or city within this state,
2. Any operator of a school bus or multipassenger motor vehicle owned and approved to operate by the state department of education or any
school district within this state, or
3. Any operator, conductor or driver of a locomotive engine, railway car or train of cars.
WRITE, SEND, OR READ A TEXT BASED COMMUNICATION (Also Known As TEXTING): Manually entering alphanumeric text into, sending text,
or reading text from, an electronic device, and includes, but is not limited to, short message service (SMS), e-mailing, instant messaging (IM), a
command or request to access a world wide web page, or engaging in any other form of electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future
communication. As used in this definition, texting does not include:
1. Using voice commands to select or enter a telephone number, an extension number, or voicemail retrieval codes and commands into an
electronic device for the purpose of initiating or receiving a phone call,
2. Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global positioning system or navigation system, or
3. Using a device capable of performing multiple functions for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited in this section, including, but not limited to,
fleet management systems, dispatching devices, smart phones, citizens band radios, and music players.
D. This section shall not apply to railroads and railroad operating employees regulated by the federal railroad administration. (Ord. 2015-12, 10-13-2015,
eff. 11-1-2015)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 102/269
Chapter 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
7-4-1: PROHIBITED PARKING PLACES:
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or ordinance or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk.
2. In front of a public or private driveway.
3. Within an intersection.
4. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant, except in a parking space officially marked.
5. On a crosswalk.
6. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
7. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless
the city indicates a different length by signs or markings.
9. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
10. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of the entrance when properly signposted.
11. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
12. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway underpass.
14. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
15. Between the curb, if one exists, or between the outside edge of the roadway and the outside edge of the dedicated easement to the city for
roadway purposes; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to stopping, standing or parking on driveways.
16. Any designated fire lane.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (2011
Code)
7-4-2: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
A. Authority To Designate:
1. The city is authorized to establish parking time limits, or to prohibit parking, on designated streets and parts of streets by having appropriate signs
placed thereon.
2. When such signs are in place, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation thereof.
B. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours: Where official signs are erected giving notice that parking is prohibited during certain hours, no person shall
park a vehicle during said hours upon that portion of the street so designated.
C. Parking Time Limited:
1. Generally: All parking limit regulations, unless specifically provided otherwise, shall be in force and effect between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., except Sundays and legal holidays.
2. Specific Area: Parking on Rogers Boulevard between B and Javine Streets shall be limited to a period of two (2) hours between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Mondays through Saturdays, inclusive, excepting legal holidays.
3. Compliance With Sign Provisions: Except as provided in subsection C2 of this section, in all instances where official signs are erected giving notice
that parking is limited to a certain period, no person shall park a vehicle for a period exceeding the specified limit, except on Sundays and legal
holidays. It shall be a violation of this subsection for any person to move a vehicle in any manner or leave a parking space and then reenter it to
avoid the intent of this subsection.
D. Parking In Excess Of Forty Eight Hours: No person, operator or owner shall park or permit to be parked or left standing on any public street, alley or
other public space any vehicle, wagon, automobile or other private property while unattended for a continuous period exceeding forty eight (48) hours,
and any such vehicle, wagon or automobile is hereby declared a public nuisance endangering public safety and may be impounded by the police
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 103/269
department. Any vehicle or other private property left standing may be removed by the police department or its agents. The removal and storage fee
must be paid by the owner of the vehicle in violation of this subsection before its redemption. (2011 Code)
7-4-3: PARKING PLACES FOR PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS; ENFORCEMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space on private property accessible to the public and where the public is
invited or public property that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such
person has a physical disability insignia as under the provisions of 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 15-112, and such insignias are displayed as provided in
47 Oklahoma Statutes section 15-112 or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (2011 Code)
7-4-4: PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING:
A. Parallel:
1. Except as otherwise provided, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with
the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb. In parallel parking spaces, the frontmost part
of a vehicle shall be alongside of and next to the parking meter for the parking space. The city council may by ordinance permit parking of vehicles
with the left hand wheels adjacent to and within eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb on a one-way roadway.
2. No person shall park a vehicle on a street unless the vehicle is headed in the direction of traffic with the curbside wheels of the vehicle parallel to the
curb or roadside edge.
B. Angle: The city council may by ordinance permit angle parking on any roadway. In diagonal parking spaces, the frontmost part of a vehicle shall be
directed at and next to the parking meter for the parking space.
C. Parking Within Marked Lines: Vehicles must be parked within the lines marked on the street for such parking spaces. (2011 Code)
7-4-5: DANGEROUS AREAS; PLACEMENT OF SIGNS:
The city council may place signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any highway where such stopping, standing or
parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of
traffic thereon. Such signs shall be official signs and no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on such signs.
(2011 Code)
7-4-6: OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
A. Prohibited Act: Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the highway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of said
highway, but in every event, an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a
clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of four hundred feet (400') in each direction upon such highway.
B. Exception, Disabled Vehicles: This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a
highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (2011
Code)
7-4-7: POSTED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Permission Required; Exception: It shall be unlawful to place or park a motor vehicle or a trailer upon the posted private property of another without first
obtaining permission of the landowner or the person in charge of such property, except where said placing or parking is casual or involuntary.
B. Violation; Penalty: Violation of the terms of this section shall be considered to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, violators shall be fined
not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) and, in addition thereto, shall pay any and all reasonable and necessary charges incurred by the landowner or
other person in having any vehicle or trailer removed from his property and stored.
C. Nonliability Of Landowner: The landowner or person in charge of the land shall not be liable for any damages which may occur to a trespassing vehicle
or trailer under the terms of this section while the same is trespassing, or while it is being removed from his property, or while it is in storage. (2011
Code)
7-4-8: ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
A. The city is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such
parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall
park a vehicle in any such designated place. (2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 104/269
7-4-9: ONE-WAY STREETS:
The city is authorized to erect signs upon the left hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are
in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left hand side in violation of any such sign. (2011 Code)
7-4-10: ALLEYS:
A. No person may park a vehicle in any alley at any time, except as provided in this section.
B. Drivers of vehicles may park in alleys for periods not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes while engaged in loading or unloading from an establishment
abutting such alley items or merchandise too numerous, heavy or bulky to carry by hand.
C. No person shall park a vehicle in an alleyway except with the vehicle headed in the direction in which traffic is designated to move through such alley.
No person shall park a vehicle in an alley in such a manner as to prevent the free flow of traffic through the alley. (2011 Code)
7-4-11: NARROW STREETS:
A. The city is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20'), or
upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in
violation of any such sign. (2011 Code)
7-4-12: HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES:
A. The city is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding one hundred feet (100') in length in which the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such
designated place. (2011 Code)
7-4-13: PARKING NEAR GARBAGE CONTAINERS PLACED FOR PICK UP:
No person shall park a vehicle of any nature within six feet (6') of any container used in the city container collection service in such a manner which would
interfere with the removal of refuse from such container, or block the approach to such container. Proof of ownership of any vehicle violating this section
shall be prima facie proof that such owner parked such vehicle so as to violate this section. (2011 Code)
7-4-14: PARKING OF TRUCKS AT NIGHT:
No person shall park at night any commercial vehicle of one ton classification or greater on any through street nor on any street of twenty six feet (26') or
less in width unless the person is actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise and while the vehicle displays warning lights as required by state
law. The storage of commercial vehicles, trucks or trailers wider than ordinary passenger cars on any street at night is expressly prohibited. (2011 Code)
7-4-15: PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10')
of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (2011 Code)
7-4-16: PROHIBITED PURPOSES:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
A. Displaying the vehicle for sale.
B. Displaying advertising or displaying merchandise or other things for sale or selling merchandise or other things.
C. Washing, greasing, repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (2011 Code)
7-4-17: VEHICLE STORAGE:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 105/269
No owner or occupant of any place of business shall permit any vehicle, whether left in storage or safekeeping or for repair, or otherwise, to be or to
remain on a sidewalk, street, or alley adjoining or in front of such place. (2011 Code)
7-4-18: LOADING AND UNLOADING:
A. Authority To Designate Loading Zones; Permit Required:
1. The city is hereby authorized to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate
signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable.
2. The city shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a
permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. The city, upon granting a permit and issuing such signs, shall
collect from the applicant and deposit in the city treasury a service fee established by the city council and may by general regulations impose
conditions upon the use of such signs and for reimbursement of the city for the value thereof in the event of their loss or damage and their return in
the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year.
B. Loading Or Unloading At Angle To Curb; Special Permit:
1. The city is authorized to issue special permits to authorize the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading property
subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property alongside the curb or to
the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and herein authorized.
2. It shall be unlawful for any permit holder or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
C. Evening Time Parking Within Loading Zones: Vehicles shall be permitted to park between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight in those loading zones which are designated by sign or other marking for such evening time parking.
D. Passenger Curb Loading Zones: No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading
or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading
zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
E. Standing In Loading Zones:
1. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and
loading of property in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of property exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
2. The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers
when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone to load or unload property. (2011 Code)
7-4-19: BUSES AND TAXICABS:
A. Stopping For Loading And Unloading:
1. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided in this
chapter.
2. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone so designated as provided in this chapter, except in case of an emergency.
3. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped
to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than eighteen inches (18") from
the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
4. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided in
this chapter. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
B. Restricted Use Of Bus And Taxicab Stands: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a
taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may
temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with
any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (2011 Code)
7-4-20: OPENING VEHICLE DOORS:
Drivers or passengers of vehicles parked on a public street shall not open the doors of said vehicles on the side of the vehicle available to traffic until and
unless it is reasonably safe to do so. (2011 Code)
7-4-21: VEHICLE WITH MOTOR RUNNING:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 106/269
No vehicle with the motor running shall be parked on any street or alley unless a licensed operator is in said vehicle. (2011 Code)
7-4-22: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE:
The person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, and effectively setting the brake
thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (2011 Code)
7-4-23: MOVING PARKED VEHICLE:
It shall be lawful for regular police officers of the city in the performance of their duties to change the position of any parked vehicle. (2011 Code)
7-4-24: EXCEPTIONS TO CERTAIN PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
Provisions of this parking chapter shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or to vehicles or machinery used in the construction or maintenance of
highways, and such vehicles or machinery may be operated on any part of the road, whether same is open to traffic or closed, when such operation is
necessary in the maintenance or construction of said highway. (2011 Code)
7-4-25: PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY:
In any proceeding for the violation of this chapter, the license plate displayed upon the motor vehicle in violation shall constitute in evidence prima facie
presumption that the registered owner of such motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed such motor vehicle at the place where the violation
occurred. (2011 Code)
Chapter 5
BICYCLES
7-5-1: PEDESTRIANS CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES:
Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic control devices, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles to the curb or by
the shortest route to the opposite curb. (2011 Code)
7-5-2: RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS:
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or paths of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. (2011 Code)
7-5-3: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. No person shall ride a bicycle, roller skates, skateboard, or similar type device, upon a sidewalk or other public property within a business district.
B. The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk, roadway, or other public property prohibiting the riding of bicycles, roller skates,
skateboards, or similar type devices, thereon by any person, and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey them.
C. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, roller skates, skateboard, or similar type device, upon a sidewalk or other public property other than in a
business district, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(2011 Code)
7-5-4: SPEED:
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. (2011 Code)
7-5-5: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. (2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 107/269
7-5-6: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or upon the sidewalk in such manner as to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (2011 Code)
7-5-7: EQUIPMENT:
A. Lights: Every bicycle in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to three hundred
feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance
of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. Siren Or Whistle Prohibited: A bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
C. Brakes: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (2011
Code)
7-5-8: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
A. It is an unlawful offense for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter.
B. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.
C. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein. (2011 Code)
Chapter 6
IMPOUNDED VEHICLES
7-6-1: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE; RECLAMATION:
A. Circumstances For Removal: Members of the police department are authorized to remove a vehicle from a street to a garage or other place of safety
under any of the circumstances enumerated as follows:
1. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic.
2. When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason
of physical injury or otherwise incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
3. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement
of traffic.
4. When any vehicle has been parked for more than one hour in excess of the time allowed for parking in any place.
5. When any vehicle which has been involved in two (2) or more violations of this title for which citations have been issued, and not presented as
required, is parked in violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. Reclamation Of Vehicle: A vehicle impounded as provided in this section shall be delivered back to the owner or other person to whom it may properly
be delivered only after such fine or fines and costs as may be properly assessed by the municipal judge for the violation or violations for which such
vehicle was impounded, and any reasonable costs of or charges for impounding and storage, have been paid. (2011 Code)
7-6-2: UNCLAIMED VEHICLE DISPOSITION:
A. Sale At Public Auction: When any motor vehicle, including motorcycle, motor scooter, and motor bicycle, has been impounded by the police department
on account of any of the offenses designated in this chapter, if the owner on being notified, either personally or by mail, fails to claim and redeem the
vehicle, or if upon diligent inquiry the owner cannot be found and notice is given to him by advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation in
the city once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks and the owner fails for a period of sixty (60) days after the first date of publication to claim and
redeem the vehicle, the chief of police shall sell the vehicle at the time and place designated in the notice at public auction.
B. Disposition Of Proceeds:
1. After deducting all amounts due for towage, expenses of keeping, impounding fee, and costs of notice and of sale, the remaining proceeds shall be
paid to the owner if he demands same within two (2) years from the date of sale. If the remaining proceeds are not claimed for a period of two (2)
years from the date of sale, they shall become a part of the general fund of the city.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 108/269
2. If at said sale no bidder bids enough to cover all amounts due for towage, expenses of keeping, impounding fees, and costs of giving notice and
sale, the chief of police may thereafter, without giving further notice, sell the impounded vehicle at public or private sale. Disposition of the sale price
obtained in such event shall be the same as if sold at sale for which notice was given as provided in this section. (2011 Code)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
EXCAVATIONS; UTILITY LINES CROSSING PUBLIC WAYS
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPLICANT: Any contractor, person or organization desiring to cross public ways within the city or in any other area in which the city has jurisdiction with
pipes, wires, lines, conduit or anything else.
BACKFILL: As applied to open cuts, means one and one-half inch (11/2") crusher run compacted to ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor density.
BOND: A two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) surety bond issued by a company licensed to do business within the state of Oklahoma or the
deposit of cash for the benefit of the city in the same amount with a bank engaged in business in Tulsa County or Osage County, Oklahoma, conditioned
that all work done will be in accordance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the city and statutes or regulations of the state of
Oklahoma; and the bond shall further be conditioned that the principal shall indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all loss, cost, damages,
expenses, actions or liability of any kind, including reasonable attorney fees, which the city may be required to pay by reason of any loss, damage, injury
sustained, suffered or incurred by any person on account of or by reason of any work performed by the applicant or his agents in the use of the streets,
alleys or property of the city or by reason of the neglect or failure or refusal of the principal or his agents to erect and maintain proper safety devices,
warning signals or barricades about such work while it is in progress and until completed.
BORE AND CASE: The drilling of a channel laterally from one side of the public way to the other at a depth which, in the opinion of the city, will not disturb
or injure the surface of the public way and the installation of the wire, pipe or other device within a durable and permanent casing.
MUTCD: "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
OPEN CUT: Excavation through the surface of the public way.
PROCTOR DENSITY: The maximum density (weight/volume) the backfill can be compacted. (Ord. 2000-10, 8-29-2000)
8-1-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS LISTED:
No construction shall be done until the city has issued a permit for paving cut or boring permit, which shall be on a form consistent with the permit attached
to ordinance 2000-10. The permit shall constitute authorization for the commencement of construction by the applicant and shall set forth any
specifications for backfilling and compacting the trench, other than those contained in this chapter, and specifications for replacement of the surface of the
public way. It may also contain additional specifications for the manner of boring under the public way. (Ord. 2000-10, 8-29-2000)
8-1-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE; INSURANCE:
A. Application Form; Fee: Anyone desiring to cross a public way or street shall first submit to the city for review and approval an application on a form
identical to the "application form" appended to ordinance 2000-10 along with a nonrefundable fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
B. Construction Plans; Liability Insurance: There must be attached to the application construction plans for the crossing desired to be made and a
certificate of or binder for liability insurance, providing public liability insurance for the applicant in a single limit amount of not less than three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00). (Ord. 2000-10, 8-29-2000)
8-1-4: DETERMINATION BY CITY OF TYPE OF CROSSING:
When the application is submitted, the city shall determine the type of crossing to be permitted: "open cut" or "bore and case". This determination will be
based upon the condition of pavement or surfacing being crossed, existing utility locations, traffic and the anticipated future use of the street or public way.
(Ord. 2000-10, 8-29-2000)
8-1-5: CONSTRUCTION ACCORDING TO SPECIFICATIONS; TIME LIMIT:
When a permit is issued, construction shall be completed in accordance with the specifications and plans set forth in the permit and shall be completed
within seventy two (72) hours after commencement of work. After seventy two (72) hours, if the work is not completed, completion may be done by the city,
the cost of which will be borne by the contractor or its surety. A permit will be valid for only thirty (30) days after the date of its issuance. (Ord. 2000-10, 8-
29-2000)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 109/269
8-1-6: OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
The following provisions are also applicable:
A. Easements: An applicant shall be responsible for securing all necessary easements over, under, and through private property.
B. Maps, Records And Inspection: The city shall have the right to inspect and examine, at any reasonable time and upon reasonable notice, the property
owned or used, in part or in whole, by an applicant.
C. City Codes In Effect: An applicant shall be subject to all general ordinance provisions now in effect or hereafter adopted. Nothing in this chapter or a
license issued hereunder shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city regarding building, construction,
electrical, plumbing and other codes, permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction. (Ord. 2000-10, 8-29-2000)
8-1-7: BORING REQUIRED:
All street and public way crossings requiring underground construction shall be bored unless waiver of this requirement is made by the city. (Ord. 2000-10,
8-29-2000)
8-1-8: RESTORATION OF STREETS:
A. Restoration By Applicant: Whenever an applicant shall, with or without a permit, disturb the surface of any street, alley, public highway, street
maintenance easement, or ground for any purpose mentioned in this chapter, the applicant shall restore the same using "backfill" as defined in section
8-1-1 of this chapter, and when any opening is made by the applicant in any hard surface pavement in any street, alley, street maintenance easement,
or public highway, the applicant shall promptly and properly refill the opening and restore the pavement.
B. Density Testing After Restoration: After restoration, the city shall conduct a density test. If the test reveals a proctor density of ninety five percent (95%)
or more, the cost of the test will be paid by the city. If the test reveals a proctor density of less than ninety five percent (95%), the cost of the test will be
borne by applicant; and, in that event, the applicant shall, at its expense, perform the backfill again until it meets this specification.
C. Restoration By City Upon Neglect By Applicant: The city may refill and/or repave in case of neglect by the applicant. The cost thereof, including the cost
of inspection and supervision, shall be paid by the applicant. All excavations made by an applicant in the streets, alleys, street maintenance easement,
and public highways shall be properly safeguarded for the prevention of accidents. The work hereby required shall be done in strict compliance with the
rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city as now or hereafter provided. (Ord. 2000-10, 8-29-2000)
8-1-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code. Each day on which a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2000-10, 8-29-2000; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 2
PUBLIC PARKS
8-2-1: PURPOSE, APPLICABILITY, CONSTRUCTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND DEFINITIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the use of and conduct in the parks and recreation areas of the city.
B. Applicability: This chapter shall apply in all parks and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the city, unless expressly exempted. For the issuance of
permits, temporary designations, authorizations, granting of approval and other actions the approving governing official shall be the city council.
C. Construction: In the interpretation of this chapter and all succeeding park and recreation area ordinances, the provisions shall be construed as follows:
1. Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
2. Any requirement or prohibitions of any act shall respectively extend to and include the causing and procuring, directly or indirectly, of such act.
3. No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed by any officer or employee of the city in line of duty or work as such, or by
any person, his agent or employees, in the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with the city.
4. Any act otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance shall be lawful if performed, under, by virtue of and strictly within the provisions of a permit so
to do, and to the extent authorized thereby.
D. Enforcement:
1. The police department shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, enforce the provisions of this chapter.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 110/269
2. The police department shall have the authority to arrest, issue citations or order any person or persons acting in violation of this chapter to leave the
park or recreation area.
E. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMALS: Cats, dogs, horses, any fowl or birds and any living creatures within the jurisdiction of the park or recreation area.
APPROVING GOVERNING REPRESENTATIVE: The city council or its designee.
CITY COUNCIL: The city of Skiatook city council.
CROSSING: Any crossing whether marked by a pavement or otherwise; the extension to any sidewalk space across any intersecting drive, street or
highway.
CURB: Any boundary of any street, road, avenue, boulevard or drive, whether or not marked by a curb.
PARK: Any public park, recreational area, grounds, or facility owned by the city of Skiatook.
PARK ATTENDANT: Any person employed by the city to perform duties or tasks within the park and recreation areas.
PATH: Any footpath, walk or any path maintained for pedestrians.
PEDESTRIAN: A person afoot.
PERMIT: Any written license issued by or under the authority of the approving governing representative permitting a special event or activity on park
facilities.
PERSON: Any natural person, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, firm or partnership.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGE: Any event open to the public that is or may be attended by seventy five (75) or more persons.
SOLICITING: Persons selling goods or services by sample or taking orders for future delivery with or without accepting advance payment for the
goods. Soliciting shall also include persons seeking any form of contributions.
STOPPING AND STANDING, WHEN PROHIBITED: Any cessation of movement of a vehicle occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with pedestrians or other traffic including horses and bicycles.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals and vehicles, either singly or together.
VEHICLE: Any conveyance (except wheelchairs) including motor vehicles, trailers of all types, campers, tricycles, bicycles, motorized or not, sleds,
sleighs, pushcarts or vehicles propelled by other than muscular power and also includes any horse or horsedrawn conveyance.
VENDING: Selling or trading any item or service. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-2: PARK HOURS:
A. No person shall enter into or remain upon nor shall any vehicle be left unattended in any park area or facility between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., or the extension of hours as approved by the chief of police and/or the approving governing representative.
This curfew shall not apply to the Osage Trail exercise path, except the curfew shall apply to those portions located in Skiatook Central Park from 5th
Street to Highway 20/Rogers Boulevard.
B. From the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. any individual or entity holding a valid permit regulated by this chapter and
actually engaged in one of the permitted activities, shall be allowed to remain in any park. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-3: STRUCTURES, PLANTS, TREES, EARTH, RUBBISH:
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to:
A. Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, pavings or paving
materials, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either
real or personal.
B. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.
C. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or
other means or agency.
D. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or
across such lands, unless approved by the city.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 111/269
E. Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, or injure the bark or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise disturb grass
areas or in any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
F. Climb any tree or overhead walkway; climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, planters, fountains, dams, railings, fences or upon any other property
not designated or customarily used for such purpose.
G. Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, dam, bench or other structure.
H. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into or away from such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or
may result in the pollution or damage of such waters or drains.
I. Take into, carry through or put into any park, any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other material. Such refuse and rubbish shall be deposited in receptacles
so provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
J. Cause or permit to run loose any animal.
K. Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
L. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird, or remove or be in possession
of the young of any wild animal or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird.
M. Ride a horse.
N. Walk a domestic animal without a leash, such leash to be no longer than six feet (6'). Further, the owner or person having custody of such domestic
animal shall be responsible for removal of any animal solid waste from paved surfaces. Animals are not allowed in the playground or splash pad area.
(Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-4: VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to:
A. Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas. No type of motorized vehicle (except for emergency vehicles and
motorized wheelchairs) is permitted on the Osage Trail.
B. Park a vehicle anywhere except on a designated parking area.
C. Leave a vehicle standing or parked in established parking areas or elsewhere in the park and recreation areas during hours when the park and
recreation area is closed.
D. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is space available.
E. Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others. Bicycle riders shall yield the right of way to pedestrians on all sidewalks and trails.
F. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by it.
G. Wash any vehicle.
H. Drive or operate within the parks any truck or tractor, or vehicle used for advertising; provided that taxis, buses and trucks may be used to carry visitors
to the parks and recreation areas.
I. Use the parks, park drives, parking places or parkways for the purpose of demonstrating any vehicles or for the purpose of instructing another to drive or
operate any vehicle; nor shall any person use any park area, including parking places, for the repairing or cleaning of any vehicle except in an
emergency.
J. Cause or permit a vehicle in tow of another vehicle to enter the parks or proceed therein, except that in case of a breakdown a disabled vehicle may be
towed to the nearest exit; or operate or drive a vehicle containing any person or object projecting or hanging outside of or beyond the side or the rear
thereof. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-5: FIREARMS, WEAPONS, TOOLS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 112/269
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or have possession of in any park or recreation area:
A. Any unlawful weapon.
B. Any pistol or revolver or objects upon which loaded or blank cartridges may be used. Official starters, at authorized track and field events, are exempted
from this restriction.
C. Any burglar tools.
D. Any rifle, shotgun, BB gun, air gun, pellet gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow, crossbow or other weapon in which the propelling force is gunpowder, a
spring, air or any compressed gas. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-6: EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of or set off any fireworks. Specific approval may be issued by the city council for conducting
properly supervised firework displays in designated park areas. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-7: ADVERTISING, ASSEMBLAGES, ENTERTAINMENT:
A. No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, deliver, place, cast or leave about any bill, billboard, placard, ticket, handbill, circular or advertisement.
B. No person shall do any of the following without a permit, provided that no permit shall be required for any action or event sponsored by the city:
1. Display any advertising signs or other advertising matter, provided that a sign attached to a vehicle to identify the vehicle, or a sign lawfully on a taxi
or bus, is not prohibited.
2. Operate for advertising purposes any musical instrument, soundtrack or drum.
3. Hold public assemblages.
4. Conduct exhibitions.
5. Hold a parade.
C. By majority vote, the city council may permit signs for any contract permittee situated in a park. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-8: MERCHANDISE, SALE PROHIBITED:
No person shall expose or offer for sale or rent any article in any park or recreation area, without a permit or vendor contract as a concessionaire. (Ord.
2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-9: IGNITABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places provided for such purposes. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and
direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar, cigarette,
tobacco, paper or other material within or against any building, boat or vehicle, or under any tree or in underbrush. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-10: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, AND SOLICITATION
OF ALMS:
While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular, no person shall:
A. Bring beverages containing alcohol in any amount, or controlled dangerous substances, or drink or use the alcohol or controlled dangerous substances
at any time, nor shall any person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor, alcohol or a controlled dangerous substance in any park or recreation
area. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
B. Use tobacco products and/or an electronic smoking device in any form. The use of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices is prohibited in all
city owned parks and in and around all public restrooms located in city owned parks. Tobacco products and electronic smoking devices may be used in
parking lots located within city owned parks; however, said usage is restricted to within a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this section, "tobacco" and
"electronic smoking device" are as defined in section 5-1-1 of this code. (Ord. 2014-05, 2-11-2015)
C. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private, without a permit. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 113/269
8-2-11: MISCELLANEOUS CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to:
A. Camp or stay overnight without authorization from the approving governing representative.
B. Take part in the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects in such a manner as to create a hazard to persons or property.
C. Enter an area posted as "Closed To The Public".
D. Engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or obscene language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace.
E. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit such person claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the permit for the
purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
F. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
G. Erect or occupy any tent, stand or other structure in any park or playground, or sell or give away from any such tent, stand or other structure any food,
drink or other thing, without a permit.
H. Ride or use skateboards, rollerblades, bicycles, or similar devices in prohibited areas. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-12: BOATING:
No boats of any kind are allowed on city owned lakes, ponds or streams except with a permit issued by the city. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-13: REGULATED ACTIVITIES:
The following activities are prohibited within city parks unless an event permit is issued in accordance with this chapter:
A. Swimming, bathing, floating or wading in ponds, fountains, streams or lakes;
B. Fishing, trapping, seining, or removal of any fish;
C. Boating on ponds, streams or lakes except with a permit from the approving governing representative;
D. Archery;
E. Camping;
F. Throwing or propelling any object in such a manner as to create a hazard to persons or property;
G. Trapping, hunting, shooting or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird, wildfowl or animal or to rob bird nests or wildfowl nests in or on any
city park. The chief of police may grant permission to appropriate officers to remove animals or fowl which constitute a nuisance or menace to health or
property. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-14: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS OR HUNTING IN PARKS:
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or weapon in or on any part of any city park. No game bird or animal or migratory fowl may be hunted
or taken in or on any city park, at any time. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-15: PERMITS:
A. Permits for special events in parks and recreation areas shall be obtained by application to the city council in accordance with the following procedure:
1. A person seeking issuance of a permit under this section shall file an application stating:
a. The name and address of the applicant;
b. The name and address of the person, corporation or association sponsoring the activity, if any;
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 114/269
c. The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
d. The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired;
e. Any other information reasonably necessary to a determination as to whether a permit should be issued;
f. Variances required from park rules and regulations, if any.
2. Standards for issuance of a use permit shall include the following findings:
a. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public's enjoyment of the park.
b. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation.
c. That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
d. That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city.
e. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use on the date and hour requested in the application.
B. Within thirty (30) calendar days after the receipt of an application the city council may make a decision whether to grant or deny a permit. If the city
council fails to make said decision within the thirty (30) day time period, the application for the permit shall be deemed denied.
C. The decision of the city council shall be final.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in the permit.
E. An applicant for a permit may be required to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to the permittee and members of the general public
arising out of such permitted activities in the amount of the potential liability of the city under "the Oklahoma governmental tort claims act"1 prior to the
commencement of any activity or issuance of any permit unless such insurance requirement is waived or lessened by contract approval, or motion or
resolution of the city council.
F. The city council shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause shown. (Ord. 2012-
09, 7-14-2012)
8-2-16: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2012-09, 7-14-2012)
Chapter 3
CABLE TELEVISION
8-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory.
AFFILIATE: An entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership with grantee.
BASIC CABLE: The tier of service regularly provided to all subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals. Basic cable
service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with 47 USC section 543(b)(7).
CABLE SERVICE: A. The one-way transmission of video programming or other programming services; and
B. Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other services provided through electric or electronic
signals, or which utilizes any facility or equipment of the cable system. For the purposes of this chapter, providers of direct-broadcast satellite
television do not operate a cable service.
CABLE SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment or other
communications equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and other service to multiple subscribers within a
community, and which utilizes the public rights of way within the city to provide cable service.
CITY: The city of Skiatook or its lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
FCC: Federal communications commission, or successor governmental entity thereto.
GRANTEE: Community Cable & Broadband, Inc., or its lawful successor.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 115/269
GROSS REVENUES: All cash, funds, monies, credits, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration received directly or indirectly by Community
Cable & Broadband, Inc., its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent and any person in which Community Cable & Broadband, Inc., has financial interest, arising
from or attributed to the sale or exchange of cable communications services provided by Community Cable & Broadband, Inc., within the city of Skiatook,
including, but not limited to, basic cable service, cable programming services of different levels and packages, and pay television paid by subscribers to
the cable system operated by grantee.
1984 CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, as amended from time to time.
1992 CABLE ACT: The cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992, as amended.
PERMIT: The consent and authorization of the city whether such authorization is designated as a permit, license, franchise, resolution, contract, certificate,
or otherwise, which authorizes use of the public streets and rights of way and construction and operation of the cable system for the purpose of offering
cable service subscribers. The term "permit" shall have the same meaning as "franchise" within the context of applicable state and federal law regulating
the transmission of cable systems and cable service to subscribers.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust corporation, or governmental entity.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface of and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, public way, drive, circle, or other public right of way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights of
way dedicated for compatible uses in any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the city in the service
area which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the cable system.
Public way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the city within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for any utility or
public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights of way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle
the city and the grantee to the use of thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting grantee's cable service or other services over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the
cable system.
SERVICE AREA: The present municipal boundaries of the city and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
SERVICE TIER: A category of cable service or other services provided by the grantee and for which a separate charge is made by grantee.
SUBSCRIBER: A person or user of the cable system who lawfully receives cable services or other services therefrom with grantee's express permission.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING: Programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to, programming provided by a television broadcast station.
(Ord. 2013-07, 5-14-2013)
8-3-2: GRANT OF PERMIT:
A. Grant:
1. The city hereby grants to grantee a nonexclusive permit which authorizes the grantee to construct and operate a cable system and provide cable
service and other related services in the city of Skiatook and to use the public rights of way within the service area; and for that purpose to erect,
install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, or along any public way and all extensions thereof
and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and
other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system, as long as the grantee complies with terms,
conditions, and provisions of this chapter, and the building, plumbing, mechanical, electric, fire and safety ordinances and health codes of the city of
Skiatook, the state of Oklahoma, or the United States Of America and any other applicable rules or regulations of the federal communications
commission, or federal aviation administration as may be required, and the 1984 cable act.
2. Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional
poles, conduits, or other facilities, on public property, until written approval of the city is obtained. However, no location of any pole or wire holding
structure of grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by grantee at its own expense whenever the
city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
3. This permit granted hereby is nonexclusive and nothing herein shall be construed to divest the city of total control and regulation of the public ways
within the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
B. Terms: Pursuant to this chapter, the city of Skiatook grants to the grantee a nonexclusive permit for a term of ten (10) years from the effective date of
this permit, unless otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Provided, however, that either party may, upon notice
given sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date of the permit granted herein, request a renegotiation of the terms of this permit, such negotiations to be
completed prior to the expiration of the initial term of the permit.
C. Acceptance; Effective Date: The grantee shall accept the permit granted pursuant hereto by signing the permit and filing same with the city clerk or
other appropriate official or agency of the city within ten (10) days after or the passage and final adoption of this permit. Subject to the acceptance by
grantee, the effective date of this permit shall relate back to the date of its passage and final adoption by the city council of the city of Skiatook.
D. Favored Nations: In the event the city enters into a permit, license, authorization, or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other
than grantee to enter into the city's streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to
any other part of the service area, the material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained herein, in order that one operator
not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another. (Ord. 2013-07, 5-14-2013)
8-3-3: STANDARDS OF SERVICE:
A. Operational Standards: The grantee shall maintain and operate the cable system as to provide video, audio, and other signals to be delivered with the
signal strength and quality levels which meet the requirements specified by the FCC and any other normally accepted industry standards. Under
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 116/269
normal operating conditions, each of the following standards shall be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time on an annual basis.
Standard installations shall be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed; and, except when beyond the control of the
grantee, the grantee shall respond to cable system outage promptly, and in no event, later than twenty four (24) hours in those cases involving five (5)
or more subscribers.
B. Condition Of Street Occupancy: All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment installed or erected by the grantee
pursuant to the terms hereof must have prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, type, and other pertinent aspects, and shall be located
so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who
own property that adjoins any of said public ways. The grantee shall not have a vested right to retain the location of any pole, conduit, or structure
installed by grantee. Such poles, conduit, and structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense when necessary for the
convenience of the city.
C. Installation And Maintenance Standards: All cable transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and maintained so as to cause
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and the city and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a
safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. The grantee shall at all times use ordinary care and shall install and maintain in
use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the
public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other safety devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety
of all members of the public. Any poles or fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to not interfere with the
usual travel on such public way.
D. Restoration Of Public Ways: If during the course of grantee's construction, operation, or maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance or
damage of any public way by the grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way in a manner approved by the city to a condition
reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance. The grantee shall guarantee and maintain
such restoration for a period of one year against defective materials or workmanship.
E. Relocation At Request Of City: Upon its receipt of a reasonable advance notice, not to be less than five (5) business days, the grantee shall, at its own
expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of the grantee when lawfully
required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of
street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water lines, or any other type of structures or improvements by the city; but, the grantee shall in all
cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to any company using such street, easement, or right of way for the
specific purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds shall also be made available to the grantee.
F. Relocation At Request Of Third Party: The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a permit issued by the city to move a building or
structure, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building or structure, provided: 1) the expense of such temporary raising of
the wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the grantee, making such payment in advance; and 2) the grantee is given not less than
seventy two (72) hours' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
G. Trimming Of Trees And Shrubbery: The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the
service area on public property, subject to the supervision and direction of the city, so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the grantee's
wires, cables, or other equipment. The grantee shall reasonably compensate the city or property owner for any damages caused by such trimming, or
shall, at its cost and expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction or maintenance of the system undertaken
by the grantee. The grantee shall notify the property owner at least twenty four (24) hours prior to such trimming, unless such trimming is necessary
due to a bona fide emergency. Trimming trees on private property shall require the consent of the property owner. Grantee shall indemnify and hold the
city harmless for any and all claims or causes of action arising out of the trimming of trees and shrubbery by grantee.
H. Use Of Grantee's Equipment By City: Subject to any applicable state or federal regulation or tariffs, the city shall have the right to make additional use,
for any public purpose, of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in any public way; provided, that: 1) such use
by the city does not interfere with a current or future use by the grantee; and 2) at grantee's sole discretion, the city may be required either to pay a
reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate the grantee for the use of such poles, conduit, or equipment; provided, however, the
grantee agrees that such compensation or charge shall not exceed like charges paid by public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole attachment
agreement, or other authorization, relating to the service area within the city of Skiatook.
I. Emergency Repair Of Public Ways: The city shall not be liable to the grantee for any injury to grantee's cable system caused by any city or Skiatook
public works authority employee while performing emergency repairs within the public ways. In all other circumstances, when city employees
negligently injure grantee's cable system, the city shall only be liable to the grantee for the grantee's actual cost of materials, equipment, and labor
necessary to effect repairs, with no allowance for interruptions to service or loss of revenue, subject to any applicable limits of liability established by
the Oklahoma government tort claims act1. The grantee shall file with the city clerk a schedule of the current costs of materials, equipment, and labor
necessary to make repairs.
J. Safety Requirements: Construction, installation, and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All
such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with acceptable FCC or other federal, state, and local regulations. The cable system shall not
unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area.
K. Service Interruption: The grantee shall maintain and operate its system and render efficient service in accordance with such rules and regulations as
are, or may be, hereinafter promulgated by the federal communications commission. Whenever it is necessary to interrupt service for the purpose of
making repairs, adjustments, or installations, the grantee shall do so at such times as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers,
and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, the grantee shall give reasonable notice thereof to the customers.
L. Aerial And Underground Construction: In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respected public
utilities providing telephone communications and electric service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate, and maintain all of its
transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided that such facilities are actually capable of receiving grantee's cable and other equipment
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 117/269
without technical degradation of the cable system's signal quality. In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of
the respective public utilities providing telephone communications, and electrical service are both aerial and underground, the grantee shall have the
sole discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing
contained in this subsection shall require the grantee to construct, operate, or maintain underground any ground mounted appurtenances such as
subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related
equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this subsection, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the
respected public utilities providing telephone communications and electrical services are placed underground after the effective date hereof, the
grantee shall only be required to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given reasonable
notice and access to the public utilities facilities at the time that such are placed underground.
M. Required Extensions Of Service: The cable system, as constructed as of the date of the passage and final adoption of this chapter, substantially
complies with the material provisions thereof. The grantee is hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required
pursuant to the terms hereof within the service area. Whenever the grantee shall receive a request for service from at least fifteen (15) subscribers
within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable bearing strand feet (1/4 cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall extend its cable
system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers; provided, that
such extension is technically feasible, and if it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the cable system, or
as provided for under subsection K of this section.
N. Subscriber Changes For Extension Of Service: No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a
subscriber's request to locate his cable drop underground, existence of more than one hundred fifty feet (150') of distance from distribution cable to
connection of service to the subscribers, or a density of less than fifteen (15) subscribers per one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable bearing
strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, cable service or other service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of
construction, including cost of material, labor, and easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to
be borne by the grantee and subscribers in the area in which cable service may be expanded, the grantee shall contribute an amount equal to the
construction and other cost per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of potential subscribers per one thousand
three hundred twenty (1,320) cable bearing strand feet of its trunks or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals fifteen (15) subscribers.
Potential subscribers will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. The grantee may require that the payment of the
capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.
O. Service To Public Buildings: The grantee shall provide without charge one outlet of basic service to each city office building(s), fire station(s), police
station(s), and public school building(s) that are passed by its cable system. The outlets of basic service shall not be used to distribute or sell cable
service in or throughout such buildings. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, the grantee shall not be required to provide an
outlet to such building where the drop line from the feeder cable to said building or premises exceeds two hundred (200) cable feet, unless it is
technically feasible and so long as it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the cable system to do so, or
unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the incremental cost of such dropped line in excess of two hundred (200) cable feet. In the
event that additional outlets of basic service are provided to such building, the building owner shall pay the usual installation fee associated therewith,
including, but not limited to, labor and materials. Upon request of the grantee, the building owner may also be required to pay the service fee
associated with the provision of basic service to the additional outlets.
P. Emergency Override: In the case of an emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the city, make available its facilities for the city to
provide emergency information and instruction during the emergency or disaster period, at no cost to the city.
Q. Governmental And Educational:
1. The grantee shall provide, at no cost to the user, adequate channels for governmental and educational use and for the networking among
governmental or educational users. The grantee shall also provide technical assistance required for the use of these channels and assist with
recommendations of proper equipment, to be purchased by the user. In no event shall this chapter be interpreted to require the grantee to provide
any equipment necessary for the use of these channels.
2. The grantee shall have the right to temporarily use any unused portion of a channel allocated under this section which is not being fully utilized,
provided such use shall not interfere with any educational or government use. If the channels provided for governmental and educational use are
being fully utilized, the grantee shall provide, at no cost to the user, additional governmental and educational channels. Generally, a channel shall be
considered as being fully utilized if more than an average of forty eight (48) hours per week over a six (6) month period of programming other than
character generated programming is offered.
3. The grantee shall not make any separate or premium charge to a subscriber for access to educational or governmental channels.
4. All channels allocated for governmental or educational use shall be of the same quality as the channels on the cable system for cable service. All
channels allocated for educational use shall be available to subscribers in the service area and the service areas of other cable systems
interconnected with the cable system. (Ord. 2013-07, 5-14-2013)
8-3-4: REGULATION BY CITY:
A. Permit Fee: The grantee shall pay to the city, as compensation of the rights and privileges enjoyed under this permit, a fee equal to four percent (4%) of
gross revenue (as defined in section 8-3-1 of this chapter) received by the grantee from the operation of the cable system on a quarterly basis;
provided, however, that the grantee may credit against such payment: 1) any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the city or other
governmental entity on a cable operator, or subscriber, or both solely because of their status as such; 2) any tax, fee or assessment of general
applicability which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed, both on utilities
and cable operators and their services); and 3) any other special tax, assessment, or fee such as a business, occupation, and entertainment tax. The
permit fee payment shall be due and payable in thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief
report from a representative of the grantee showing the basis for the computation. If payment of the permit fee is not made by the grantee before the
expiration of thirty (30) days after each quarter, a daily late fee and penalty will be assessed in the amount of three dollars thirty cents ($3.30) per day,
beginning with the thirty first day after the end of each quarter.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 118/269
B. Rates And Charges: The city may not regulate the rates for the provision of cable service and other services, including, but not limited to, ancillary
charges relating thereto, except as expressly provided herein and except as authorized pursuant to the federal and state law including, but not limited
to, the cable act and FCC rules and regulations relating thereto. From time to time, and at any time, the grantee has the right to modify its rates and
charges including, but not limited to, the implementation of the additional charges and rates; provided, however, that the grantee shall give notice to the
city of any such modifications or additional charges ninety (90) days prior to the effective date thereof.
C. Renewal Of License:
1. The city and the grantee agree that any proceeding undertaken by the city that relates to the renewal of the grantee's permit shall be governed by
and comply with the provisions of section 626 of the cable act (as such existed as of the effective date of this chapter), unless the procedures and
substantive projections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of federal
or state law.
2. In addition to the procedures set forth in said section 626(a), the city agrees to notify the grantee of preliminary assessments regarding the identity of
future cable related community needs and interests, as well as the past performance of the grantee under the then current permit term. The city
further agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to the grantee prior to the time that the four (4) month period referred to in
subsection (c) of section 626 of the cable act is considered to begin. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this subsection, the grantee
and the city agree that at any time during the term of the then current permit, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to
comment, the city and the grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the then current permit and the city may
grant a renewal thereof. The grantee and the city consider the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express provision of section
626 of the cable act.
D. Conditions Of Sale:
1. Except to the extent expressly required by federal or state law, if a renewal or extension of the grantee's permit is denied or the permit is lawfully
terminated, and the city either lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully effects the transfer of ownership of the cable
system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be valued at the fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued
as a going concern, unless otherwise agreed by the parties. The city of Skiatook is under no obligation to compensate the grantee for loss of its
cable system or to purchase the cable system from grantee, unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
2. The grantee and the city agree that in the case of a lawful revocation/termination of the permit, the grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified third party. The city further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the
grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior permit; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater
than six (6) months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, the grantee is unsuccessful in procuring qualified transferee
or assignee of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the city, the city and the grantee may avail themselves of any rights they may have
pursuant to the federal or state law; it being further agreed that the grantee's continued operation of its cable systems during the six (6) month period
shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the city or the grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set
forth in this subsection, neither the city nor the grantee shall be required to violate federal or state law.
E. Transfer Of Permit: The grantee's rights, title, or interest in the permit shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, without the
prior written consent of the city, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. The grantee shall give the city at least sixty (60) days' notice of any
such proposed assignment, sale or transfer. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer and trust, by mortgage or security agreement,
by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of grantee in the permit or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. (Ord.
2013-07, 5-14-2013)
8-3-5: COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING:
A. Books And Records: The grantee agrees that the city may review such of its books and records, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive
basis, as is reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public
records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein,
the city agrees to treat any information disclosed by the grantee to it as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents
thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof.
B. Customer Service Log: The grantee shall maintain a local telephone or toll free number for the purpose of individuals registering complaints, requests
for repair, installations, or adjustments. In the event of a subscriber complaint, the grantee shall maintain a written log recording the nature of such
complaint, the result of its investigation, and the disposition of the complaint. Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the
grantee to the FCC, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction, in respect to any matters affecting cable system
operation authorized pursuant to this permit, shall be submitted to the city manager upon request. (Ord. 2013-07, 5-14-2013)
8-3-6: INSURANCE, INDEMNIFICATION, AND BONDS OR OTHER SURETY:
A. Insurance Requirements: The grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of this chapter comprehensive
general liability insurance in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); provided if the maximum liability to the city under the Oklahoma
governmental tort claims act2 should be increased to more than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury, and property
damage, the amount of liability insurance required hereunder shall be increased to that amount. Said insurance shall designate the city as an additional
insured. The grantee shall file with the city clerk certificates of the insurance required hereunder in the form satisfactory to the city attorney. In no event
shall the insurance coverage maintained by the grantee be less than the limits of liability as set forth in the governmental tort claims act applicable to
the city.
B. Indemnification: The grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the city, its officers, agents and employees, from and against
any and all liability for damages and for any liability or claim resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death) which arise out
of the grantee's construction, operation, or maintenance of its cable system, or damages arising out of any provisions or requirements of this chapter or
its enforcement, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and costs.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 119/269
C. Bonds And Other Surety:
1. Except as expressly provided herein, the grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other surety as a condition of being awarded
the permit or continuing its existence. The city acknowledges that the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the grantee are sufficient to
afford compliance with the terms of this chapter and the enforcement thereof. The grantee and city recognize that the costs associated with bonds
and other surety may ultimately be borne by the subscribers in the form of increased rates for cable services.
2. In order to minimize such costs, the city agrees to require bonds and other surety only in such amounts and during such times as there is a
reasonable demonstrated need therefor. The city agrees that in no event, however, shall it require a bond or other related surety in an aggregate
amount greater than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) conditioned upon the substantial performance of the material terms,
covenants, and conditions of the city. Initially, no bond or other surety will be required. In the event that one is required in the future, the city agrees to
give the grantee at least sixty (60) days' prior written notice thereof stating the exact reason for the requirement. (Ord. 2013-07, 5-14-2013)
8-3-7: ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION/EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
A. Notice Of Violation: In the event that the city believes that the grantee has not complied with the terms of this chapter, it shall notify the grantee in writing
of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance. In the event that the city finds that the grantee has not paid the required permit/franchise fees when
the same are due, the city shall send written notice of such failure, and the grantee shall have fifteen (15) business days to remit the permit/franchise
fees then due. Should the grantee fail to remit the permit/franchise fees then due, the city may, at its sole option, cancel and terminate this permit, and
take all lawful actions to enforce its rights hereunder, including, but not limited to, the rights and remedies set forth in subsection D of this section.
B. Grantee's Right To Cure Or Respond: The grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in subsection A of this section: 1) to
respond to the city contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or 2) to cure such default, or 3) in the event that the nature of default cannot be cured
within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the city of the steps being taken and the projected date that
they will be completed.
C. Public Hearing: In the event that the grantee fails to respond to the notice described in subsection A of this section pursuant to the procedures set forth
in subsection B of this section, or in the event that the default is not remedied within thirty (30) days after the grantee is notified of the default pursuant
to subsection A of this section, the city shall schedule a public meeting to investigate the default. Such public meeting shall be held at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the city council which is scheduled at a time which is no less than five (5) business days therefrom. The city shall notify the
grantee of the time and place of such meeting and provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
D. Enforcement:
1. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the city, after such meeting determines that the grantee is in default of any provision of the
permit, the city may:
a. Foreclose on all or any part of any security provided under this permit, if any, including without limitation, any bonds or other surety; provided,
however, the foreclosure shall only be in such a manner and in such amount as the city determines necessary to remedy the default;
b. Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief;
c. Declare the permit granted hereby canceled, terminated and revoked; or
d. Seek specific performance of any problem which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages.
2. The grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply promptly with any provision of this chapter by reason of any failure of the city to
enforce prompt compliance.
E. Acts Of God: The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty
relating thereto, where such noncompliance or defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability
to control.
F. Removal At Expiration/Termination Of Permit: At the expiration of the term for which this permit/franchise is granted, or upon the expiration of any
renewal or extension period which may be granted, or the lawful termination of this permit/franchise, the city shall, subject to any other lawful and valid
authorizations the grantee may have to use its system in the public rights of way, have the right to require the grantee, at the grantee's sole expense, to
remove all portions of the cable system from all rights of way within the city and to restore affected sites to their original condition. The city may not
order removal of the cable system, or any portion thereof, until the parties have exhausted all applicable processes governing cable television franchise
renewals as set forth in 47 USC section 546. Should the grantee fail, refuse or neglect to comply with the city's directives, all portions of the cable
system, or any part thereof, may at the option of the city, become the sole property of the city, at no expense to the city, or be removed, altered or
relocated by the city at the cost of the grantee. The city shall not be liable to the grantee for damages resulting from such removal, alteration or
relocation. This section is subject to the provisions of subsection 8-3-4D of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-07, 5-14-2013)
8-3-8: UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION:
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically,
acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of the cable system without the express consent of the grantee. Further, without the express consent of
grantee, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, remove or injure any property, equipment, or part of the cable system or any means of
receiving cable service or other services provided thereto. Subject to applicable federal and state law, the city shall incorporate into its criminal code, if not
presently a part thereof, criminal misdemeanor law, which will enforce the intent of this section. (Ord. 2013-07, 5-14-2013)
8-3-9: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 120/269
A. Documents Incorporated And Made A Part Of Chapter: The following documents shall be incorporated herein by this reference, and in the case of a
conflict or ambiguity between or among them, the document of latest date shall govern:
1. Any enabling ordinance in existence as of the effective date hereof; and
2. Any agreement between the grantee and the city reflecting the renewal of the permit, if any.
B. Preemption: If the FCC, or any other federal or state body or agency, shall now or hereafter exercise paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of
the permit, and to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede or preclude the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the city, the jurisdiction of
the city shall cease and no longer exist.
C. Actions Of City: The city of Skiatook makes no covenant or warranty of any nature relating to the validity or duration of this chapter or any of the rights
created hereby. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be
unreasonable to withhold.
D. Service Discrimination Prohibited: The grantee is prohibited from denying access to cable service to any group of potential residential cable subscribers
because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. The grantee shall not discriminate among subscribers and
potential subscribers to the cable service.
E. Legal Compliance: The city shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and standards with respect to the construction, maintenance
and operation of a cable system.
F. Notices: Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response to be served upon the city or grantee shall be in writing, and
shall be deemed to have been duly served to the required party seven (7) business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly
addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the U.S. postal service.
1. The notices or responses to the city shall be addressed as follows:
City Of Skiatook
Attn: City Manager
P.O. Box 399
Skiatook, OK 74070
2. The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows:
Community Cable & Broadband, Inc.
Attn: Dennis Soule
P.O. Box 307
Skiatook, OK 74070
3. The city and the grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other.
G. Descriptive Headings: The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the
meaning or interpretation of the text herein. (Ord. 2013-07, 5-14-2013)
Chapter 4
OSAGE GARDENS CEMETERY1
8-4-1: CEMETERY DEDICATION:
The property, as more fully described in the plat thereof and attached to ordinance 98-04, is hereby dedicated as a municipal cemetery for the city, and is
to be known as Osage Gardens Cemetery. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
8-4-2: GOVERNMENT OF CEMETERY:
The cemetery of the city shall be governed by the city council and operated under the general supervision of the city manager. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
8-4-3: CARETAKER AND OTHER EMPLOYEES:
A. Employment And Discharge: The caretaker and other employees of the municipal cemetery shall be employed and may be discharged in the same
manner as other city employees. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
B. Duties Of Caretaker:
1. The caretaker shall be responsible, under the general supervision of the public works supervisor/director, for the overall maintenance, care and
management of the cemetery properties, and the enforcement of cemetery rules and regulations as provided by ordinances and resolutions of the
city. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998; amd. 2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 121/269
2. The caretaker shall supervise the opening and closing of all gravesites, and the placing of all monuments and markers on a cemetery lot as to
location, footing and proper base.
3. The caretaker shall have the further duty and is fully authorized to maintain order, to supervise all work, workmen, visitors, drivers and operators of
all vehicles, and to expel from the grounds of the cemeteries any person violating the established cemetery rules and regulations or provisions of this
chapter, or whose conduct is offensive toward the cemeteries, other persons or the places of interment. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
8-4-4: FEES AND CHARGES SET BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council may set, by resolution, from time to time, such fees and charges as they deem necessary and reasonable for the purchase of cemetery
spaces, opening and closing of gravesites, disinterments and other provided services. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
8-4-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS SET BY CITY COUNCIL:
A. City Council Authority:
1. The city council may, by resolution, from time to time, establish, revise and amend such rules and regulations for the use, care, control,
management, restriction and protection of all or any part of the cemeteries as they deem to be required and necessary.
2. As special cases may arise in which the literal enforcement of a rule or regulation may impose an unnecessary hardship, the city reserves the right,
without notice, to make exceptions, suspensions or modifications to any established rule or regulation when, in the sole judgment of the city, the
same would appear to be advisable. Such temporary exception, suspension or modification shall in no way be construed as affecting the general
application of any established rule or regulation.
3. Until otherwise decreed by the city council, rules and regulations in effect, and not in conflict with this chapter on the effective date hereof, with
respect to the cemeteries shall continue to be in full force and effect. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
B. Posting Of Written And Printed Rules: The cemetery rules and regulations promulgated by the city council shall be written and plainly printed and
maintained subject to inspection in the office of the city clerk and at any office maintained within the cemetery. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998; amd. Ord. 2013-
3, 2-12-2013)
8-4-6: CEMETERY LOTS AND SPACES:
A. Use Of Lots: No cemetery lot or space shall be used for any other purpose than the interment of bodies of persons. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
B. Deeds To Cemetery Lots And Spaces: Deeds to lots and spaces in the cemeteries shall be issued to the purchasers of said lots or spaces by the city in
such form as shall be deemed adequate. Cemetery deeds shall be signed by the mayor, and attested to by the city clerk, and the same shall carry an
acknowledgment sufficient to authorize the said deeds to be recorded in the office of the county clerk of Osage County, Oklahoma, or in such other
counties as cemetery lots or spaces may therein be located. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
C. Lot Purchase Limitation: No individual person, family or entity of any nature may purchase more than sixteen (16) cemetery spaces (2 lots) without prior
approval of the city council. This limitation shall not apply to any area of the cemeteries designed and designated as family estate areas. (Ord. 98-04,
3-31-1998)
D. Limitation Of Deed Transfer: No owner of any lot or space in the cemeteries shall sell or transfer the same or any interest therein except as permitted by
the laws of the state of Oklahoma and city of Skiatook resolutions, ordinances or established cemetery rules and regulations. No such transfer shall be
effective unless and until the same is approved by the city clerk and such approval endorsed upon the conveyance in writing. This limitation is
necessary in order that the city shall have a complete record of ownership and persons entitled to use such cemetery lot or space. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-
1998; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
8-4-7: PERPETUAL CARE FUND:
Twenty five percent (25%) of all monies received from the sale of lots, interments, disinterments and reinterments shall be segregated and set aside as a
permanent fund to be known as the "cemetery perpetual care fund". The cemetery perpetual care fund principal shall be expended for purchasing lands for
cemeteries and for making capital improvements as defined at 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 17-110, if necessary. The balance of the fund shall be
invested in the manner provided by law for investment of municipal funds. Interest from the investments may be used for the same purposes as the
principal or in improving, caring for, and embellishing the lots, walks, drives, parks, and other necessary improvements on such cemeteries. When made,
donations, bequests and other like deposits shall be accepted only for purposes of maintenance, upkeep, improvement, beautification, and embellishment
of the cemetery in general. Such donations, bequests, etc., shall be deposited in and become part of the cemetery perpetual care fund principal. All
monies paid into the cemetery perpetual care fund shall be managed and controlled by the city in the same manner as other special funds, and shall be
audited annually along with all other city funds. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
8-4-8: INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENTS:
A. Consent To Interment: No interment shall be permitted in any space without a written order of interment consent form being completed and signed by
the owner, or one of them, showing the exact location of the interment to be made and not then unless a proper burial certificate or permit is furnished.
At least twenty four (24) hours' previous notice shall be required before any interment is made. In extreme emergencies, adjustments in time may be
made.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 122/269
B. One Interment To Space: Only one interment shall be permitted in any adult interment space, except in the case of a mother and infant in one opening,
or two (2) infants.
C. Disinterment By City: No disinterment shall be made except by employees of the city under the direct supervision of the caretaker, with the consent of
the owner, based upon an official permit therefor, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. Disinterments and reinterments shall be made in
accordance with the laws of the state of Oklahoma. Under no circumstance shall any disinterment or reinterment be made unless a state of Oklahoma
licensed funeral director is present.
D. Space Paid For Before Interment: No interment shall be made in any space in a lot sold to individual ownership unless the same is paid for together
with charges for opening and closing the place of interment. Should the interment be made upon promise of immediate payment, or upon the faith of an
insufficient or forged check, draft or other bill of exchange, so that such service is obtained by fraud, then the city shall have the right to remove such
body to a single interment space apart from the lot where such interment was made. Should such aforementioned circumstance occur, the owner of
such lot shall be responsible for any and all additional charges and expenses incurred by the city in removal and reinterment of such body.
E. Charges Paid In Advance: All charges for the purchase price of actual spaces for interment and all interment and removal fees or for foundation
charges or other work or services for which charges are made shall be paid in advance and before the services are performed. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
8-4-9: OPENING CASKET OR CONTAINER; COURT ORDER:
No casket or container of a deceased human body shall be opened by any person within the confines of city cemeteries without an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction, except when the last services are being held at graveside and then only with the consent of the person having charge and authority
to do so. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
8-4-10: STRUCTURES, ENCLOSURES AND TREES:
A. Structures Contrary To Rules And Regulations Prohibited: Lot owners shall make no improvements or erect any monument, marker or structure contrary
to this chapter or to the cemetery rules and regulations established by the city council. Should any monument, effigy, structure or other object
whatsoever, or any inscription be placed in or upon any space, lot, monument or marker which in the opinion of the city is deemed to be offensive or
injurious to the appearance of the surrounding spaces, lots or grounds, the city shall have the right and privilege to enter upon such lot and remove
such offensive object or inscription.
B. Prior Approval Of Monument Or Marker: All owners or anyone duly authorized to act for or in behalf of an owner shall, before ordering any marker,
monument, memorial or structure, secure from the city written approval of the proposed design, size and lettering style.
C. Enclosures Or Fences Prohibited: No enclosure of any kind, such as fence, coping, curbing, hedge or ditch, shall be permitted around any space, lot or
place of interment.
D. Planting Trees Or Shrubs: No trees, shrubbery or plants of any type shall be set, planted, pruned or removed from any space, lot, place or location
within the cemeteries without the written approval of the city. The city shall have the authority to, at any time, prune, remove or transplant any tree,
shrub, plant or flower in the cemetery when such is deemed by the city to be in the best interest of maintaining the beautification of the cemeteries.
(Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
8-4-11: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
So long as the city and its officers and agents act in good faith and upon reasonable grounds in making interments, removals or disinterments, it shall not
be liable in damages on account of forgeries or frauds of others or mistakes honestly made, but the city shall use all reasonable means at its command
and shall be permitted to correct any such mistakes so that any person affected thereby may not suffer loss by reason thereof. The city and its officers and
agents shall not be liable for the safekeeping, theft or loss by any cause of any flowers, blankets, design or other object authorized to be placed on any lot
or grave and the foregoing will be placed on such lot or grave at the sole risk and responsibility of the lot or space owner. (Ord. 98-04, 3-31-1998)
Chapter 5
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
8-5-1: PROCEDURES AND MINIMUM STANDARDS ADOPTED:
The procedures and minimum standards set forth in this chapter are hereby promulgated and adopted for the use of any land or facility at the Skiatook
Municipal Airport. (1991 Code § 1-441)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity which involves, makes possible, or is required for the operation of aircraft or which contributes to, or is required
for, the safety of such operations and shall include, but not by way of limitation, all activities commonly conducted on airports, such as charter operations,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 123/269
pilot training, aircraft rental, land sightseeing, aerial photography, crop dusting, aerial advertising and surveying, air carrier operations, aircraft sales and
services, sale of aviation, petroleum products, whether or not conducted in conjunction with other included activities, repair and maintenance of aircraft,
sale of aircraft parts, sale and maintenance of aircraft accessories, radio communication and navigation equipment and any other activity which, because
of its direct relationship to the operation of aircraft, can appropriately be regarded as an aeronautical activity.
AIRPORT: The Skiatook Municipal Airport located on municipal lands and operated by the city of Skiatook.
AIRPORT COMMISSION OR COMMISSION1: The Skiatook airport commission as created by ordinance 434 as it may be hereafter amended.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Skiatook.
MASTER PLAN: The scaled dimensional layout of the entire airport property to be prepared hereafter, indicating current and proposed usage for each
identifiable segment as approved by the city council and as amended from time to time.
MINIMUM STANDARDS: The qualifications established herein, as amended from time to time by the city council upon recommendation of the airport
commission, setting forth the minimum requirements to be met as a condition for the right to conduct an aeronautical activity on the airport, and shall also
include all requirements and regulations of the federal aeronautic administration (FAA) which apply to the airport.
PERSON: Any person, firm, general or limited partnership, corporation, trust or association making application for, leasing or using any land or facility at
the airport. (1991 Code § 1-442)
8-5-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The standards set forth in this chapter shall be equally applicable to all operators, persons, firms, partnerships or corporations, their assigns or sublessee
with no discrimination on gender, color, race, national origin, religion, age, familial status, or handicap. (1991 Code § 1-450; amd. 2011 Code)
8-5-4: RESTRICTIONS ON LAND AND FACILITY USE:
A. No person shall be permitted to use any airport land for any purpose or conduct any aeronautical activity for commercial purposes or the solicitation of
business in connection therewith unless such activity is conducted in accordance with the standards herein established and as hereinafter amended
from time to time upon the recommendation of the airport commission with the approval of the city council.
B. Use of airport land or facilities contrary to the standards and requirements herein set forth is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 1-
443)
8-5-5: APPLICATION FOR USE OF LAND:
A. Filing Of Application; Contents: Any person desiring to acquire the use of land or establish or use any facility on the airport for an aeronautical activity
shall be furnished a copy of these standards and procedures, as amended from time to time, and shall thereupon make application in writing, filed with
the city clerk, setting forth in detail the following: (1991 Code § 1-444; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The proposed land use, facility and/or activity sought.
3. The names and the qualifications of the personnel to be involved in conducting such activity.
4. The financial responsibility and ability of the applicant to carry out the activity sought.
5. The tools, equipment, services and inventory, if any, proposed to be furnished in connection with such activity.
6. The requested or proposed date for commencement of the activity and the time of conducting the same.
7. The estimated cost of any structure or facility to be furnished, the proposed specifications for same, and the means or method of financing such
construction or acquisition of facilities. (1991 Code § 1-444)
B. Notice And Hearing:
1. Upon the filing of such an application with the clerk, it shall be immediately referred to the airport commission and considered at the next scheduled
meeting of such commission; and if no meeting is scheduled within thirty (30) days from the filing of such application, a meeting shall be called for
consideration of the same and notice thereof shall be given to the applicant. (1991 Code § 1-445; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
2. If such application involves conduct of an aeronautical activity for commercial purposes, all other persons then conducting commercial aeronautical
activities on the airport shall also be notified of the filing of such application and the time and place of the airport commission meeting to consider the
same.
3. Upon the consideration of the application, the airport commission shall determine whether or not the applicant meets the standards and qualifications
as herein set out, and whether, under the standards set forth in section 8-5-8 of this chapter, such application should be granted in whole or in part,
and if so, upon what terms and conditions, and shall make a written report and recommendation to the city council concerning the same. (1991 Code
§ 1-445)
C. Action On Application By City Council: Upon receipt of written recommendation of the airport commission, the city council shall include said matter upon
the agenda of the next regular meeting of the city council and, at such meeting or at a subsequent meeting to which it may be passed, shall approve,
modify or reject such recommendations and applications. (1991 Code § 1-446)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 124/269
8-5-6: LEASE OR CONTRACT:
Upon the approval of any such application as submitted or modified, the city council shall cause to be prepared a suitable lease or contract agreement
setting forth the terms and conditions of the land and/or facility use, which lease or contract shall in every instance be conditioned upon the following:
A. Original and continued compliance with the standards required for each particular aeronautical activity approved, and shall refer to and incorporate
these standards by reference.
B. That any structure or facility to be constructed upon the airport shall be constructed in conformity with all pertinent regulations of the state and the city,
and shall be erected pursuant to a building permit duly issued and compliance with the requirements of current codes and regulations of the city and
commission; and that all structures will include aprons, taxiways and roads, constructed at the expense of the lessee, from lessee's structure to existing
taxiways, aprons and roads in accordance with specifications previously approved by the city. All construction shall proceed to completion with due
diligence.
C. Shall reserve the right in the city council to modify or add to the standards for operation of aeronautical activities at the airport; shall provide for
termination or cancellation of the lease or contract upon failure to comply after notice. (1991 Code § 1-447)
8-5-7: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES:
In addition to meeting the requirements of section 8-5-6 of this chapter, every person conducting the following specific activities shall meet the additional
requirements as hereinafter set out:
A. Fuel And Oil Sales: Persons conducting aviation fuel and oil sales on the airport shall be required to provide:
1. Hard surface ramp space equivalent to existing taxiway and aprons accessible by taxiway with electric pumps and underground tank storage having
a capacity equal to the minimum tank truckload deliverable for each of those grades of aviation fuel commonly used by general aviation piston driven
aircraft, and, if and when in the judgment of the commission, public demand requires, shall also provide storage capacity approved by the
commission for standard jet fuel.
2. Shall provide properly trained line personnel on duty at least eight (8) hours of every calendar day, seven (7) days a week, and on call by readily
accessible telephone at other hours during the day or night.
3. Proper equipment for repairing and inflating aircraft tires, servicing oleo struts, changing engine oil, washing aircraft and aircraft windows and
windshields, for recharging or energizing discharged aircraft batteries and starters.
4. Shall provide conveniently located heated and air conditioned lounge or waiting rooms for passengers, and crews of itinerant aircraft, together with
sanitary restrooms and public telephones.
5. Shall provide adequate towing equipment and parking and tie down area to safely and efficiently move aircraft and store them in all reasonable
expected weather conditions.
6. In conducting refueling operations, every operation shall install and use adequate grounding facilities at fueling locations to eliminate the hazards of
static electricity and shall provide approved types of fire extinguishers or other equipment commensurate with the hazard involved in refueling and
servicing aircraft.
B. Aircraft Charter And Taxi Service: Local fixed base operators operating aircraft and taxi service shall provide:
1. Passenger lounge, restroom and telephone facilities as required of an operator for fuel and oil sales.
2. Adequate table, desk or counter for checking in passengers, handling ticketing or fare collection, handling of luggage.
3. Properly certificated suitable aircraft with properly certificated and qualified operating crew, one of which shall be located at the airport and ready for
departure during at least eight (8) hours of daylight operation daily and at other times, standby units and crews available upon call within one hour's
notice.
4. Passenger liability insurance of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per passenger seat and property damage liability of at least fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
5. A current FAA air taxi permit.
Subsections B4 and B5 of this section shall also apply to all transient operators.
C. Aircraft Engine And Accessory Maintenance: All persons operating aircraft engine and accessory maintenance facilities shall provide:
1. Sufficient hangar space to house any aircraft upon which such service is being performed.
2. Suitable storage space for aircraft awaiting maintenance or delivery after repair and maintenance to be completed.
3. Adequate shop space to house the equipment and adequate equipment and machine tools, jacks, lifts and testing equipment to perform overhauls
as required for FAA certification and repair of parts not needing replacement on all single engine land and light multiengine land general aviation
aircraft.
4. At least one FAA certificated airframe and power plant mechanic available during eight (8) hours of the day, five (5) days per week.
5. Facilities for washing and cleaning aircraft.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 125/269
6. Storage capacity for aircraft undergoing repair and maintenance work; provided, however, that any aircraft or part thereof in a nonairworthy condition
be screened or removed from ground level public view.
7. If spray painting of the aircraft is to be performed, the operator shall provide separately partitionable space with adequate exhaust fans and fire
protection.
D. Aircraft Rental And Sales: Local fixed base operators conducting aircraft rental and sales activity shall provide:
1. Suitable office space for consummating sales and/or rentals and the keeping of the proper records in connection therewith.
2. Hangar storage space for at least one aircraft to be used for sales or rental.
3. For rental, at least one airworthy aircraft suitably maintained and certificated.
4. For new sales activity, a sales or distributorship franchise from a recognized aircraft manufacturer of new aircraft and at least one demonstrator
model of such aircraft.
5. Adequate facilities for servicing and repairing the aircraft or satisfactory arrangements with other operators on the airport for such service and repair.
6. There shall be available, at least during eight (8) hours of the working day, a properly certificated pilot capable of demonstrating new and/or used
aircraft for sale or for checking out rental aircraft and model sold.
7. The minimum stock of readily expendable spare (parts), or adequate arrangements for securing spare parts required for the type of new aircraft and
models sold.
8. Current up to date specifications and price lists for types and models of new aircraft sold.
9. Proper checklists and operating manuals on all aircraft rented and adequate parts catalog and service manual on new aircraft sold.
E. Flight Training: All persons conducting flight training activities shall provide:
1. Continuing ability to meet certification requirements of the FAA for the flight training proposed.
2. Public liability insurance in an amount not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any one incident and property damage
insurance in an amount not less than seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00).
F. Crop Dusting And Spraying: Persons seeking to conduct crop dusting or spraying of agricultural chemicals shall be required to satisfy the airport
commission that:
1. Suitable arrangements have been provided for the safe storage and containment of noxious chemicals and materials and that all operations are in
compliance with all federal and state regulations governing the same. No poisonous or inflammable materials shall be kept or stored in close
proximity to other facility installations at the airport.
2. The operator shall have available properly certificated aircraft suitably equipped for the agricultural operation undertaken.
3. The operator shall make suitable arrangement for servicing the aircraft with adequate safeguards against spillage on runways and taxiways or
pollution or disbursal of chemicals by wind to other operational areas on the airport.
4. He has been issued a current FAA agricultural license under FAR 137.
5. He has been bonded in the state and carries chemical liability insurance.
G. Combination Activities: Any person conducting a combination of the specific activities listed hereunder shall not be required to duplicate the
requirements of the individual activities but where the requirement of one activity is sufficient to meet the requirement of a separate activity to be
conducted, the one activity shall be sufficient to meet both requirements. (1991 Code § 1-448)
8-5-8: STANDARDS FOR USE OF AIRPORT LAND AND FACILITIES:
In determining whether to grant an application and thereby permit a requested use of airport land or facilities, the commission and the city council shall
apply the following standards in addition to the requirements set forth above:
A. Whether there exists a public need for the service or facility proposed.
B. The likelihood of the proposed service or facility being a successful business enterprise.
C. The business acumen, financial resources, character, integrity, experience and past record of the applicant.
D. The effect of the proposed operation or facility on the city, the municipal airport, other airport operations and whether it is in the best interest of the city
and the airport that the application be approved or rejected. (1991 Code § 1-449)
8-5-9: AMENDMENT OF STANDARDS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 126/269
The airport commission shall review the standards for conducting aeronautical activities at least annually and shall recommend to the city council such
revisions or amendments as shall be deemed necessary under the use circumstances surrounding the airport to properly protect the health, safety and
interest of the city and the public. Upon approval of any such amendments, the operators of aeronautical activities secured hereunder shall be required to
conform to such amended standards. (1991 Code § 1-451)
8-5-10: CERTAIN ACTIVITIES RESTRICTED; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. City Council Consent For Conducting Certain Activities: No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any activity at the Skiatook Municipal Airport
other than normal motorized aircraft operations without the consent of the city council given at a duly held public meeting.
B. Regulation Of Airport Use:
1. The city council may from time to time establish rules and regulations for the operation of and activities permitted at the Skiatook Municipal Airport,
including, but not limited to:
a. Defining permissible uses of the airport;
b. Defining prohibited uses of the airport;
c. Establishing restrictions, conditions and limitations upon use of the airport; and
d. Making any other rule or regulation governing operations at and use of the facility. (Ord. 93-09, 11-30-1993)
2. Copies of rules and regulations relating to the airport made by the city council shall be maintained by the city clerk and made available for inspection
by the public. (Ord. 93-09, 11-30-1993; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
C. Suspension Of Rules And Regulations For Public Event: Whenever airshows or other public events are conducted within the city which, in the opinion
of the city council, are beneficial for the city, the city council may suspend any rule or regulation previously made for the duration of such public event
(not to exceed, however, a period of 48 hours) during which time the rules and regulations previously made shall not apply. (Ord. 93-09, 11-30-1993)
Chapter 6
ATHLETIC FACILITIES
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the use of athletic facilities owned by the city of Skiatook ("city").
B. Applicability: This chapter shall apply to the use of all city owned athletic facilities, including, but not limited to, football fields, baseball and softball fields,
soccer fields, including soccer fields at public parks, wrestling facilities, and basketball gyms. (Ord. 2015-05, 4-28-2015)
8-6-2: ATHLETIC FACILITIES USE AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
A. Requirement Of Athletic Facilities Use Agreement: An athletic facilities use agreement shall be required when a "youth sports organization" (defined as
a youth sports league, team or club, including booster clubs and referred to in this chapter as "YSO", whether singular or plural) desires to utilize city
owned athletic facilities, including, but not limited to, athletic fields located at the Skiatook Sports Park located at 3020 W. 133rd St. North, John Zink
Park, the soccer fields located at 800 West Oak Street, and the Central Complex Gym, located at 710 South Osage.
B. Agreement Required: No YSO ("youth sports organization") may utilize or use for any purpose city owned athletic facilities unless an athletic facilities
use agreement is entered into and approved by the city council of the city of Skiatook.
C. Preference For Use: Preference for athletic facility use shall be given to YSO based within the greater Skiatook, Oklahoma, geographic area and in
which the participants primarily reside within the Skiatook, Oklahoma, geographic area. (Ord. 2015-05, 4-28-2015)
8-6-3: REQUIRED TERMS:
A. Any athletic facilities use agreement entered into must include the following terms in substantially similar form:
1. The city shall retain all ownership rights and right of access to the athletic facility at any time.
2. Any athletic facilities use agreement must be for a defined term of not more than one year, but such agreement may be renewable for successive
periods of time.
3. The city shall reserve the right to use any or all portions of the athletic facility in times of natural disaster, emergency or other community wide higher
use need.
4. Cancellation for any reason upon thirty (30) days' written notice.
5. Reservation of the right of the city to utilize the athletic facilities at any time for municipal purposes.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 127/269
6. In the event that a conflict arises with any other YSO which has the right to utilize an athletic facility being the subject of the athletic facilities use
agreement, or any part thereof, regarding practice scheduling, game scheduling or tournament scheduling, and the parties cannot resolve the
dispute between themselves, the city manager, or his designee, shall decide as to the use of the athletic facilities area. The decision of the city
manager or his designee shall be final and nonappealable.
7. The use of the athletic facilities shall be nonexclusive and the city reserves the right to enter into similar agreements with other YSO.
8. All fixed alterations, additions and permanent improvements made during the term of the athletic facilities use agreement shall become the property
of the city and the YSO making such fixed alterations, additions and permanent improvements shall not be entitled to remove such fixed alterations,
additions and permanent improvements without the written consent of the city.
9. The YSO shall retain ownership of any nonpermanent structure installed at the athletic facility provided by the YSO, including, but not limited to,
temporary storage buildings, nonpermanent concession buildings, as well as any nonpermanent referee buildings. Any nonpermanent structures
provided by the YSO which remain on city or Skiatook public works authority property for more than thirty (30) days after the expiration or termination
of an athletic facilities use agreement shall become the property of the city, without further action on the part of the city.
10. The city shall provide access to the athletic facilities for sport and athletic uses only.
11. The city shall provide keys and/or lock combinations for necessary gates and doors to allow access to the athletic facilities which are the subject of
an athletic facilities use agreement. A YSO shall not duplicate any keys or disseminate any lock combinations without the consent of the city
manager. The YSO shall notify the city in writing who has been issued a key and/or who has been provided the combination to any locks.
12. Unless otherwise agreed, the city shall clear the site of unsafe debris that interferes with the intended use of the athletic facility. This shall include
ice storm, severe weather and flood related storm debris.
13. Unless otherwise agreed, the city shall provide basic trash service (typically weekly service).
14. The city shall maintain all fences, backstops and related grounds to ensure public safety.
15. The city shall provide adequate mowing services for all public, nonathletic field areas.
16. The city shall provide proper signage (as determined by city ordinances, codes and/or park rules and regulations) that is enforceable by police, fire,
code enforcement, city staff and the YSO.
17. The city shall have the right to conduct background checks on employees, volunteers or subcontractors of a YSO entering into an athletic facilities
use agreement, or to require that the YSO conduct such background checks, with the results being furnished to the city for the purposes of public
safety and protection of public property.
18. The YSO shall adhere to all city ordinances and/or park rules and regulations, as well as all state and federal laws and regulations.
19. The YSO shall be responsible for the conduct and behavior of their players, coaches and guests.
20. The YSO shall acknowledge and accept the risk of theft, vandalism or other criminal acts occurring within the property comprising the athletic
facility.
21. The YSO shall provide to the city by July 1 of each year, a public liability insurance policy with coverage of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. The insurance policy must list the city of Skiatook and the Skiatook public works authority as additional insured
parties, with a requirement of written notice to the city prior to any cancellation. In the event that the public liability insurance policy lapses or is
canceled, the city manager may terminate this agreement, effective upon written notice delivered to USER.
22. The YSO shall be responsible for any damages occurring to city or Skiatook public works authority property (buildings, irrigation components,
fences, signs, posts, sidewalks, parking lots, gates, landscaping, roadways, sports fields, gymnasiums, electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems)
that are a result of YSO volunteers, coaches, players, board members, or by the general public during YSO events. The YSO shall not be
responsible for damages or vandalism occurring while the YSO is not using the athletic facility. Evaluation of estimated time of damages or
vandalism acts to be set by the Skiatook police department.
23. The YSO shall place and keep trash confined to city supplied trash receptacles.
24. The YSO shall not make any alterations, modifications or improvements of any type without the prior consent of the city of Skiatook.
25. The YSO shall provide adequate mowing and groundskeeping services for all athletic fields and the areas adjacent thereto.
26. The YSO shall restrict motorized vehicles to designated parking areas.
27. The YSO shall not allow another person or organization to use the property covered by an athletic facilities use agreement, including, but not
limited to, third party tournament hosts (not the YSO) desiring to utilize a city athletic facility for a tournament, or use of the athletic facility for
practices by teams not from the Skiatook geographic area, unless written permission is granted by the city manager.
28. The YSO shall submit an accident/incident report form within twenty four (24) hours for any/all injuries, vandalism, theft, or domestic disputes and
make sure to include any documentation from police, fire, and/or emergency medical services.
29. The YSO shall work in good faith to resolve any scheduling or other conflicts.
30. The YSO shall take appropriate measures to ensure that its coaches and volunteers are not a danger to children participating in youth sports,
including obtaining background checks to determine the criminal and other history for each coach or volunteer at least once yearly. Any coach or
volunteer failing a background check shall not be allowed to serve in either capacity.
31. The YSO shall not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, creed, color, sex, or national origin.
32. The YSO shall indemnify the city against all expenses, liabilities, and claims of every kind, including reasonable attorney fees arising out of: a) the
failure by the YSO to perform any of the terms or conditions of this agreement, b) any injury or damage happening on or about the premises, c)
failure to comply with any law of any governmental authority, or d) any mechanics' lien or security interest filed against the premises' equipment,
materials, or alterations of buildings or improvements thereon. Further, during the times that the YSO is in control of the athletic facilities being
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 128/269
utilized, the city shall not be liable for any injury or damages to any property or to any person using the premises nor for damage to any property of
the YSO.
33. The city manager may terminate any athletic facilities use agreement due to a material breach of the agreement by the YSO which is the party to
such agreement, upon ten (10) days' written notice delivered to the YSO detailing such breach.
B. The city manager is authorized to include any other terms or conditions in an athletic facilities use agreement which the city manager shall deem
necessary and beneficial for the city, subject to approval of the agreement by the city council. (Ord. 2015-05, 4-28-2015)
Title 9
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 1
UTILITIES, GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-1-1: TRANSFER FEE AND RETURNED CHECK FEE:
A. Transfer Fee: A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for transfer of utilities. This will be deemed to have occurred when the occupant of
one location switches either residence or commercial operations for which billing occurs. Said transfer will apply to all residential, commercial, and
industrial accounts.
B. Returned Check Fee:
1. If a check is presented for payment for any and all utilities or services and returned by the paying bank, a returned check fee of twenty dollars
($20.00) will be added to the account for which payment was intended.
2. If the check was to cover any other bill from the city, the fee will be applied with the corresponding bill.
C. Modification Of Fees: The transfer fee and returned check fee heretofore described may be modified as necessary by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 2004-06, 7-27-2004)
Chapter 2
WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
9-2-1: AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall have authority to decide any question which may arise and which is not fully covered by any of the provisions contained in this
chapter, and its decision in such cases shall be final. (1991 Code § 18-24)
9-2-2: APPLICATION FOR INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE:
A. Filing Of Application: Any person desiring to have premises connected with the supply system of the city shall present at the utility office a written
application containing the name, a description of the lot, block, and addition, and the official house number of the premises on which the water is
desired.
B. Application Signed: Said application shall be signed by the owner of said premises, or by his duly authorized agent.
C. Payment Of Fees: Said applicant shall pay to the city and take receipt therefrom, the fees for installation of water service as provided by the city council.
(1991 Code § 18-1)
9-2-3: CONTRACT CONDITIONS; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The application provided for in section 9-2-2 of this chapter shall contain a contract on the part of the person making the same, to pay for the water applied
for at the rate and in the manner specified in such contract and ordinances and shall reserve to the city the right to charge and collect the rates and
enforce the penalties provided for in this chapter, to change the rates at any time without notice to the consumer, and to install a meter or meters to
register the water consumed, and shall specify that said contract is subject to all the provisions of this chapter and of any ordinance of the city relating to
the subject hereinafter passed, and shall provide that the city shall not be held responsible for any damage by water or other cause resulting from
defective plumbing or appliances on the premises supplied with water installed by the owner or occupants of said premises, and that the fact that the
agents of the city have inspected the plumbing and appliances shall not be pleaded as a basis for recovery in case of damage to premises from defective
plumbing or appliances installed by the owner or occupant of the premises, and shall provide that in case the supply of water shall be interrupted or fail by
reason of accident or other cause whatsoever, the city shall not be liable for damages for such interruption for any reasonable period of time, and the same
shall not be held to constitute a breach of contract on the part of the city or in any way relieve the consumer from performing the obligations of his contract.
(1991 Code § 18-2)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 129/269
9-2-4: TAPPING OF PREMISES; RATES:
A. Abutting Street Where Water Main Exists: Upon payment of fees for installation of water service and the execution of the contract provided for in section
9-2-3 of this chapter, the water superintendent shall cause the premises described in the application, if the same abuts upon a street upon which there
is a city water main, to be connected with the city water main by a service pipe extending at right angles, from the main toward the property line, to a
point not more than two feet (2') within the line of the street curb, where a curb cock, meter and box shall be placed, which connection shall thereafter
be maintained by and kept within the exclusive control of the city. (1991 Code § 18-4)
B. Abutting Street Where Water Main Does Not Exist: In case application is made for water service on premises not abutting upon a street upon which
there is a city water main, the city shall lay its connection from the main toward the premises for a distance not exceeding fifty feet (50'), for each
applicant to be serviced by such connection, and permit connection therewith by pipes laid at the expense and maintained by the owners of the service,
or may, in the discretion of the superintendent upon the payment of actual cost thereof, extend the service to the premises of the applicant along and
beneath any public street or avenue of the city, but not otherwise. (1991 Code § 18-6)
C. Rate Charges: A record shall be kept by the superintendent of the date when the water is turned on for such premises. Rates shall be charged from the
day the premises are connected with the city water main and the water turned on for such premises. (1991 Code § 18-5)
D. Number Of Taps Allowed; Special Permit: No premises shall be allowed to have more than one service connection unless a special permit therefor is
given by the superintendent. The granting of such permit shall be subject to such conditions as the superintendent may elect. Every separate premises
supplied by city water must have its own separate service connection with the city main, and the premises so supplied will not be allowed to supply
water to any other premises. (1991 Code § 18-7)
E. Connection Limited To One Premises:
1. Limitation: From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obtain, use or procure the use of a
water service connection with the city for the furnishing of more than one premises from any one water service connection. It shall further be unlawful
for any person, firm or corporation who has a water service connection for a particular premises to extend water service to any other premises, and
upon a finding by the water superintendent that this clause has been violated, it shall be mandatory for said water superintendent to disconnect water
service from all such premises, the said service to be reconnected only upon order of the city council, in its sole discretion. (1991 Code § 18-25)
2. Premises Defined: The word "premises", as used in this subsection E, shall be defined to be a home or building under one roof, or the portion
thereof used by any one family or one business establishment; provided, that water may be furnished to outbuildings when the same shall be used
for the sole purposes of the major premises, as subsidiary or ancillary buildings, or for the watering of the grounds of the premises or of the animals
belonging to or under the control of the owner of the premises; and further provided, that nothing in this subsection shall prevent the continued
existence of water service connections presently existing and in conflict with this section; and provided also, that buildings used as multiple-family
residences may be considered as one premises if the same are under one roof and are owned by a single person, firm or corporation who is
responsible for the payment of the entire charges for water service. (1991 Code § 18-26)
F. New Water Taps: New water taps, when permitted to be made from the eight inch (8") water line, shall be made in such a manner so that each user is
metered by one meter and subject to rate charges imposed by the city to persons, organizations, or firms similarly situated; and under no
circumstances shall more than one user be metered through any water meter. "User", as used in this subsection, shall mean a residential single-family
dwelling unit, a continuous commercial or business unit under identical and common ownership, and in other applications has reference to a single
continuous structure occupied by one person, firm or organization. (1991 Code § 18-30)
G. Discretion Of City Council And Utility Board: One water tap of the necessary size, to be determined by the superintendent, shall be allowed to each
apartment or multiple housing development which is under one roof. The city council and utility board shall act on any cases which are considered to
be of an unusual nature. (1991 Code § 18-20)
9-2-5: LAYING OF PIPE; SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Requirements:
1. All persons connecting to a main water line shall use standard galvanized iron pipe, PVC plastic pipe, or cast iron pipe up to and including two
inches (2") in size, and all pipe shall be laid not less than two feet (2') below established grade.
2. The superintendent shall maintain private services from city mains in streets which are being graded, or regraded, and shall have such access on
private property as shall be necessary to maintain such pipes during the work; and shall, as soon as practicable upon the completion of such work,
relay said pipe in such street.
3. Except for such above cause, owners shall maintain their private pipes from the end of the city service to, and into, their property, or in case the
superintendent finds it necessary to maintain same, the owner shall relinquish all rights to said pipes.
4. When necessary, the superintendent may slope services in on property to conform to the slope occasioned by the grading of the street and charge
the expense thereof to the owner of such service.
5. Provided, that where there are no mains in the street adjacent to the property to be supplied, a permit for a temporary connection may be given by
the superintendent for the supply of more than one premises from the same service line, but such temporary permit shall be revocable at any time by
the superintendent, and he shall, in all such cases, place a separate shutoff for each of said premises. (1991 Code § 18-8)
B. Failure To Comply: Where any service now exists or may hereafter be installed contrary to the provisions of subsection A of this section, the premises
supplied by the main service shall be responsible for all delinquent and unpaid charges against any one or all of the separate owners or users, and the
superintendent may, at his discretion, cause the water to be shut off from such premises if the owners thereof fail or refuse to comply with the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 130/269
provisions of subsection A of this section, after ten (10) days' notice in writing so to do, which notice may be served upon the occupant of such
premises. (1991 Code § 18-9)
9-2-6: FEES FOR INSTALLATION OF SERVICE:
A. Fee Set By City Council: In all cases, the fee for service connection inside and outside the city limits shall be established by the city council, and the
said fee shall be paid to the utility office before any work shall commence upon the installation of such water service.
B. Materials Used Property Of City: The right, title, interest, and ownership in and to any and all the materials, appliances and apparatus of every nature
installed by the city shall be and remain the property of the city.
C. Additional Fee For Additional Water Tap: In case more than one water tap is required for any service, an additional fee as established by the city council
shall be charged for each additional water tap.
D. Excavation Of Paved Street: For all services where it becomes necessary to open a paved street or put a pipe under a paved street, the cost of labor
and materials in laying such service and replacement of the paving shall be included in the fixed fee for installing the service.
E. Connections Extending Along Street With No Main: In such cases of connections extending along a street on which there is no main, the cost of
materials and labor necessary to extend the main to the property of such an applicant shall be estimated by the superintendent, and the estimated cost,
in addition to the fixed fee as provided, shall be paid to the superintendent by the person applying for such installation before the work of connecting
the main with the property is begun; provided, that whenever the estimated cost is not sufficient to cover the total expense thereof, the applicant shall
pay the deficiency; and provided further, that any excess payment shall be returned to the person applying for the installation. (1991 Code § 18-10)
9-2-7: SERVICE PIPES AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Number Of Connections Restricted:
1. Hereafter, no more than two (2) service connections shall be attached to, or connected with, a five-eighths inch (5/8") or three-fourths inch (3/4") tap
from any water main;
2. No more than four (4) service connections shall be attached to, or connected with, any one inch (1") tap from any water main;
3. No more than six (6) service connections shall be attached to, or connected with, any one and one-half inch (11/2") tap from any water main; and
4. No more than eight (8) service connections shall be attached to, or connected with, any two inch (2") tap from any water main in the city. (1991 Code
§ 18-3)
B. Location And Requirements: Before water will be turned on to any premises connected with the city mains, the service pipes upon such premises must
be made to conform to the following regulations:
1. The service pipes must be so located that the supply for each separate house or premises shall be controlled by a separate stop and waste cock of
the best standard make, approved by the superintendent, with the extension handle properly protected from the frost and so placed within the
premises that all service pipes and fixtures may be thoroughly drained during freezing weather.
2. The connection between the city pipes at the curb cock and the service pipes on the premises must be made with a union placed within eighteen
inches (18") of the curb cock. Every existing service or branch service not already equipped as required in this section must be so equipped at the
owner's expense within ten (10) days after notice in writing from the superintendent; and if not so equipped within such time, the superintendent may
cause the water to be shut off from the service without further notice. (1991 Code § 18-11)
C. Reconnecting: When new buildings are to be erected upon the site of old ones and it is desired to increase the size of or change the location of the
service connection, or where a service connection to any premises is abandoned or no longer used, the superintendent may cut out or remove such
connection, after which, a new service shall be placed only upon the owner making application and paying for a new tap in the regular manner. When
the service of any premises comes from a city main not located in front of said premises, the superintendent shall, when the main is laid in front of said
premises, after notifying the owner or tenants thereof, transfer the service connections to the new main without charge and at the same time cut out the
old service connection. (1991 Code § 18-12)
D. Laying Of Main: When a new main is laid in any street, owners of premises on said street who are being supplied with city water from a private main or
a connection to a private service shall make application for a tap and shall connect a separate service connection to the main in front of premises to be
paid for by the consumer as in other cases. (1991 Code § 18-13)
9-2-8: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Whenever the owner or occupant of any premises connected with the city water supply system desires to discontinue the use of water for any reason, he
shall notify the utility office that the water supply is to be shut off. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any premises connected with the city water supply
system to disconnect the water on said premises unless he shall first file in the office of utilities a written request that the service of water to said premises
be discontinued, and shall pay all arrearages on water charges for said premises. After water has been shut off from any premises upon the application of
the owner thereof, or for nonpayment of water charges or for any other cause, it shall be unlawful for any person to turn on the water again for such
premises, except when authorized so to do by the superintendent. (1991 Code § 18-14)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 131/269
9-2-9: WATER METERS:
A. Installation; Costs: All meters which are hereafter installed by the city on the service of any person, which are larger than three-fourths inch (3/4") in size,
shall be installed and the actual cost necessary to be incurred by the city in purchasing and installing said meter shall be charged against the owner of
said premises and shall be collected without discount at the next succeeding date upon which the charge for service to such consumer is due and
payable; and in the event of the neglect, failure, or refusal of such customer to pay to the city the expense and cost of such meter as aforesaid,
together with any and all service charges and penalties which may have accrued, such failure to pay may result in the discontinuance of said service.
(1991 Code § 18-15; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Multiple Meters; Costs: In the event more than one meter is installed upon the same premises, the city shall be entitled to charge for each additional
meter installed, the actual cost thereof, and the necessary expense incurred in installing each additional meter or meters.
C. Meters Property Of City: All meters, except as hereinbefore or otherwise provided, which are installed by the city at its expense, shall be and remain the
property of the city, and will not be removed unless the use of water on the premises is to be entirely discontinued, or the service connection
abandoned.
D. Replacement Of Lost Or Injured Meters: In all cases where meters are lost, injured, destroyed or broken by the carelessness or negligence of the
owners or occupants of said premises which are served through such meters, they shall be replaced or repaired by or under the direction of the
superintendent, and the cost charged against the owner or tenants of such premises. In case of nonpayment of the expense and cost of making such
repairs, upon the date next following for the payment of such charges, services to such premises shall be discontinued.
E. Failure To Register Properly: In the event the meter shall fail to register properly, the consumer shall be charged on an estimate made by the
superintendent on the basis of the average monthly consumption, during the last three (3) month period preceding immediately. (1991 Code § 18-15)
9-2-10: RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER:
The city reserves the right at any time without notice to shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, nonpayment of rates, or any other reasons, and
the city shall not be responsible for any damage, such as bursting of boilers supplied by direct pressure, the breaking of pipes or fixtures, stoppage or
interruption of water supply, or any other damage resulting from shutting off the water. (1991 Code § 18-16)
9-2-11: WATER RATES AND CHARGES; PAYMENT:
A. Compliance With Requirements; Meter Deposit; Payment Of Charges:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection with any service or branch pipe thereof, or make any repairs, additions or alterations of
any pipe, stopcock, stop and waste cock, water closet, or any other fixture connected with or designed to be connected with the city water system,
except in compliance with this chapter, and all such work must be inspected by the superintendent.
2. The city may require a cash deposit of not less than thirty five dollars ($35.00) as security for payment of charges for water services furnished by
meter rates; and in the event of the failure of any consumer of whom such requirements shall be made to make such deposit as security for the
payment of charges, services to him may be withheld or discontinued.
3. In the event the last day for the payment of any bills hereinabove provided shall fall upon Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, then payment may be
made upon the business day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. (1991 Code § 18-17)
B. Water Rates Within Corporate Limits:
1. Residential Rates: Effective October 1, 2014, the rates per month for treated water supplied through meters to all residential places within the
corporate limits of the city shall be as follows (gallonage rates):
Gallonage Rate Per
Thousand Gallons
Minimum bill (no consumption) $7.77
0 - 5,000 gallons 5.23
5 ,001 - 10,000 gallons 5.56
10,001 - 25,000 gallons 5.23
25,001 - 50,000 gallons 4.91
50,001 - 1,000,000 gallons 4.60
Over 1,000,000 gallons 4.66
Charge is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered use or increment thereof.
The rate established by this subsection shall also apply to all users drawing water under existing easement contracts running with the land on the
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 132/269
eight inch (8") and twelve inch (12") main lines when water is requested thereunder by the owner and granted by the city council after a showing of
entitlement thereto.
2. Commercial Rates: Effective October 1, 2014, the rates per month for treated water supplied through meters to all commercial places within the
corporate limits of the city shall be as follows (gallonage rates):
Gallonage Rate Per
Thousand Gallons
Minimum bill (no consumption) $17.64
0 - 5,000 gallons 5.56
5,001 - 10,000 gallons 5.56
10,001 - 25,000 gallons 5.23
25,001 - 50,000 gallons 4.91
50,001 - 1,000,000 gallons 4.60
Over 1,000,000 gallons 4.66
Charge is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered use or increment thereof.
C. Water Rates Outside Corporate Limits:
1. Residential Rates (Outside): Effective October 1, 2014, the rates per month for treated water supplied through meters to all residential places outside
the corporate limits of the city shall be as follows (gallonage rates):
Gallonage Rate Per
Thousand Gallons
Minimum bill (no consumption) $9.01
0 - 5,000 gallons 6.42
5,001 - 10,000 gallons 6.73
10,001 - 25,000 gallons 6.42
25,001 - 50,000 gallons 6.13
50,001 - 1,000,000 gallons 5.82
Over 1,000,000 gallons 5.82
Charge is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered use or increment thereof.
2. Commercial Rates (Outside): Effective October 1, 2014, the rates per month for treated water supplied through meters to all commercial places
outside the corporate limits of the city shall be as follows (gallonage rates):
Gallonage Rate Per
Thousand Gallons
Minimum bill (no consumption) $20.68
0 - 5,000 gallons 6.72
5,001 - 10,000 gallons 6.72
10,001 - 25,000 gallons 6.13
25,001 - 50,000 gallons 5.82
50,001 - 1,000,000 gallons 5.82
Over 1,000,000 gallons 5.87
Charge is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered use or increment thereof. (Ord. 2014-19, 9-30-2014)
D. Annual Rate Adjustment: All rates for each category of use will increase by the lesser of the social security administration cost of living adjustment
(COLA) or one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) annually on each subsequent January 1 beginning January 1, 2009, and each January 1 thereafter until
repealed. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-29-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 133/269
E. Minimum Multiple-Family Unit Rates: Where two (2) or more family residential units are supplied with water through a single meter, when so permitted
by this chapter or other policies of the city, the minimum charge per month per unit shall be made for the first one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction
thereof multiplied by the number of units so connected, without regard as to whether or not any such unit or units be vacant or occupied, all hotels,
motels and mobile trailer parks excluded. (1991 Code § 18-21)
F. Due Date For Payment: The water rates as herein prescribed are based upon the consumption and use for each calendar month, and all such bills
mature and become due and payable on the first day of the following month. Said rates are considered delinquent after the tenth day of the month, and
a penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of the water billed shall be assessed. (1991 Code § 18-22)
9-2-12: TRESPASS TO CITY PROPERTY:
A. Disturbing Meters, Other Property: It shall be unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized by the superintendent, to disturb, displace, interfere with,
cover up, damage or destroy any meter, meter box, water mains, water pipes, machinery, tools, buildings, fire hydrants, curb cocks, curb box, or any
other property belonging to, connected with, or under the control of the municipal water system of the city.
B. Obstructing Access To Fire Hydrants: It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire hydrants by placing around or upon the same,
any stone, brick, lumber, dirt or fencing or any other material.
C. Unlawful Connection: It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection with any fixture or connect any pipe with any water main or water pipe
belonging to the municipal water system of the city without first obtaining permission so to do from the superintendent. (1991 Code § 18-23)
9-2-13: SURPLUS WATER FROM CITY OF TULSA:
All water purchased by the city from the city of Tulsa as its surplus water, when delivered to the city, becomes restricted and necessary water in the
possession and under the control of the city. All of such water is necessary as by resolution duly adopted by the city council members and required by the
city for its own use and the use of its own inhabitants, and is not subject to resale outside of the corporate limits of the city except by negotiated written
contract between the prospective purchaser on one side and the city on the other. (1991 Code § 18-28)
9-2-14: ABROGATION OF SERVICE:
All water sold and furnished to persons, firms and corporations without the corporate limits of the city, pursuant to taps granted under this chapter, shall be
sold and furnished upon written contracts expressly stating that the contract may be abrogated by the city at any time the city council or the trustees of the
Skiatook public works authority shall declare by resolution that the water being furnished under the contract is required by the city for the use of the
inhabitants and its own use; and such shall be expressly stated in every application to be prepared by the city clerk. (1991 Code § 18-33; amd. Ord. 2013-
3, 2-12-2013)
9-2-15: EXCEPTION; TWELVE INCH LINE:
Nothing contained in the previous sections of this chapter relates in any manner to the twelve inch (12") water line owned and operated by the city. Taps
from the twelve inch (12") water line are governed pursuant to the provisions of section 9-2-17 of this chapter. (1991 Code § 18-34; amd. 2011 Code)
9-2-16: SKIATOOK PUBLIC WORKS AUTHORITY; LEASED PROPERTY:
A. City Approval: The trust indenture dated September 18, 1974, creating the Skiatook public works authority, a copy of which is on file in the office of the
city clerk, wherein the city of Skiatook is declared to be the beneficiary of said trust, is hereby approved and the city accepts said trust as beneficiary
thereof. (1991 Code § 18-35; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. Leased Property: Pursuant to approval by a majority of the qualified electors of the city opting at a special election held therein on September 13, 1977,
made and entered into by and between the city of Skiatook, a municipal corporation (hereinafter called the "lessor") and the trustees of the Skiatook
public works authority, an Oklahoma public trust (hereinafter called the "lessee"), for and in consideration of the covenants, agreements, provisions and
conditions hereinafter contained on the part of the lessee to be kept, observed and performed, lessor has demised and leased, and hereby does
demise and lease, unto lessee, the following property (hereinafter collectively called the "leased property"):
1. All of the following described proprietary, revenue producing utility properties, systems and facilities of lessor:
a. All of the water production, storage, transportation and distribution system and facilities, including all tangible property, real and personal, and all
interest therein, appertaining or related thereto or used in connection therewith, and all rights of way, easements, licenses, and other rights and
privileges appertaining or related to such system and facilities or the use thereof, now belonging to the lessor or under its custody, management or
control; and
b. All of the property specifically described in the "Schedule Of Specific Property".
2. Any and all additions and/or improvements to the presently existing water system, properties and facilities mentioned in subsection B1 of this
section, and any and all tangible property, real or personal, and any and all interests therein, appertaining or related to such water system, properties
or facilities, or used in connection therewith, and any and all rights of way, easements, licenses, or other rights or privileges, appertaining or related
to such water system, properties or facilities or the use thereof, which may, hereafter, be acquired by lessor or which shall, hereafter, come under its
custody, management or control; it being the intent of this subsection that any of the foregoing, immediately upon acquisition of ownership, custody,
management or control thereof by lessor, shall become and be a part of the property demised and leased hereunder. (1991 Code § 18-36)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 134/269
3. Any and all properties, systems and facilities purchased and/or constructed and/or installed by the lessee with the proceeds of indebtedness incurred
by the lessee and secured by its leasehold interest in and to any of the leased property, or by the revenues (or any part thereof) from any of the
leased property shall, immediately upon such purchase and/or construction and/or installation by lessee, become the property of the lessor and
become and be a part of the leased property demised and leased hereunder. (A copy of such lease is on file and in the office of the city clerk.) (1991
Code § 18-36; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
9-2-17: TWELVE INCH WATER LINE:
A. Fees For Taps: All applicants to whom water taps are granted must pay whatever fees and charges are established by the Skiatook public works
authority, and that authority is hereby granted the power to establish a rate of such fees and charges; and all applicants must further agree to pay
monthly water charges at the rate established by the Skiatook public works authority for persons residing outside the city. (1991 Code § 18-42)
B. Use And Assignability: Water taps granted pursuant to the policy set forth in this chapter shall be limited to one single-family residential dwelling unit,
and the water taps granted shall "run with the land" in that the owner of such tap shall always be the person owning the residential dwelling unit which
such tap services. Water taps granted hereby may not be assigned or sublet. Persons receiving water taps from such line may not sell or give water to
any other person, and the use of water from such taps is limited to the single-family residential dwelling to which service is initially established. In the
event that a tract of property for which a water tap is granted hereunder shall hereafter be subdivided or otherwise divided into ownership among one
or more persons, the water tap heretofore granted shall remain appurtenant to that tract upon which there is located the single-family residential
dwelling unit to which service is established hereby. (1991 Code § 18-43)
9-2-18: FINALITY OF DECISION:
All decisions made by the Skiatook public works authority concerning the grant or denial of any application for water taps shall be final and not subject to
review by any other board, agency or tribunal, and the Skiatook public works authority may reject an application for any reason whatsoever even though
the same be deemed arbitrary or capricious, it being the intent of the city to establish only guidelines for use in granting or denying applications for water
taps, and it not being the intention to impose any obligations upon the city or its public works authority to grant any application submitted. (1991 Code
§ 18-45)
9-2-19: WATER CONSERVATION:
A. Authority To Prohibit Use Of Water: The city council and the trustees of the Skiatook public works authority are hereby authorized during periods of
drought to prohibit the use of water for any purposes deemed by them not essential to the health and welfare of the city, such limitation of use to be by
resolution; and the city council and the trustees of the Skiatook public works authority are further authorized to limit any use of water to certain hours of
the day and to certain purposes. (1991 Code § 18-47)
B. Discontinuance Of Use Outside Corporate Limits: In the event that any period of drought continues so that it appears that the city will be unable to
supply adequate water for the inhabitants of the city, the city council and trustees of the Skiatook public works authority in such event are hereby
authorized to disconnect (as provided by the laws of the state of Oklahoma) from the city's water distribution and supply system, all persons residing
outside the corporate limits of the city. (1991 Code § 18-48)
9-2-20: LIMITED USE OF WATER DURING DROUGHT:
A. Drought Defined: "Drought", as that word is used within this section, has reference to those periods during which the city is furnishing to users of its
water system over a mean seventy two (72) hour period, more water than the city is receiving from its supplier so that the storage capabilities of the city
for water are in danger of becoming inadequate to hold a sufficient supply to meet the basic needs of the inhabitants of the city. (1991 Code § 18-50)
B. Prohibition Of Use: The city council is hereby authorized during periods of drought to prohibit the use of water for any purposes deemed by them not
essential to the health and welfare of the city, such limitation of use to be by resolution; and the city council is further authorized to limit any use of
water to certain hours of the day and to certain purposes. (1991 Code § 18-51)
C. Users Residing Outside Corporate Limits: In the event that any period of drought continues so that it appears that the city will be unable to supply
adequate water for the inhabitants of the city, the city council in such event is hereby authorized to disconnect (as provided by the laws of the state of
Oklahoma) from the city water distribution and supply system, all persons residing outside the corporate limits of the city. (1991 Code § 18-52)
D. Delegation Of Authority: The city council may, in its discretion, delegate the right to limit permissible uses of water as set forth in this section to the
mayor, the city clerk, or the manager of the city water system. (1991 Code § 18-53; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
E. Penalty: Whenever any limitation is made upon the permissible use of water from the city water system where the use of the same is limited to certain
hours, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provision of this section or any resolution limiting the use of water shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than thirty five dollars ($35.00), inclusive
of costs. (1991 Code § 18-54)
9-2-21: LEASE-PURCHASE WATER LINE CONTRACTS:
A. Rates: All water furnished to customers of the city through water lines that are the subject of lease-purchase water line contracts which have not been
fully paid shall in all incidents be delivered to such customers according to the ordinances of the city in all respects, except that the rate which those
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 135/269
customers shall pay for the water shall be two (2) times the rates that would be required for such a customer should he be located within the corporate
limits of the city. (1991 Code § 18-57)
B. Provisions Cumulative: The provisions of this section shall be cumulative to all other ordinances, and shall not be deemed to have repealed any
ordinances by implication. (1991 Code § 18-58)
9-2-22: BULK WATER PLANT RESTRICTIONS:
A. Use Of Water: No person, firm or organization shall withdraw, use or remove from the bulk water plant, owned and operated by the city and located at
111 North A Street within the corporate limits of the city, water, when the same is to be used for any purpose other than human consumption and
household purposes. "Household purposes" as used herein means the use of water for purposes normally associated with the maintenance and
occupancy of a residential dwelling unit. The same does not include the use of water for agricultural, industrial, manufacturing, oil and gas operations,
and other nondomestic uses. This enumeration of prohibited uses of such water shall in no way be construed to expand the definition of household
purposes beyond uses normally associated with residences. (1991 Code § 18-59)
B. Manner Of Withdrawal: No person may withdraw water from the Skiatook bulk water plant by use of a container which has previously been used for any
purpose other than the transportation or storage of potable water; and no person may withdraw or take water from the Skiatook bulk water plant in any
container or vehicle of any nature, except in such a manner that the nozzle and hose installed at the bulk water plant remain free from contamination of
any kind or any contact with any soiled surface of any nature. (1991 Code § 18-60)
C. Violation: Any person, firm or organization violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1991 Code
§ 18-61)
9-2-23: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
If any person, firm or corporation shall violate the provisions of this chapter, the same shall be deemed to constitute the offense of larceny of water from
the city and the Skiatook public works authority, which offense shall be deemed committed at place where payment for such water should be made, upon
conviction, any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and suffer a punishment not less than
the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00), inclusive of costs. (1991 Code § 18-46)
Chapter 3
ELECTRIC SERVICE REGULATIONS
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as referred to in this chapter shall be construed to mean and include:
CITY: The municipal electric service of the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
CONSUMER: Any person, firm, corporation, or establishment connected to or using, or applying to be connected to or using the facilities of the municipal
electric service of the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma. (1991 Code § 18-100)
9-3-2: SERVICE PROVIDED:
The city shall provide electric service to all consumers presently receiving service from its electric system and, in addition, if electric service is available,
shall serve all new consumers within the city limits and certain areas outside the city limits; and, where such service requires the use of streets, avenues,
alleys, etc., the city shall construct the distributing lines. (Ord. 2015-01, 1-27-2015)
9-3-3: SECURITY DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
A. Deposit Required; Amount: The city shall require a security deposit at the installation of service from all consumers and shall give a receipt therefor. The
amount of the security deposit required will be established by resolution of the city council.
B. Procedure Upon Termination Of Service:
1. At the termination of service, the city shall refund the deposit upon full payment of all bills for service due to the city and the surrender of the deposit
receipt.
2. Any such deposit may be applied by the city to the payment of any or all bills due the city at the time of termination of service to the consumer, either
for electric or water service, or may be applied on any other outstanding bill due the city, and may be so applied with or without permission or
consent of the consumer. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
9-3-4: READING OF METERS AND PAYMENT OF BILLS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 136/269
A. Meter Reading And Billing Dates: Meters will be read and bills mailed to consumers on or before the first day of each month for books 11 through 20,
inclusive, and on or before the fifteenth day of each month for books 1 through 10, inclusive.
B. Due Date: All bills for service shall be due upon presentation of the bill and shall be payable within twenty (20) days following mailing of the bill.
C. Meter Improperly Recording; Average Determined: In case a meter does not record or is incorrectly recording or is not read, the bill for that period will
be based upon an average of the preceding twelve (12) months. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
D. Service Disconnection For Nonpayment; Additional Charges: If any bill for service is not paid within twenty (20) days after the mailing of such bill, the
service may be disconnected without further notice. Upon the dispatch of personnel for disconnection of service, a charge of twenty five dollars
($25.00) shall be assessed. There shall be no additional charge if service is reestablished during normal municipal business hours. An additional
charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed for reestablishing service at all other times. The assessment for reestablishment of service shall be
added to the consumer's bill. These fees may be changed as deemed necessary by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-27-2004; amd. 2011
Code)
E. Service Interruption For Repairs; Nonliability Of City: The city shall have the right at any time to discontinue service or partial service from its lines for
the purpose of making repairs, extensions, replacements or inspections, and for such other reasons as may become necessary. The city, however,
shall arrange such interruptions so that the smallest possible number of consumers will be affected. The city shall not be liable or responsible for failure
to supply electric service or for interruptions of the supply, and the city shall not be responsible or liable for damages resulting to a consumer or to a
third person, company or corporation from the above causes or from the use of electricity or the presence of the city's equipment or apparatus upon a
consumer's premises. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
9-3-5: TEMPORARY SERVICE:
A. Period Of Time: Any electric service for less than twelve (12) months shall be considered temporary service.
B. Consumer Cost: There will be a nonrefundable fifty dollar ($50.00) connection fee for all temporary services. Temporary service connection fees may be
waived by the city manager, in his discretion, for competitive reasons related to economic development and to gain a new customer when negotiating
with a customer or customers that might otherwise choose another utility provider for electric service, where another provider can actually serve the
customer at the location at issue. (Ord. 2015-01, 1-27-2015)
9-3-6: WIRING REGULATIONS:
The following regulations are hereby adopted and prescribed as standards for the wiring of consumers' installations in the city:
A. Compliance With National Electrical Code: All new wiring must be done in accordance with the national electrical code, and such further specifications
as may be set up from time to time by the city.
B. Consumer Requirements: The consumer shall be required to furnish, install and maintain at all times in good condition all interior wiring, apparatus and
equipment, including all fixtures, appliances, and everything pertaining to the use of electric service on their premises. When wiring is to be done before
service wires of the city are extended to the consumer's premises, the city shall be notified and it shall specify the point of service for the consumer.
(1991 Code § 18-103)
9-3-7: SERVICE RESTRICTIONS:
The city may refuse to connect or supply motors or other apparatus of such type or of such installation as may impose low voltage or an insufficient power
factor, or such as may otherwise impair service to other consumers. (1991 Code § 18-106)
9-3-8: ELECTRIC METERS AND EQUIPMENT; INSPECTIONS:
A. Meter Requirements And Restrictions:
1. The city shall supply electricity through meters furnished and owned by it, and delivery of electric current is considered completed at the load
terminals of the meters. No city employee shall be permitted to do any work beyond the load terminals of said metering equipment.
2. The register of the meter shall be prima facie evidence of the amount of electricity used by the consumer, and he shall be held responsible and shall
pay for said electricity in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
3. In case of interference with or unnecessary injury to metering equipment or other property belonging to the city, the city may remove same and
refuse further service until such damage is paid.
4. If the city finds, at any time, that taps have been made ahead of the metering equipment, or tampering with the meter, it shall estimate as nearly as
possible the amount of electric service illegally used, and bill the same to the consumer.
B. Inspection Authorized; Correction Of Defects: The city shall, at all times, have the right to inspect any and all wiring, equipment, installations and
appliances upon the premises for a consumer; and should such inspection disclose dangerous or defective conditions of service or conditions likely to
interfere with proper service to and use of electric facilities to and by other consumers, the city shall have the right to require correction or removal of
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 137/269
such defective wiring, installation, equipment and appliances by the consumer upon reasonable notice; and upon his failure or refusal to do so, shall
discontinue service to such consumer until such defective condition shall be corrected. (1991 Code § 18-107)
9-3-9: OVERHEAD AND UNDERGROUND SERVICES:
A. Overhead Primary And Secondary Facilities: All electrical services provided by the city shall be on the basis of overhead primary and secondary
facilities with secondary service being brought to the customer's service entrance head. The customer shall provide the attachment member with the
necessary strength to support the overhead service. If the customer's point of attachment fails due to rot, decay or any other cause, the city shall have
the right to disconnect service from the structure until repairs are made by the customer. The customer shall obtain the meter base from the city, at no
cost to the customer, and shall furnish and install all other materials required for service except for the service wire and meter which will be furnished
and installed by the city.
B. Secondary Lengths: The maximum secondary length shall be two hundred feet (200'). Secondary lengths greater than two hundred feet (200') must first
be approved by the city manager, and the customer shall pay all costs relating to the additional secondary length requirement.
C. Underground Services: Underground single phase services to residential customers shall be furnished by the city in lieu of overhead service if so
requested by the customer and approved by the electric department supervisor. Lengths of underground. Secondary service shall be limited to two
hundred feet (200'). Underground secondary lengths greater than two hundred feet (200') must first be approved by the city, and the customer shall pay
all costs relating to the additional requirement. The customer shall install the meter base on the structure to which electric service is to be furnished and
shall furnish and install pipe or conduit below final grade as directed by electric department personnel (typically 21/2 inch electric PVC 6 inches below
final grade, or as directed by the electric department supervisor). The city shall be responsible for trenching and backfilling all service lines to the
metering point at a minimum depth of two feet (2').
D. Costs Paid By Customer: The customer shall pay all costs incurred for all primary electrical service extensions in excess of two hundred feet (200'), for
service to a single location, unless the extension of primary electrical infrastructure, in the opinion of the city manager, shall be beneficial and
necessary for future expansion of electrical service beyond the location served. The customer shall be required to pay all costs incurred in secondary
electrical service extensions in excess of two hundred feet (200') to service a single location. In case of such extension of electrical infrastructure,
whether primary or secondary, the customer shall be responsible for clearing any obstructions prior to electric installation and for obtaining necessary
utility easements and rights of way in a form acceptable to the city.
E. Transformers: 3-phase pad mounted transformers will be furnished for new commercial and industrial customers if 3-phase underground service can be
made available at a cost comparable to the cost of installation of an overhead transformer. When pad mounted transformers are not feasible, in the
discretion of the city manager, the city shall have the right to build overhead transformer banks to supply the customer's service. The customer shall be
responsible for building the transformer pad to the city's specifications.
F. Residential Subdivisions: The city may extend its electrical infrastructure to service residential subdivisions, including the provision of primary facilities
and transformers and other necessary equipment, at its cost, if multiple customers shall be obtained from such extension of electrical infrastructure or if
such extension of electrical infrastructure shall be beneficial and necessary to the city for future expansion of electrical service. The city will require the
developer or owner to excavate, trench and backfill the primary service lines of the subdivision; however, the city manager, in his discretion, may direct
the city to trench and backfill when necessary for competitive reasons, for economic development purposes and to gain additional customers when
negotiating with a developer or owner that might otherwise choose another utility provider for electric service, where another electric utility provider can
actually serve the customer at the subdivision location. The final plat must be approved and filed of record with the county clerk of the county in which
the subdivision is located prior to the installation of any electrical service lines. In addition, all excavation and "dirt work" must be complete and at final
grade prior to the installation of any electrical service lines.
G. Residential Voltage: The city shall provide 120/240 volt single phase service for all new residential customers.
H. Commercial/Industrial Voltage: The city shall provide the following voltages for all new commercial/industrial customers:
Single phase, 120/240;
3-phase, 120/208 is the preferred and recommended voltage. However, the following listed voltages can be made available to 3-phase customers
when requested by the customer and approved by the city manager:
120/240, 240/480 or 277/480. (Ord. 2015-01, 1-27-2015)
9-3-10: METER INSTALLATION CHARGES:
A. Determination Of Fee: The fees for installation of electric meters of the following size shall be determined by the city council:
100 ampere overhead - 100 ampere underground
200 ampere overhead - 200 ampere underground
B. Payment Of Fee: The fees shall be paid by the property owner or person requesting the installation of such meter. The fees include the cost of work and
materials furnished in the installation of such meter. (1991 Code § 18-109)
9-3-11: SAFE ACCESS AND CLEARANCE, FINAL PLAT REQUIRED, EXCAVATION, EASEMENT:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 138/269
A. Safe Access And Clearance: The city shall at all times have safe and clear access to all electrical equipment (meters, pedestals, transformers, poles
and other equipment) of city, and shall have the right to remove any shrubs, bushes, trees, fences or any other obstructions that impede access to its
electrical equipment, or that may pose a hazard to the employees of city or the public. The city will not be responsible for removing, repairing, or
replacing any obstruction(s) removed or damaged during outages or regular work operations.
B. Final Plat Required: In the case of platted developments, whether commercial or residential, the final plat must be approved and filed of record with the
county clerk of the county in which the development is located prior to the installation of any electrical service lines.
C. Final Grade: Upon the installation of any electrical service lines whether primary or secondary, installed by city, the developer or builder shall ensure all
buried electric lines maintain their original installation depth of at least two feet (2') once final grade is complete.
D. Easement: When the city provides electrical service, whether overhead or underground, there shall be an implied easement which exists in favor of the
city, ten feet (10') on either side of the centerline of the secondary electrical service line from the primary service line/transformer to the metering
location. This easement shall be solely for the provision, installation, maintenance, reworking, relocating, upgrading, replacing and removing the
secondary electrical service, as well as the right of access to the easement location for the purposes of the easement. (Ord. 2015-01, 1-27-2015)
ARTICLE A. ELECTRIC SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES
9-3A-1: RATES FOR ELECTRIC SERVICE:
The city shall supply electric service to consumers in accordance with the following schedules, except that all schedules shall be subject to adjustment due
to changes in the wholesale power cost from Grand River dam authority and southwestern power administration.
All demand and energy rates set forth in each rate schedule shall be increased by a factor of 1.2 times the increase or decrease in demand and energy
costs made by Grand River dam authority and southwestern power administration to the city and as approved by the city council. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-
2000)
A. Residential Service Rate Schedule:
1. Rates:
Effective
May 1, 2016
Effective
October 1, 2016
First 50 kWh Minimum charge Minimum charge
Next 250 kWh @ $0.11197 $0.11364
Next 700 kWh @ 0.09910 0.10120
Excess @ 0.09358 0.09498
2. Minimum Charge: 5.46 5.54
3. Net Minimum Charge: The total net monthly charge, calculated as above, shall not be less than 5.46 5.54
(Ord. 2016-5, 4-26-2016)
4. Payment: The above rate and minimum apply only in case a bill is paid on or before the twentieth day of the billing. If not so paid, the gross rate,
which is the net rate and minimum, plus ten percent (10%), then applies. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-27-2004)
5. Conditions Of Service:
a. Voltage, phase and frequency of energy supplied under this schedule shall be as specified by the city.
b. Service under this schedule shall be furnished for the sole use of the customer and shall not be resold or submetered.
c. Service shall be supplied through a single meter unless authorized by the city. At the request of the customer, separate meters may be billed as a
separate customer.
d. Welding, X-ray, or other equipment characterized by severe fluctuating demands shall not be served under this schedule.
e. This schedule shall apply to regular service, as distinguished from intermittent or seasonal service.
f. The electric heating rate will be made available to those customers who utilize electricity as the principal energy source for space heating by
means of permanently connected heat pump and/or space heating equipment. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
B. Small Commercial Service Rate Schedule:
1. Availability: This schedule is available for service within the urban area of the community, or from a common low tension network serving such area,
to commercial establishments, rooming houses, multi-family dwellings, or combined commercial and residential use for usage up to three thousand
five hundred (3,500) kWh per month.
2. Rates:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 139/269
Effective
May 1, 2016
Effective
October 1, 2016
First 30 kWh Minimum charge Minimum charge
Next 30 kWh @ $0.13646 $0.13851
Next 940 kWh @ 0.10583 0.10742
Next 1,500 kWh @ 0.09970 0.10120
Excess @ 0.09358 0.09498
3. Minimum Charge: 6.82 6.92
4. Net Minimum Charge: The total net monthly charge, calculated as above, shall not be less than 6.82 6.92
(Ord. 2016-5, 4-26-2016)
5. Payment: The above rate and minimum apply only in case a bill is paid on or before the twentieth day of the billing. If not so paid, the gross rate,
which is the net rate and minimum, plus ten percent (10%), then applies. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-27-2004)
6. Conditions Of Service:
a. Voltage, phase and frequency of energy supplied hereunder shall be as specified by the city.
b. Service under this schedule is furnished for the sole use of the customer, and there shall be no submetering or resale of service, unless otherwise
authorized by the city.
c. Service shall be supplied through a single meter unless otherwise authorized by the city. At the request of the customer, separate meters may be
retained, in which case each meter shall be considered a separate customer. Polyphase service, metered separately, shall be considered a
separate customer.
d. All motor drain devices of one and one-half (11/2) hp capacity or larger must be operated on a nominal voltage of two hundred eight (208) volts or
higher.
e. The maximum size of any single-phase motor shall be ten (10) hp.
f. All polyphase motors of twenty five (25) hp and larger shall be controlled by reduced voltage starters. Reduced voltage starters shall be of the auto
transformer, resistor or part winding type. Request for exceptions to this requirement are to be submitted in writing to the electric department.
Exceptions granted by the city council will be granted in writing.
g. Service shall be rendered under this schedule up to a demand of twenty (20) kW or a usage of three thousand five hundred (3,500) kWh per
month. When a customer's usage reaches this level for any two (2) months during a twelve (12) month period, the city shall install a demand meter
and place the customer on the large commercial rate for a period of twelve (12) successive months. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
C. Large Commercial Service Rate Schedule:
1. Availability: This schedule is available for service to any customer located on the lines of the city for lighting or power.
2. Rates:
Effective
May 1, 2016
Effective
October 1, 2016
Demand charge $7.46 per kW $7.57 per kW
Energy charge:
First 1,000 kWh @ 0.09358 0.09498
Next 5,000 kWh @ 0.08134 0.08256
Excess @ 0.06542 0.06640
(Ord. 2016-5, 4-26-2016)
3. Minimum Bill: The minimum bill for the large commercial service rate schedule is the charge for one thousand (1,000) kWh, which is subject to the
power cost adjustment clause.
4. Billing Demand: The demand shall be the highest fifteen (15) minute kilowatt demand occurring during the month as measured by a suitable meter.
The monthly demand shall not be less than the maximum demand recorded.
5. Minimum Monthly Bill: The minimum monthly bill for the large commercial service rate schedule is the charge for one thousand (1,000) kWh, which is
subject to the power cost adjustment clause. (Ord. 2014-15, 5-27-2014)
6. Power Factor: The customer shall maintain a power factor of not less than forty percent (40%) lagging. The average power factor during the month
used for billing purposes shall be obtained from the measured kilowatt hours and the measured reactive kilowatt-ampere hours taken during the
month. The meter for measurement of reactive kilowatt-ampere hours will be ratcheted to prevent reverse registration. If the average power factor
during the month is less than ninety percent (90%) lagging, the total bill for the month shall be increased one percent (1%) for each one percent (1%)
or major fraction thereof by which the average power factor during the month is less than ninety percent (90%) lagging. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 140/269
7. Payment: The above rate and minimum apply only in case a bill is paid on or before the twentieth day of the billing. If not so paid, the gross rate,
which is the net rate and minimum, plus ten percent (10%), then applies. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-27-2004)
8. Conditions Of Service:
a. Voltage, phase and frequency of service hereunder shall be as specified by the city.
b. More than one class of service, as to character of voltage, phase and frequency, if separately metered, shall not be combined for billing hereunder.
c. Service to each separate location or point of delivery hereunder shall be billed separately.
d. Service under this schedule is for the sole use of the customer, and shall not be resold or submetered.
e. Lighting service incidental to power may be rendered hereunder if such combined lighting and power is served through one point of delivery, and
the customer furnishes all additional equipment necessary for further transportation or regulation of energy for lighting service. Should such service
to incidental single-phase load result in phase unbalance, whereby the average of the separate loads on the 3-phase is less than eighty percent
(80%) of the load of maximum phase, the customer shall correct such phase unbalance to meet the above limitation. Should the customer fail to
correct such phase unbalance, the demand, as determined, shall be increased in due proportion to such phase unbalance, or such single-phase
service shall be rendered separately and billed under the appropriate rate coercing such service.
f. All polyphase motors of twenty five (25) hp and larger shall be controlled by reduced voltage starters. Reduced voltage starters shall be of the auto
transformer, resistor or part winding type. Requests for exceptions to this requirement are to be submitted in writing to the city electric department.
Exceptions granted will be granted in writing.
g. Maximum size of any single-phase motor shall be ten (10) hp.
h. The term of service shall be not less than one year. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
D. Industrial Service Rate Schedule:
1. Availability: This schedule is available for service to any customer located on the lines of the city with a demand greater than five thousand (5,000)
kW minimum per month, or total electric commercial building.
2. Rates:
Effective
May 1, 2016
Effective
October 1, 2016
Demand charge $7.46 per kW $7.57 per kW
Energy charge:
First 150 kWh/kW @ 0.05499 0.05582
Next 200 kWh/kW @ 0.05250 0.05329
Excess @ 0.05124 0.05201
(Ord. 2016-5, 4-26-2016)
3. Billing Demand: The demand shall be the highest fifteen (15) minute kilowatt demand occurring during the month as measured by a suitable meter.
The monthly demand shall not be less than the maximum demand recorded for the preceding eleven (11) months.
4. Transformer Ownership; Not Applicable To This Rate: Where the customer supplies all facilities (other than metering equipment) for utilization of
service at the voltage of the city's distribution system, the above demand and energy charges shall be decreased four percent (4%).
5. Metering Adjustment; Not Applicable To This Rate: The above rate applies to service metered at the voltage of the city's secondary line feeding to
such location. Where service is metered at primary voltage, adjustment for billing shall be made by decreasing demand and energy charges two
percent (2%).
6. Minimum Monthly Bill: The minimum monthly bill for the industrial service rate schedule is the charge for one thousand (1,000) kWh, which is subject
to the power cost adjustment clause. (Ord. 2014-15, 5-27-2014)
7. Power Factor: The customer shall maintain a power factor of not less than ninety percent (90%) lagging. The average power factor during the month
used for billing purposes shall be obtained from the measured kilowatt hours and the measured reactive kilowatt-ampere hours taken during the
month. The meter for measurement of reactive kilowatt-ampere hours will be ratcheted to prevent reverse registration. If the average power factor
during the month is less than ninety percent (90%) lagging, the total bill for the month shall be increased one percent (1%) for each one percent (1%)
or major fraction thereof by which the average power factor during the month is less than ninety percent (90%) lagging. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
8. Payment: The above rate and minimum apply only in case a bill is paid on or before the twentieth day of the billing. If not so paid, the gross rate,
which is the net rate and minimum, plus ten percent (10%), then applies. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-27-2004)
9. Conditions Of Service:
a. Voltage, phase and frequency of service hereunder shall be as specified by the city.
b. More than one class of service, as to character of voltage, phase and frequency, if separately metered, shall not be combined for billing hereunder.
c. Service to each separate location or point of delivery hereunder shall be billed separately.
d. Service under this schedule is the sole use of the customer, and shall not be resold or submetered.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 141/269
e. Lighting service incidental to power may be rendered hereunder if such combined lighting and power is served through one point of delivery, and
the customer furnishes all additional equipment necessary for further transportation or regulation of energy for lighting service. Should such service
to incidental single-phase load result in phase unbalance, whereby the average of the separate loads on the phase is less than eighty percent
(80%) of the load of maximum phase, the customer shall correct such phase unbalance to meet the above limitation. Should the customer fail to
correct such phase unbalance, the demand, as determined, shall be increased in due proportion to such phase unbalance, or such single-phase
service shall be rendered separately and billed under the appropriate rate coercing such service.
f. All polyphase motors of twenty five (25) hp and larger shall be controlled by reduced voltage starters. Reduced voltage starters shall be of the auto
transformer, resistor or part winding type. Requests for exceptions to this requirement are to be submitted in writing to the city. Exceptions granted
by the city will be granted in writing.
g. Maximum size of any single-phase motor shall be ten (10) hp.
h. The term of service shall be not less than one year. (Ord. 2000-06, 3-14-2000)
E. Modification Of Fees: The rates reflected herein under subsections A, B, C, and D of this section, titled "payment", may be modified as necessary by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-27-2004)
9-3A-2: POWER COST ADJUSTMENT CLAUSE:
A. Adjustment Clause: All foregoing electric rate schedules set forth in section 9-3A-1 of this article are based on a base power cost adjustment fee of
$0.023/kWh, which fluctuates monthly based on the fuel cost of generating power by the wholesale electric provider to the city/Skiatook public works
authority. In the event that the power cost adjustment surcharge from a wholesale electric provider exceeds one percent (1%) of the base power cost
adjustment fee in any one month, or exceeds one percent (1%) of the base power cost adjustment fee in any three (3) month period, the electric rate
schedules will be increased by the amount of the increase in the power cost adjustment fee, per kWh, over and above the base power cost adjustment
fee. The electric rate schedules shall be amended effective the billing cycle following the increase in the power cost adjustment surcharge as set forth
in this section without further action by the city council. (Ord. 2016-5, 4-26-2016)
9-3A-2-1: ELECTRIC RATE ADJUSTMENT:
A. Automatic Increase: In the event that a wholesale electric supplier to the city of Skiatook/Skiatook public works authority increases the base wholesale
power rate, the electric rate schedules set forth in section 9-3A-1 of this article shall be increased automatically in the same percentage as the rate
increase by the wholesale electric supplier.
B. Implementation Of Automatic Rate Increase: Any automatic electric rate adjustment authorized by this section shall be implemented in a six (6) month
time period, in increments of one-sixth (1/6) of the total rate increase being effective and implemented each month for six (6) months, thereby
increasing the electric rate schedules accordingly. Such electric rate adjustment implementation shall begin not sooner than ninety (90) days prior to
the effective date of the wholesale power rate increase.
C. Right Of City Council: This section shall not be deemed to impair the right of the city council to establish electric service rates and charges by
ordinance.
D. Notification Of City Council: Upon receiving notice of a wholesale electric rate increase from a wholesale electric supplier, staff of the city of Skiatook
shall notify the city council of the electric rate increase upon receipt of such notice. (Ord. 2016-5, 4-26-2016)
9-3A-3: PRIVATE OUTDOOR LIGHTING SERVICE RATE:
High pressure sodium $8.00 per month
(Ord. 2001-04, 6-26-2001)
9-3A-4: SPECIAL SERVICE:
A. Availability: This service may be available to customers located on or near lines of the city and provides for service for special applications. The rate will
be either small commercial or large commercial as determined by the electric superintendent.
B. Installation Costs: The installation costs shall be calculated on the total labor overhead and material cost including all additional lines, transformers and
miscellaneous equipment required.
C. Overhead Service: Service shall be of the overhead type. Service is for the sole use of the customer, and shall not be resold or submetered. (1991
Code § 18-113)
9-3A-5: PARALLEL GENERATION SERVICE RATE:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 142/269
A. Availability: Electric service, under this schedule, is available to points on the city's existing distribution facilities within the existing service area, to
customers whose total parallel generation facility does not exceed one hundred (100) kilowatts (kW).
B. Applicability:
1. Applicable to residential, small commercial, or large commercial customers who contract for the purchase of capacity and/or energy from the city at
one delivery point and who desire to generate at least a portion of their energy requirements by operating in parallel with the city's system.
Customer's source of parallel generation may include windmills, water wheels, solar generators, geothermal devices, or other renewable resources.
2. This schedule is not applicable to maintenance, backup, interruptible, supplementary, or resale electric service.
C. Character Of Service: Alternating current, sixty (60) hertz, at the voltage and phase of the city's established secondary distribution system at the
location of the customer. The city shall not be required to furnish service, under this schedule, to customers whose 3-phase generator is less than ten
(10) kA in size nor whose single-phase generator is more than fifty (50) kA in size.
D. Net Monthly Bill:
1. The customer shall pay the city for capacity and energy supplied to the customer at the applicable rate for the customer class.
2. The city shall pay the customer for energy supplied the city at the cost of purchased energy per kilowatt hour during the previous month including
fuel cost adjustment.
3. The monthly minimum charge shall be calculated as provided in the tariff applicable to such class of customers, except that if a special transformer
installation is necessary for the benefit of the customer or to protect the quality of service to other customers, such minimum shall not be less than
one dollar ($1.00) per kA of the required transformer capacity. The city will credit the customer's account monthly for energy received from customer.
E. Payment: Monthly bills will be rendered net after deduction for energy received, payable within ten (10) days of the date of the bill, and will become
delinquent thereafter. Five percent (5%) shall be added to the net amount on the date the bill becomes delinquent.
F. Additional Terms And Conditions Of Service:
1. Metering: The city will supply, own, and maintain all necessary meters and associated equipment utilized for measuring capacity and energy
delivered to the customer and energy delivered to the city. In addition, for purposes of monitoring customer generation and load, the city may install
at its expense, load research metering. The customer shall supply, at no expense to the city, a suitable location for meters and associated equipment
used for billing and for load research.
2. Interconnection Facilities:
a. The customer shall furnish, install, operate, and maintain in good working order all facilities beyond the city's metering facilities including such
automatic synchronism, control and protective devices, breakers, relays, locks and seals, as shall be designated by the city as being required for
operation of the generator in parallel with the city's system. Interconnection facilities shall be accessible to city personnel at all times.
b. The customer may be required to reimburse the city for any equipment or facilities required as a result of the installation by the customer of
parallel generation equipment.
c. The customer shall furnish plans and drawings of the generation and interconnecting facilities to the city for the city's approval or disapproval prior
to construction of these facilities. The customer shall notify the city prior to the initial energization and startup testing of the customer owned
generator, and the city shall have the right to conduct and/or witness tests.
3. Limiting Production: The city may require the customer to limit the production of electrical energy from the parallel generator to an amount no greater
than the load at the customer's facility of which the generating facility is a part at certain times and as operating conditions may warrant.
4. Proof As Qualified Facility: The city may require the customer to furnish information that the customer is a "qualified facility" as defined by federal
regulations.
5. Compliance With Technical Codes: The facilities of the customer shall equal or exceed the requirements of the national electrical code, the national
electrical safety code, and any municipal, county, or state codes applicable. The city reserves the right to disconnect facilities if safety or operating
stability warrants such disconnect. (1991 Code § 18-115)
9-3A-6: VIOLATION:
If any person, firm or corporation shall violate the provisions of this article, same shall be deemed to constitute an offense, and, upon conviction thereof,
any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 18-114)
Chapter 4
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
9-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
BOD (BIOLOGICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 143/269
procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
mg/l: Milligrams per liter.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present and includes the domestic waste and industrial sewage in any combination.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated superintendent of the sewer department by the city council.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering. (1991 Code § 18-151)
9-4-2: DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES:
No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer any of the following substances:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or facility (including the aquaculture fish management program), constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of sewage treatment systems.
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or causing the pH of the sewage treatment system to rise above 9.5, or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to processes, structures, equipment and/or personnel of the sewage works.
D. Solid, viscous or liquid substances in quantities or of such size as to cause or be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper products such as dishes, cups, milk
containers, and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders, slops, chemical residues, or bulk solids.
E. Any strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
F. Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes which cause the sewage system to be overloaded.
G. Any substance that may pass through the treatment system without being effectively treated or otherwise reduced to acceptable concentrations by
normal treatment methods such that the sewage treatment system effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge to the receiving waters.
H. Any waste containing rhenium, strontium or tellurium.
I. Any waters or wastes containing substances in excess of the limits established in section 9-4-3 of this chapter. (1991 Code § 18-152)
9-4-3: LIMITATIONS ON DISCHARGE:
No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following substances, materials, waters or wastes in concentrations,
quantities or rates in excess of those set forth herein:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C), or any substance which causes the
temperature of the total sewage lagoon to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit (10°F) or more per hour or a combined total increase of plant
influent temperature to one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F).
B. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oil, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)
(0° and 65°C).
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage shredder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and approval of the sewer superintendent.
D. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits to be established by the superintendent on a case by case
basis in compliance with and after consultation with the appropriate regulatory agencies.
E. Any substance with a BOD or suspended solids concentration in excess of three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l) except that, upon receipt of a
written application and establishment of appropriate charges, the superintendent may, if the sewage works has sufficient unused or uncommitted
capacity, authorize the discharge of wastes containing BOD and/or suspended solids concentrations in excess of three hundred milligrams per liter
(300 mg/l) each.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 144/269
F. Any waters or wastes with total dissolved solids concentrations greater than three thousand milligrams per liter (3,000 mg/l), plus the dissolved solids, in
the city water supply.
G. Any waters or wastes containing excessive discoloration or causing excess discoloration of the effluent, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
H. Any waters, wastes or other substances containing one or more of the following constituents in excess of the concentrations listed:
Average For 30
Consecutive Days
(mg/l)
Maximum For
Any 1 Day
(mg/l)
Antimony 0.01
Arsenic 0.1
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 0.5 1.0
Chromium-hexavalent 1.0
Chromium-total 5.0
Copper 1.0
Cyanide 1.0
Fluoride 1.5
Lead 0.4 0.8
Mercury 0.002
Nickel 1.8 3.6
Phenols 0.1
Silver 0.3 1.0
Vanadium 10.0
Zinc 5.0
I. Limitation on elements or compounds not listed shall be established and/or limitations for elements or components listed will be lowered if necessary to
ensure that the effluent of the wastewater treatment plant and system is in full compliance with legal requirements of county, state or federal regulatory
agencies. (1991 Code § 18-153)
9-4-4: ABATEMENT AND REFUSAL OF SERVICE:
Violation of this chapter is declared to constitute a public nuisance, which may be abated by severance of the offender from the city sewer system. No
building permit or other license of any nature shall be issued by the city to any person, firm or corporation when it appears that the issuance of the same
will result in a violation of this chapter, nor shall such an offender be permitted to use water obtained from the city. (1991 Code § 18-154)
9-4-5: WASTEWATER RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Authority; Rate Determination And Adjustment:
1. Authority: The city of Skiatook and the Skiatook public works authority shall be the sole determining authority for attachment to the wastewater
collection system and may prescribe any additional requirements and inspections as necessary for the health, safety, welfare and proper operation of
the wastewater system.
2. Basis For Rates: Wastewater rates shall be based on the metered water supplied by all sources for each wastewater connection. (Ord. 2008-05, 1-
29-2008)
3. Annual Rate Adjustment: All rates for each category of use will increase by the lesser of the social security administration cost of living adjustment
(COLA) or one and five-tenths percent (1.5%) annually on each subsequent January 1 beginning January 1, 2017, and each January 1 thereafter
until amended or repealed.
B. Inside Wastewater Rates: Wastewater rates and charges shall be as follows for facilities within the corporate limits of the city, effective as of the dates
indicated:
1. Residential Rates (Inside City Limits):
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 145/269
Effective Date
January 1,
2014
January 1,
2015
January 1,
2016
Inside wastewater:
Minimum bill (no consumption) $4.00 $5.25 $6.50
Charge per thousand gallons:
0 - 5,000 gallons 2.15 2.65 3.15
5,001 - 10,000 gallons 2.55 3.05 3.55
10,001 - 25,000 gallons 2.55 3.05 3.55
25,001 - 50,000 gallons 2.55 3.05 3.55
50,001 - 1,000,000 gallons 2.55 3.05 3.55
Over 1,000,000 gallons 2.55 3.05 3.55
Charge is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered use or increment thereof.
2. Commercial Rates (Inside City Limits):
Effective Date
January 1,
2014
January 1,
2015
January 1,
2016
Inside wastewater:
Minimum bill (no consumption) $15.00 $19.00 $23.00
Charge per thousand gallons:
0 - 5,000 gallons 2.25 3.25 4.25
5,001 - 10,000 gallons 2.25 3.25 4.25
10,001 - 25,000 gallons 2.25 3.25 4.25
25,001 - 50,000 gallons 2.25 3.25 4.25
50,001 - 1,000,000 gallons 2.25 3.25 4.25
Over 1,000,000 gallons 2.25 3.25 4.25
Charge is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered use or increment thereof.
3. Multiple Units: Multiple residential dwelling units, manufactured home developments and mobile home parks having singular service connections
shall be calculated based upon the number of residential equivalencies and multiples of the base minimum rate for establishing the base amount as
set forth in subsection B1 of this section.
C. Outside Wastewater Rates: Wastewater rates and charges shall be as follows for facilities outside of the corporate limits of the city, effective as of the
date indicated:
1. Residential Rates (Outside City Limits):
Effective Date
January 1,
2014
January 1,
2015
January 1,
2016
Outside wastewater:
Minimum bill (no consumption) $6.50 $8.50 $11.00
Charge per thousand gallons:
0 - 5,000 gallons 3.90 4.90 5.90
5,001 - 10,000 gallons 4.30 5.30 6.30
10,001 - 25,000 gallons 4.30 5.30 6.30
25,001 - 50,000 gallons 4.30 5.30 6.30
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 146/269
50,001 - 1,000,000 gallons 4.30 5.30 6.30
Over 1,000,000 gallons 4.30 5.30 6.30
Charge is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered use or increment thereof.
2. Commercial Rates (Outside City Limits):
Effective Date
January 1,
2014
January 1,
2015
January 1,
2016
Outside wastewater:
Minimum bill (no consumption) $19.00 $23.00 $27.00
Charge per thousand gallons:
0 - 5,000 gallons 3.90 4.90 5.90
5,001 - 10,000 gallons 3.90 4.90 5.90
10,001 - 25,000 gallons 3.90 4.90 5.90
25,001 - 50,000 gallons 3.90 4.90 5.90
50,001 - 1,000,000 gallons 3.90 4.90 5.90
Over 1,000,000 gallons 3.90 4.90 5.90
Charge is per one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered use or increment thereof.
3. Multiple Units: Multiple residential dwelling units, manufactured home developments and mobile home parks having singular service connections
shall be calculated based upon the number of residential equivalencies and multiples of the base minimum rate for establishing the base amount as
set forth in subsection C1 of this section. (Ord. 2013-21, 10-29-2013)
D. Wastewater Connection Fees: Wastewater system connection fees shall be based upon four inch (4") standard connections as follows:
1. Inside the corporate limits of the city: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
2. Outside the corporate limits of the city: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
3. Oversize connections shall be based upon multiples of the four inch (4") minimum size, i.e., six inch (6") tap equals one and one-half (11/2) tap fee.
(Ord. 2008-05, 1-29-2008)
9-4-6: REQUIRED CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWER; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Unless an exemption is granted in writing by the city engineer or city manager, all lots or tracts of land, whether platted or unplatted within the Skiatook
city limits shall connect to the sanitary sewer, where available and where connection is feasible and reasonably accessible. All connections shall be
subject to the approval of the building inspector and shall be made in accordance with the regulations of the Oklahoma state department of health
and/or department of environmental quality. This requirement shall not apply to septic tank, aerobic systems or other approved sewage disposal
systems already existing and in use as of August 1, 2013, which meet the requirements for such systems by the Oklahoma state department of health
and/or Oklahoma department of environmental quality or other appropriate state agency having jurisdiction.
B. Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible or connection thereto is not feasible due to topography or distance to the sanitary
sewer main from the subject property, and where an exemption has been granted in writing by the city engineer or city manager, but where plans for
the installation of private sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision have been prepared and approved by the Oklahoma state department of
health and/or Oklahoma department of environmental quality, including, but not limited to, provision for septic tank systems or aerobic systems, the
owner or developer shall install sewers in conformity with such plans. (Ord. 2013-14, 8-13-2013)
9-4-7: PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, PORTABLE SANITARY TOILETS:
A. Privies Prohibited; Portable Sanitary Toilets Allowed: No person, firm or corporation shall use or maintain any privy, or any structure designed as a
repository for human excrement, on any lot in the city; except, however, temporary portable sanitary toilets that are serviced and attended to at least
once each week may be allowed on construction sites and certain athletic or other social events; provided, that restroom facilities properly sewered are
not available.
B. Septic Tank Use: In the event there are certain residences within the corporate limits of the city, as of the effective date hereof, being sewered on what
is commonly referred to as a sanitary septic tank, such residences will not immediately be required to lay sewer lines to connect to the city sanitary
sewer system, but no further construction will be allowed in an area within the corporate limits of the city where a septic tank will be used for sewer
purposes. (1991 Code § 9-17)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 147/269
9-4-8: GREASE TRAPS AND GREASE INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES: Those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs and that utilize one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling,
sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing,
barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. Food
service facilities include restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps,
caterers, manufacturing plants, or any other users of the sanitary sewer system as determined by the city of Skiatook building inspector or code official
who discharge applicable waste. A food service facility, as defined herein, does not include a self-contained single-family dwelling.
GREASE: Material composed primarily of fats, oils and grease ("FOG" hereinafter) from animal, vegetable, seed or nut sources. The terms fats, oils
and grease shall be deemed as grease by definition. The term "grease" does not include petroleum based products or waste.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A structure or device designed for the purpose of removing and preventing fats, oils, and greases from entering the sanitary
sewer collection system. These devices are often installed below grade outside of the building which the interceptor serves and are built as a two (2) or
three (3) chamber tank. As defined in the international plumbing code, a grease interceptor is a grease removal device whose rated flow exceeds fifty
(50) gallons per minute and is located outside of the building it services.
GREASE TRAP: A device for separating and retaining greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary
sewer collection and treatment system. Such traps are typically compact under the sink units that are located in or near food preparation areas. As
defined in the international plumbing code, a grease trap is a grease removal device whose rated flow is fifty (50) gallons per minute or less and is
located inside a building.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR: An approved and industry standard system that is specifically designed and manufactured to separate oil from water. The
system shall allow the oil to be collected and removed on a regular basis as to prevent it from being discharged into the wastewater collection system.
Only oil/water separators manufactured for that specific operation will be approved. Product details and specifications shall be required to be provided
to the building inspector or code official to ensure that said oil/water separator meet or exceed the requirements of this section.
USER: Any person, entity or establishment including those located outside the municipal limits of the city of Skiatook who contributes, causes, or
permits the discharge of wastewater into Skiatook's sanitary sewer collection or treatment system, including persons who contribute such wastewater
from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
B. Control Plan For FOG And Food Waste:
1. Prior to the commencement of any new construction, renovation or expansion of food service facilities, the owner/operator shall be required to
submit to the building inspector or code official for approval, a FOG and food waste control plan what will effectively control the discharge of grease
(FOG) and other food based waste into the sanitary sewer collection system.
2. All existing food service facilities shall also be required to submit a FOG and food waste control plan that will effectively control the discharge of
grease (FOG) and other food based waste into the sanitary sewer collection system. Existing food service facilities shall not be exempt from the
requirements of submission of a FOG and food waste control plan for approval by the building inspector or code official.
C. General Criteria:
1. Installation Requirements: All existing or proposed food service facilities within the municipal limits of the city of Skiatook or utilizing the city of
Skiatook's sanitary sewer collection and treatment system shall be required to install, at the user's expense, an approved, properly installed,
operated and maintained grease trap and/or grease interceptor.
2. Sanitary Sewer Flows: Sanitary sewer flowage from toilets, urinals, lavatories, etc., shall not be discharged into a grease trap/grease interceptor.
These flows shall be conveyed separately to the sanitary sewer system.
3. Floor Drains: Only floor drains which collect and discharge or have the potential to collect and discharge grease shall be connected to a grease
trap/grease interceptor.
4. Garbage Grinders/Disposals: Solid food waste products shall be disposed of through customary solid waste/garbage disposal means. Any installed
garbage grinder/garbage disposal unit must be connected to a grease trap/grease interceptor.
5. Dishwashers: Commercial dishwashers must be connected to a grease trap/grease interceptor. Dishwashers discharge soapy arid hot water which
can melt grease and allow it to pass through an undersized grease trap. All grease trap/grease interceptors must be sized properly to allow adequate
detention time to allow wastewater to cool and grease to solidify so that the grease trap/grease interceptor is working properly.
D. Design Criteria:
1. Construction And Installation: Grease traps/grease interceptors shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
requirements and in compliance with the requirements of the city of Skiatook or the Skiatook public works authority, whether by the applicable
building or plumbing code, or otherwise. All grease traps/grease interceptors must be approved in writing by the building inspector/code official prior
to installation. Such approval shall be based upon the demonstrated removal and retention efficiencies of the proposed technology.
2. Access: Access to all grease traps/grease interceptors shall be available at all times, to allow for maintenance and inspection. Access to grease
interceptors shall be provided by two (2) manholes or access panels (1 on each compartment) terminating at finished grade with a cast iron or steel
frame and cover.
3. Load Bearing Capacity: In areas where additional weight loads may exist, such as an area with vehicular traffic or parking, the grease interceptor
must be designed to have adequate load bearing capacity.
E. Grease Trap/Grease Interceptor Maintenance:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 148/269
1. Cleaning/Pumping: The user, at the user's expense, shall maintain all grease traps/grease interceptors to assure proper operation and efficiency.
Maintenance of grease traps/grease interceptors shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and
bottom sludge and solids. This work shall be performed by a qualified and licensed grease removal/disposal service/hauler. Decanting or discharging
of removed waste back into the grease trap/interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed of, is prohibited. This required
maintenance shall also include a thorough inspection of the grease trap/grease interceptor and its components. Any repairs shall be noted and
retained by the user. Repairs shall be at the sole expense of the user.
2. Cleaning/Pumping Frequency: Each grease trap/grease interceptor shall be cleaned out completely and serviced at least once every four (4)
months, or at more frequent intervals, as determined by the building inspector/building code official, in order to prevent grease from entering the
sanitary sewer system.
3. Disposal: All waste removed from each grease trap/grease interceptor must be disposed of at a facility approved to receive and process such grease
as mandated by the appropriate authority, whether local, state or federal. In no way shall the waste matter be returned to any portion of Skiatook's
sanitary sewer system, whether public or private. All grease pumpage/grease removed from each grease trap/grease interceptor must be recorded in
a manifest or log, which confirms pumping, hauling and disposal of waste. The user must obtain and retain a copy of the original manifest log from
the grease removal/disposal service/hauler.
4. Maintenance Logs: A grease trap/grease interceptor cleaning and maintenance log indicating each cleaning/pumping for the previous twenty four
(24) months shall be maintained by each food service facility. The required log shall contain the date and time of service, the amount of grease or
waste cleaned or pumped, the hauling service, disposal site/facility and shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection by the building
inspector/code official. Such maintenance log shall be made available to the building inspector/code official, or his designee, upon request.
5. Submittal Of Records: Each user shall submit all cleaning and maintenance records to the building inspector/code official. The maintenance records
shall include the following information:
a. Facility name, address, contact person, and telephone number.
b. Company name, address, telephone number, and contact name of person responsible for performing the maintenance, cleaning, pumping, or
repair of grease trap/interceptor.
c. Type of maintenance performed.
d. Dates maintenance was performed.
e. Dates of next scheduled maintenance.
f. Copies of manifests/logs.
g. Date and description of any repairs made.
The user shall be required to submit maintenance records to the city of Skiatook on a biannual basis (twice per year). Records shall be submitted
by March 1 and September 1 of each year. The records shall be submitted to:
City Of Skiatook
Attn: Code Enforcement
P.O. Box 399
Skiatook, OK 74070
The city building inspector/code official/sewer treatment facility operator will perform periodic inspections of grease traps/grease interceptors and
shall notify the user of any additional required maintenance or repairs. Upon written notification by the building inspector/code official, the user
shall be required to perform the maintenance and records of said maintenance within fourteen (14) calendar days. Upon inspection by the city
building inspector/code official, the user may be required to install, at his expense, additional controls to provide a complete system which prevents
discharges of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system.
F. Additives: Any biological additive(s) placed into a grease trap/grease interceptor or building sewer discharge line, including, but not limited to, enzymes,
commercially available bacteria, or other additives designed to absorb, purge, consume, treat, or otherwise eliminate fats, oils, and grease shall require
written approval by the building inspector/code official prior to use. The use of such additives shall in no way be considered as a substitution to the
maintenance procedures required herein.
G. Chemical Treatment: Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, acids, or other chemical solvents designed to dissolve or remove grease shall not be
allowed to enter a grease trap/grease interceptor.
H. Enforcement And Fines:
1. Recovery Of Damages: When any discharge of grease from a food service facility causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the
sewage treatment works or plant, or causes any expense, fine, penalty, or damage of whatever character or nature to the sewage collection and
treatment system maintained by the city of Skiatook/Skiatook public works authority, the building inspector/code official shall invoice the owner for
same incurred by the city. If the invoice is not paid, the city manager shall notify the city attorney to take such actions as shall be appropriate to seek
reimbursement, including, but not limited to, legal action.
2. Penalty: A violation of this section is subject to the penalty provisions of sections 1-4-1 and 1-4-2 of this code. In addition, the city of Skiatook may
take any lawful action, including commencing a court proceeding in the municipal or district court in order to compel compliance with the
requirements of this section.
3. Remedies Nonexclusive: The remedies/penalties provided for in this section are not mutually exclusive. The city may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against any person or entity not in compliance with the requirements of this section and in violation hereof. (Ord. 2014-
04, 2-11-2014)
9-4-9: VIOLATION:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 149/269
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 18-155; amd. Ord.
2014-04, 2-11-2014)
Chapter 5
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
GARBAGE: Vegetables or animal refuse accumulating from kitchens, pantries, dining rooms, hotels, restaurants, boarding houses, dwellings, markets,
stores and other establishments.
PRIVATE SCAVENGER: Any person engaged in the removal and disposal of table refuse or animal and vegetable matter, usually known as "garbage",
from hotels, restaurants, cafes, boarding houses, and other places not provided for by the city, or the removal and disposal of ashes and cinders; or the
removal and disposal of manure, swill, or any animal or vegetable refuse and wastes, including decaying animal matter and fish from commission houses
and other places where such decaying animal matter and fish may accumulate.
RUBBISH: Solid and ordinary waste, other than garbage, accumulated by family residents, including glass and broken ware, discarded clothing, trash, tin
cans, bottles, papers; and tree limbs, grass and weed cuttings properly contained or bundled as described herein.
RUBBLE: Shall include dirt, rocks, ashes, debris resulting from construction, reconstruction or repair of buildings and other earthen, wooden or metal
materials, longer, larger and/or heavier than rubbish. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude a person from removing "rubbish", and
"rubble", as herein defined, from his premises at the expense of such person; provided, that such removal is done in a neat and sanitary manner.
TRASH: A. Refuse consisting of wastepaper, broken ware, discarded shoes and clothing, tin cans, bottles, grass cuttings, shrub trimmings, paper boxes
and cartons, and floor sweepings from dwellings, businesses or industrial establishments.
B. The term "trash" does not include manure, debris from construction or repair work, leaves, trees, or tree trimmings, or business or industrial wastes
which, in the judgment of the superintendent of the department in charge of refuse removal or his authorized representative, are likely to cause
damage to the equipment of the city, injury to employees of the city, or are likely, because of the nature, size or weight of the material, to handicap or
overburden the collection of trash and garbage of the city. (1991 Code § 9-1)
9-5-2: OFFICE OF CITY SCAVENGER:
There is hereby created in the city the office of city scavenger, and such officer shall be appointed as are other city appointive officers. The city scavenger
shall at all times be under the direction of the city council. (1991 Code § 9-16)
9-5-3: COLLECTION, REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF GARBAGE:
A. Method Of Collection: The city hereby reserves to itself the exclusive right and privilege of the collection, removal and disposition of all garbage and
trash within the corporate limits of the city, either by contracting with a suitable person for the collection and removal thereof, or by the collection and
removal thereof by the employees of the city, either method to be at the discretion of the city council. The city may also provide for the collection,
removal and disposition of garbage, trash, and refuse, whether commercial and industrial garbage, trash and refuse, or residential garbage, trash, and
refuse, or both, by agreement with the Skiatook public works authority to provide garbage, trash and refuse removal services, whether by the Skiatook
public works authority directly, or by contract between the Skiatook public works authority and a suitable third party vendor, either method to be at the
discretion of the board of trustees of the Skiatook public works authority. (Ord. 2016-01, 1-12-2016)
B. City Authority: The city council shall be empowered to acquire suitable trucks and other equipment for the collection and removal of garbage from within
the corporate limits of the city, and shall have power to enter into contracts with private persons or corporations to sell such garbage and/or to deliver
the same to points within or without the corporate limits of the city. (1991 Code § 9-2)
9-5-4: REFUSE SERVICE CHARGES AND FEES; PAYMENT PROCEDURE:
A. Residential Refuse Service Charges:
1. Rates Per Month:
Effective Date
July 1, 2013 July 1, 2014 July 1, 2015 July 1, 2016
Within the city limits $11.50 $12.50 $13.50 $13.85
Nonresident customers (which city at its option serves) 15.50 16.50 17.50 17.85
Thereafter, the service charges/fees for all residential refuse service customers, whether residing within or without the city limits of the city of
Skiatook, shall be increased by thirty five cents ($0.35), July 1 in each year beginning on July 1, 2017. (Ord. 2013-09, 6-11-2013)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 150/269
2. Senior Citizen Discount: There shall be a discount of two dollars ($2.00) per month for persons over the age of sixty five (65).
3. Compliance With Rules And Regulations: Residential refuse service shall be provided by the city in compliance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the public works department.
4. Time For Placement Of Garbage For Pick Up: Residential refuse shall be placed at the appropriate approved pick up location prior to six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on the day of scheduled service.
5. Separate Dwelling Units; Multi-Family Dwelling Units:
a. Each dwelling unit shall be charged separately, and "dwelling unit", as used in this subsection, shall mean any structure, edifice, module,
apartment or living area in which there resides or is intended to reside any person or persons, and shall include apartments, mobile home parks,
trailers, residences, churches and any other places where persons may reside.
b. With respect to duplexes, triplexes, apartments and other multi-family dwelling units, each living unit contained therein shall constitute a separate
dwelling unit.
c. Where dumpsters are approved for and provided to any multi-family dwelling development/complex or mobile home park, the service charge/fee
for such shall be the same as that for commercial/industrial refuse service dumpsters. (Ord. 2009-10, 12-29-2009)
6. Appropriation Of Revenues: Eight percent (8.00%) of the residential refuse service charges and fees collected shall be transferred to the city of
Skiatook for use for property/nuisance abatement purposes within the community development budget for each fiscal year. (Ord. 2013-09, 6-11-
2013)
B. Commercial/Industrial Refuse Service Charges:
1. Rates Established By Resolution: Service charges/fees for commercial/industrial refuse services where provided by the city, both within and outside
of the city limits, shall be established by resolution of the city council. Any established schedule of charges and/or fees may be amended by the city
council, from time to time, at their discretion, and upon their sole determination that a change in such schedule of charges and/or fees, in whole or
part, would be of benefit to the operations of the city. (Ord. 97-08, 10-14-1997)
a. City May Contract For Commercial/Industrial Refuse Service: The city, or the Skiatook public works authority, if the Skiatook public works authority
is providing garbage and refuse collection services by agreement with the city, may contract with a suitable and capable person, corporation or
other entity for the collection, removal and disposal of commercial and industrial garbage, trash and refuse within the corporate limits of the city.
Any contract entered into by the city or Skiatook public works authority for commercial/industrial refuse service shall set forth the monthly service
fees/refuse collection charges for each customer class as set by ordinance or resolution, the types of garbage containers to be furnished for
customer use by the refuse service provider as required by ordinance, the amount of late payment fees, the frequency of the collection of garbage,
trash and refuse, as well as customer billing procedures and procedures to resolve customer complaints and service issues. The city or the
Skiatook public works authority may either bill commercial/industrial refuse service customers directly, or a third party commercial/industrial refuse
service provider under contract with the city or the Skiatook public works authority may bill customers directly, if so agreed between the city or the
Skiatook public works authority and the refuse service provider pursuant to contract. Any third party refuse service provider shall be properly
licensed and shall carry and maintain adequate commercial general liability insurance and workers' compensation insurance, as approved by the
city manager, naming the city and/or Skiatook public works authority as an additional insured. Any contract entered into by either the city or the
Skiatook public works authority with a third party commercial/industrial refuse service provider that bills customers directly shall make provision for
payment to the city of fifteen percent (15%) of the total refuse charges and fees billed for economic development and community development
purposes, as mandated by resolution 2016-01 of the city of Skiatook and the Skiatook public works authority. Such fifteen percent (15%) of the
total refuse charges and fees billed for economic development and community development purposes shall be payable to the city monthly, and the
third party commercial/industrial refuse provider shall provide a written calculation of the fee paid, together with the total amount billed to
commercial/industrial refuse collection fees and charges for that month. In addition, any third party commercial/industrial refuse provider shall be
required to provide a yearly audit prepared by a certified public accountant evidencing the total amount billed for each fiscal year (July 1 - June 30
of following year) and the total amount paid to the city for that fiscal year. (Ord. 2016-01, 1-12-2016)
2. Preparation Of Dry Refuse: When no dumpster is provided, where the volume of dry refuse generated by the commercial/industrial customer is less
than three-fourths (3/4) cubic yard per day, refuse shall be placed in customer provided suitable tight containers having lids and no larger than thirty
(30) gallons in size. Steel or metal barrels shall not be considered as suitable containers for placement of commercial/industrial refuse to be serviced
by the city.
3. Term Defined: As used in this subsection, "commercial/industrial" shall mean any grocery store, retail store, wholesale establishment, nursing home,
school, restaurant, cafeteria, automobile dealer, county and federal government building/office, motel, bar, lounge, service station, lumberyard,
private utility company, doctor/dentist office, clothing store, furniture store, manufacturer, any location where food is sold for a charge, and any other
business or establishment which is normally and commonly generally classified as a business or industrial use of property and not defined as a
"dwelling unit" in subsection A of this section.
4. Additional Charge For Additional Pick Up: Commercial/industrial customers requiring a frequency of service greater than twice a week shall pay an
additional service charge/fee per extra pick up required. (Ord. 97-08, 10-14-1997)
5. Dumpsters:
a. All dumpsters or polycart trash containers shall be furnished by the city, the Skiatook public works authority or a third party commercial/industrial
refuse service provider under contract with the city or the Skiatook public works authority. Commercial/industrial customers shall be provided
dumpsters or polycart trash containers of adequate size, as determined by the city, the Skiatook public works authority, or its/their third party refuse
service provider, for twice a week service on dry refuse. Resizing and frequency of service shall be determined by the city, the Skiatook public
works authority or third party commercial/industrial refuse service provider under contract with the city or Skiatook public works authority, according
to usage.
Commercial/industrial customers where food or wet refuse is generated shall be serviced daily due to health considerations.
b. The city, the Skiatook public works authority, or a third party commercial/industrial refuse service provider under contract with the city or the
Skiatook public works authority shall be responsible for, and perform, all maintenance on provided dumpsters and polycart trash containers. No
dumpster provided by the city, the Skiatook public works authority or a third party commercial/industrial refuse service provider under contract with
the city or the Skiatook public works authority is to be moved by the customer from the location where set by the city's sanitation department, the
Skiatook public works authority, or a refuse service provider under contract with either the city or the Skiatook public works authority.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 151/269
c. Dumpsters and polycart trash containers provided by the city, the Skiatook public works authority, or a commercial/industrial refuse service
provider under contract are, when provided, and shall remain, the property of the city, the Skiatook public works authority, or such provider of
refuse service, to be used only for their intended purpose at the location where placed by the city, the Skiatook public works authority, or a
commercial/industrial service provider under contract with either the city or the Skiatook public works authority. (Ord. 2016-01, 1-12-2016)
C. Responsibility For Charges; Prohibitions:
1. The person, firm or corporation responsible for payment of other utility service charges for any place or establishment shall be billed and be
responsible for payment of all refuse service charges/fees to the premises whether such service be for residential or commercial/industrial trash
service.
2. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying a building, house, structure, apartment, dwelling unit or any place of
business as a separate unit to utilize the garbage containers, cans or receptacles of another owner, occupant, tenant, lessee for the disposal of his
garbage or refuse for the purpose of avoiding payment of fees levied by this chapter; and it shall not be a defense for any owner, occupant, tenant or
lessee to refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter on the grounds he or she uses a garbage disposal. (1991 Code § 9-20)
D. Billing; Delinquency In Payment: The billing rate and minimum apply only in case a bill is paid on or before the twentieth day of the billing. If not so paid,
the gross rate, which is the net rate and minimum, plus ten percent (10%), then applies. This fee may be modified as necessary by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 2004-06, 7-27-2004)
9-5-5: USE OF SERVICE COMPULSORY:
To assist in maintaining the general sanitation and health of the city, it shall be the duty of every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of
any premises located on a regularly established garbage route to notify the city clerk at the beginning of such occupancy and request, accept and use the
garbage pick up collection service, whether performed by a private licensed scavenger or by the city or the Skiatook public works authority through their
employees and agents, or by a third party refuse service provider under contract with the city or Skiatook public works authority, and by such request,
and/or accepted use, the applicant shall grant to the city or the Skiatook public works authority, their employees and agents and any refuse service
provider under contract with the city or the Skiatook public works authority, a license to come upon the premises for the purpose of removal of garbage and
trash; provided, however, that the failure of any owner, rental agent, or occupant of such premises to make such request shall not prevent nor in any way
impair or impede the city or the Skiatook public works authority from adding the address of such premises to the proper garbage collection records and
providing such service and otherwise enforcing, by appropriate action, the regulatory measures herein prescribed and causing the fee or charge thereof to
be paid. (Ord. 2016-01, 1-12-2016)
9-5-6: GARBAGE CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Location:
1. Garbage and trash containers shall be located at a single place on each premises, which shall be easily accessible to the street or alley from which
the collections are made. Containers located inside of buildings must be accessible to collectors. The city reserves the right to refuse to collect
garbage and trash from containers which are not easily accessible, and do not meet the requirements of this chapter.
2. Garbage and trash containers shall not be located directly under downspouts or eaves where they will be deluged with water during storms. (1991
Code § 9-6)
B. Container Specifications:
1. The standard refuse container required by this chapter shall be a receptacle of not more than thirty (30) gallons' or less than ten (10) gallons'
capacity of impervious material and sturdy construction with a tightfitting cover equipped with at least two (2) handles properly placed to facilitate
handling, and shall be subject to the approval of the city council.
2. If one container is not sufficient to hold the quantity of garbage and trash accumulated between collections, a sufficient number of containers shall be
provided. (1991 Code § 9-7)
9-5-7: FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION:
Garbage and trash shall be collected from each residence, business and school at least once weekly. (1991 Code § 9-8; amd. 2011 Code)
9-5-8: VEHICLES HAULING GARBAGE, CONSTRUCTION:
All vehicles used in collection, removal or disposal of garbage and trash shall be so constructed as to prevent such waste matter from spilling, blowing or
falling off while being transported in such vehicles, shall at all times be subject to inspection by any person duly authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter; and, if found to be defective or unsatisfactory for such service, shall not be used therefor until such defect is rectified and the use of the vehicle
approved by such official. (1991 Code § 9-10)
9-5-9: GARBAGE AND REFUSE ACCUMULATIONS:
A. Garbage And Refuse: No person shall deposit or place any garbage, trash, rubbish or rubble in any alley, street, or other public place within the city, nor
shall any owner, occupant, or other person having control of any building, private way, yard, or other private premises within the corporate limits of the
city allow or permit any accumulation of old newspapers, rags, broken boxes, weeds, grass or other inflammable rubbish or waste to be or remain in or
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 152/269
upon such building, private way, or private premises, or in any cellar, basement, areaway, or other place connected therewith or adjacent thereto,
unless the same shall be enclosed in suitable containers.
B. Water, Other Putrid Substances: No person shall be allowed to permit water or other putrid substances, whether animal or vegetable, to so accumulate
as to cause an offensive odor to be emitted therefrom or to cause a condition dangerous to the health of any person. (1991 Code § 9-4)
9-5-10: BURNING OF TRASH AND REFUSE:
No person shall start or maintain any fire or cause any fire to be started or maintained outside of a building and inside the corporate limits of the city for the
purpose of burning any garbage or trash, refuse, wastepaper, weeds, grass, hay, straw or other inflammable material or rubbish of any description, except
as may be approved by the city council by resolution, and special dispensation allowing only certain commercial establishments authority to install and
operate approved trash burners or incinerators and satisfy the city council that the operation of such equipment would create no hazard, air pollution or
health problem. (1991 Code § 9-5)
9-5-11: UNCOLLECTED GARBAGE AND TRASH DECLARED NUISANCE:
Fermenting, putrefying or odoriferous garbage in containers uncollected or dumped in the open due to failure to provide adequate containers or pay the
garbage service fee as provided herein, or to improper type or placing or maintenance of containers, shall be declared a nuisance. (1991 Code § 9-9)
9-5-12: REMOVAL OF GARBAGE FROM CONTAINERS OR PUBLIC DUMPING GROUNDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a city refuse collector or a private scavenger, appointed by the city, to remove, displace, uncover or otherwise
disturb any refuse container or the contents thereof; to remove garbage, trash, rubbish or rubble, or to scavenge from or upon any dumping ground,
burying ground, or any place where trash is disposed of within the city. (1991 Code § 9-11)
9-5-13: VIOLATION:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1991 Code § 9-22)
9-5-14: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF DUMPSTERS AND TRASH CONTAINERS PROHIBITED:
A. Unauthorized Use Prohibited: No person shall place garbage, trash, rubbish, or rubble in or about dumpsters or trash containers belonging to another
person or entity or for which other persons or entities are paying the associated fees and charges for refuse service and the lawful use of such
dumpsters and trash containers, without the authorization of the owner of the dumpster or trash container or the person or entity responsible for paying
the associated fees and charges for refuse service.
B. Penalty Upon Violation: Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code. (Ord. 2014-18, 9-9-2014)
Title 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS
10-1-1: TECHNICAL CODES ADOPTED; REVISIONS:
A. Adoption: Those certain documents, copies of which are on file in the office of the building inspector of the city, being marked and designated as:
The 2015 edition of the international residential code as published by the International Code Council, as adopted, amended and modified by the
Oklahoma uniform building code commission as of November 1, 2016; the 2014 edition of the national electrical code as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, and the 2015 editions of the international building code, international fuel gas code, international plumbing code, international
mechanical code, international existing building code and international fire code1, as published by the International Code Council, all as adopted,
amended and modified by the Oklahoma uniform building code commission as of November 1, 2015, as the statewide minimum codes,
be and hereby are adopted as the building code of the city for regulating and governing the construction, conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for occupancy and use; and the
demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said technical and building codes referenced herein and on file in the office of the building
inspector, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof by reference as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed or otherwise referred to. (Ord. 2016-11, 10-25-2016)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 153/269
B. Revisions: The following sections of the adopted international residential code are hereby revised and adopted as follows:
Adoption Of Table R301.2(1). Table R301.2(1) entitled "Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria", as set forth below, is hereby amended and adopted
as set forth below, and inserted into the adopted international residential code:
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
Ground Snow Load: 10 psf
Wind Design - Speed (mph): 90/40
Wind Design - Topographic Effects: No
Seismic Design Category: A
Subject To Damage From - Weathering: Moderate
Subject To Damage From - Frost Line Depth: 18"
Subject To Damage From - Termite: Moderate
Winter Design Temp: 13°F
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: No
Flood Hazards: Date of entry into national flood insurance program: 05-12-1987
Flood Hazards: Dates of flood insurance studies: 04-02-2008 & 10-16-2012
Flood Hazards: Panel numbers: 105, 1157 & 1159
Air Freezing Index: 1500 or less
Mean Annual Temp: 60.3°F
Revision Of Sections R101.1 And P2603.6.1. The following sections of the adopted international residential code, are hereby revised and made a part
of said code:
Section R101.1 - Insert: "City of Skiatook, Oklahoma"
Section P2603.6.1 - Insert: 6" and 6"
(Ord. 2013-13, 8-13-2013; amd. Ord. 2013-18, 9-10-2013)
10-1-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
A. Required: A building permit issued by the city of Skiatook must be obtained prior to commencing a construction project, in compliance with the technical
building codes adopted by the city of Skiatook, whether a new construction project, remodeling project or otherwise.
B. Duration; Residential: A building permit for a residential construction project shall be effective for nine (9) months after the date of issuance and shall
lapse and terminate if the project is not completed nine (9) months from the date of issuance. A building permit may be extended for one additional
three (3) month period at the discretion of the building inspector/code official upon application by the permit holder and submission of satisfactory
evidence that work on the residential project is progressing to completion, and that the project will be completed within the three (3) month extension.
The city council may grant additional three (3) month building permit extensions upon a showing by the permit holder that an extension is necessary
and good cause exists for such extension.
C. Duration; Commercial, Industrial Or Institutional: A building permit issued for a commercial, industrial or institutional construction project shall be
effective for eighteen (18) months after work is commenced on the project. Work must commence within six (6) months after issuance of the building
permit or the permit shall lapse and terminate, and a new building permit must be applied for and obtained prior to commencing work on a project. A
building permit may be extended for one additional six (6) month period at the discretion of the building inspector/code official upon application by the
permit holder and submission of satisfactory evidence that work on the project is progressing to completion, and that the project will be completed
within that extension period. The city council may grant additional three (3) month building permit extensions upon a showing by the permit holder that
an extension is necessary and good cause exists for such extension.
D. Fees: A building permit extension fee is hereby established in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be due at the time of any building permit
extension issued. No building permit extension shall be issued unless the required fee has been paid.
E. Lapses And Terminations: In the event that a building permit lapses and terminates and no application is made for a building permit extension by the
permit holder within thirty (30) days of notification of such termination by the building inspector/code official, then the city may order that the
construction utilities, including, but not limited to, electric service, water or sanitary sewer to the project furnished by the city of Skiatook or the Skiatook
public works authority be terminated and no utilities shall be furnished to the project until a building permit extension is obtained. (Ord. 2014-06, 2-25-
2015)
10-1-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 154/269
A. Required: A new building, with the exception of one-unit and two-unit residential dwellings, shall not be occupied nor shall a change in the use of a
building or a part of a building or lot, parcel or tract of land be made until after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy therefor.
B. Issuance: The certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the community development department only after satisfactory evidence of the applicant's
compliance with all applicable code provisions. (Ord. 99-27, 11-9-1999; amd. Ord. 2014-06, 2-25-2015)
Chapter 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODE; EXPLOSIVES REGULATED
ARTICLE A. FIRE PREVENTION CODE AND REGULATIONS
10-2A-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
See subsection 10-1-1A of this title for adoption of the international fire prevention code. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord. 2007-01, 5-29-2007)
10-2A-2: ENFORCEMENT BY FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the fire department of the city, under the supervision of the fire chief of the fire department. The chief of the
fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as may from time to time be necessary. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2A-3: MODIFICATIONS:
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the codes hereby adopted in his own discretion or upon application in
writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, where there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the letter of the code; provided,
that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or
allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department; and for applications requesting
change, a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2A-4: APPEALS:
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of
the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of said code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (Ord. 99-05, 3-
30-1999)
10-2A-5: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES; PERMITS:
The chief of the fire department and two (2) persons appointed by the mayor with approval of the city council shall act as a committee to determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to
those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The fire chief shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to
interested persons. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2A-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Violations; Penalty; Remedial Action:
1. Any person who violates any of the provisions of the fire prevention code hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally for every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999;
amd. 2011 Code)
2. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each
ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Removal Of Prohibited Conditions: The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord.
99-05, 3-30-1999)
ARTICLE B. EXPLOSIVES
10-2B-1: EXPLOSIVES DEFINED:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 155/269
The term "explosive" or "explosives", whenever used in this article, shall be held to mean and include any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that
is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion, that contains any oxidizing and combustible units, or other ingredients, in such
proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture
which may cause a sudden generation of highly heated gases so that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on
contiguous objects or of destroying life and limb. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-2: CLASSIFICATION OF EXPLOSIVES:
Classification of explosives shall be as follows:
A. Class 1: Class 1 explosives shall be liquid nitroglycerin; high explosives containing over sixty percent (60%) of nitroglycerin (except gelatin dynamite);
high explosives having an unsatisfactory absorbent or that permit leakage of nitroglycerin under any conditions liable to exist during transportation or
storage; a quantity greater than ten (10) pounds in one exterior package of nitro-cellulose in a dry and uncompressed condition, and fulminate of
mercury in bulk in a dry condition, and fulminate of all other metals in any condition, except as a component of manufactured articles not hereinafter
forbidden; or explosives containing an ammonium salt and chlorate.
B. Class 2: Class 2 explosives are black powder, high explosive (except as described in class 1), dynamite, blasting caps and electric blasting caps,
smokeless powder for small arms, wet fulminate of mercury and detonating fuses.
C. Class 3: Class 3 explosives are small arms ammunition (blank, ball or shot), primers, fuses (except as described in class 2), safety fuses, safety squibs,
and any other explosives not enumerated in class 1 and class 2 and declared by the fire chief or his designee to be relatively safe. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-
1999)
10-2B-3: MANUFACTURE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to manufacture any explosive within the corporate limits of the city, except that any class 2
and class 3 explosives may be manufactured in laboratories of the public school system, and similar institutions for the purpose of investigation and
instruction; and provided that, hand loading of black powder weapons and small arms ammunition for private use shall be allowed. The mixture of two (2)
or more explosives for immediate use for blasting shall not be considered a violation of this article. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-4: CLASS 1 EXPLOSIVES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to have, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, transport or have in his possession in
the city, any class 1 explosive. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-5: STORAGE OR KEEPING OF EXPLOSIVES:
A. Storage Prohibited In Certain Places: Under no circumstances shall any person, association, firm or corporation keep or store any explosives on any
premises which are used and occupied as a school, theater, church, or other place of public assembly; and further, no person shall keep or store any
class 2 explosives at any location, except in a properly authorized magazine. The type and location of storage magazines must be approved by the fire
chief or his designee of the city. The amount of class 2 explosives stored in any one magazine shall be limited to fifty (50) pounds.
B. Certain Explosives Prohibited; Gunpowder Allowed: It is unlawful for any person to store or keep within the city any nitroglycerin, dynamite, gunpowder,
or any other highly explosive material or substance, except that gunpowder may be kept in quantities not to exceed five (5) pounds where it is to be
securely kept. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-6: MAGAZINES; RULES AND REGULATIONS; CLASS 2 EXPLOSIVES:
A. Explosive magazines shall be made of fireproof materials and shall be conspicuously marked "magazine explosives".
B. Each magazine shall be kept locked during the night, and at all times when the room in which it is kept is not occupied by safe and trustworthy persons;
and all magazines must be kept clean and free from grit, paper, rubbish, and empty packages.
C. It is unlawful to place, keep or store any blasting caps or detonators of any kind in the same magazine with other explosives.
D. Packages of explosives in a magazine must be neatly piled in such a way that all of them may be easily examined, and packages of high explosives
must always be placed right side up.
E. An accurate inventory or log shall be kept showing the quantity of explosives stored, date of acquisition, date of removal and purpose of removal, which
shall at all times be subject to the inspection of the fire chief or his designee of the city, and when any kind of explosive is removed from the magazine,
the oldest of that particular kind must always be taken, and it shall be the duty of the magazine keeper to see that is done.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 156/269
F. No smoking, matches, firearms, or other things which might discharge or cause the discharge of explosives in the city shall be permitted within one
hundred feet (100') of any magazine. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-7: CAPPING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to cap a cartridge within a radius of fifty feet (50') of a magazine, or in any case to cap more
cartridges than necessary for immediate use. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-8: DETERIORATED EXPLOSIVES:
If any explosive is contained in a magazine so as to be in a dangerous condition, then the magazine keeper must immediately remedy the cause; or
should the fire chief or his designee receive a report of deteriorated or leaking explosives, the fire chief or his designee must cause it to be removed
outside the corporate limits of the city, and disposed of as he may deem fit, at the expense of the magazine keeper. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-9: TRANSPORTATION OF EXPLOSIVES:
A. It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to transport or carry any explosives within the corporate limits of the city, in or upon any
public conveyance.
B. It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to place or carry or cause to be placed or carried, in any vehicle, a container containing
class 2 explosives, and exploders, detonators, blasting caps or other similar explosive material.
C. It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation, in the transportation of class 2 explosives, to stop such conveyance in any populated area
within the city limits, except pursuant to a permit secured as set out herein. Every vehicle, while carrying class 2 explosives, shall display upon an erect
pole at the front end of such vehicle and at such height that it shall be visible from all directions, a red flag with the word "Danger" printed, stamped or
sewed thereon in white letters at least eight inches (8") in height, or in lieu of such flag the word "Explosives" must be painted on, or attached to the
rear end and each side of such vehicle in letters at least eight inches (8") in height. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-10: DRIVING REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation, in charge of a vehicle containing class 2 explosives, to smoke in, upon or near such vehicle,
to drive, load or unload the vehicle while intoxicated, or to load or unload such vehicle in a careless or reckless manner. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-11: DISCHARGE IN CITY:
A. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to use or discharge any class 2 explosives within the corporate limits of
the city, except in connection with blasting operations or demolitions by proper permit or where authorized by ordinance.
B. Liability Insurance: No person, association, firm or corporation shall blast or carry on any blasting operations without first having obtained permission
from the inspections department of the city. The applicant for such permit must file a certificate of blasting liability insurance coverage in an amount of
not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or a greater amount as deemed adequate in each case, as determined by the inspections department,
to become available for the payment of any real and actual damages or injury to persons or property arising from the blasting or from the injury to
persons or property arising from the blasting or from the neglect of the person blasting or his agents or employees, the amount of the insurance not
being a limit to the liability of the person blasting.
C. Plan And Preblasting Survey: In applying for a permit, the person, association, firm or corporation blasting must present a plan showing the location,
expected time of blasting, size of charge, type of explosive and any other information requested or pertaining to the blasting operation, including, but
not limited to, a preblasting survey of dwellings, structures, pipelines, transmission lines, utility service lines and other information. The preblasting
survey shall determine the condition of the structures in terms of resistance to vibrations of structural and nonstructural elements, and document any
preblasting damage, weakness, and other physical factors that could reasonably be expected to be affected by the blasting. The survey shall be
prepared and signed by the person or persons who conducted the survey and shall specify the recommended weights of individual charges that would
prevent damage to the structures examined in the area and state, if applicable, the effects repeated blasting will have on structural fatigue. Based upon
this survey, the inspections department may require the permittee or operator to prevent damage by measures such as reinforcing the structures
(provided consent of the owner is received), redesign of the blasting plan, or prohibition of blasting in the vicinity of the structure. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-
1999)
10-2B-12: REGULATING PERMITTED BLASTS:
A. Blanketing Of Area: All blasting by class 2 explosives shall be blanketed with mats, wire mesh, dirt or other material to prohibit any debris or material
from being discharged into the air in excess of six feet (6').
B. Supervision: All class 2 explosives shall be transported, handled, stored and used under the direction and supervision of a person of proven experience
and ability in blasting operations or experienced and able in the discharge of explosives.
C. Notice To Persons Near Blasting Area; Inspection After Blasting:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 157/269
1. All discharges of class 2 explosives or blasting operations shall be prohibited within a minimum of three hundred feet (300') of structures, overhead
power lines, communication lines, or utilities service lines, or within a greater distance as may be deemed necessary by the inspections department,
without first giving written notice to the owners, operators, or occupants thereof. The blasting areas shall be marked with signs warning of the
blasting and stating that precautions should be taken with electrical equipment and radio transmitters when within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
blast site, and a warning signal or statement shall be sounded prior to any blasting.
2. After blasting, the areas shall be thoroughly inspected by the person blasting and an all clear signal or announcement sounded prior to permitting
anyone to enter the blasting site area.
D. Blasting Requirements And Restrictions:
1. The blasting site and areas within three hundred feet (300') thereof where class 2 explosive blasting, loading and preparation for blasting is going on
shall be kept free of any and all equipment and any and all persons not essential to such loading or preparation for blasting.
2. All tamping is to be accomplished by the use of a wooded stock or device having no metal parts, and there shall be a separation of at least fifty feet
(50') between a loaded hole and any drilling operations in preparation of additional blasts.
3. All loaded holes shall be fired on the same shift that they are loaded, and the person in charge of blasting shall make sure all unexploded charges
shall have been removed or detonated pursuant to a permit.
4. The insertion of a drill, pick or bar in an unexploded hole shall not be permitted.
E. Record Of Blasts; Information Required: A record of each blast shall be made and retained and shall be available for inspection by the inspections
department and the public, upon request. The record shall contain the following data:
1. Name of permittee, operator, or other person conducting the blast;
2. Location, date, and time of blast;
3. Name of blaster in charge;
4. Weather conditions;
5. Type of material blasted;
6. Number of holes, burden, and spacing;
7. Diameter and depth of hole;
8. Types of explosives used;
9. Total weight of explosives used;
10. Maximum weight of explosives per delay period of eight (8) milliseconds or less;
11. Maximum number of holes per delay period of eight (8) milliseconds or less;
12. Method of firing and type of circuit;
13. Type and height or length of stemming;
14. If mats or other protections were used; and
15. Type of delay electric blasting caps used, and delay periods used. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-13: FEES:
In applying for a permit to discharge class 2 explosives in the city, the person, association, firm or corporation blasting shall pay to the city clerk the sum of
twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day of blasting. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
10-2B-14: NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION REGULATIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically provided for herein, the manufacture, storage, placement, transportation, capping, or blasting of class 2 or class 3 explosives,
as defined herein, shall at all times be in compliance with the most current regulations pertaining to explosives of the National Fire Protection Association.
(Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999)
10-2B-15: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violations of any of the requirements imposed by this article are hereby declared a misdemeanor, and subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code. (Ord. 99-05, 3-30-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING REGULATIONS
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 158/269
10-3-1: EXTENT OF JURISDICTION:
The provisions of the plumbing code, as adopted in subsection 10-1-1A of this title, shall apply to all structures and premises located within the city, and to
all structures and premises and persons, firms and corporations outside the limits of the city if the same is connected or to be connected, directly or
indirectly, to any sewer emptying, directly or indirectly, into the sewer system or to the water system of city. (1991 Code § 4-39)
10-3-2: PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
The duties of the plumbing inspector shall be performed by the plumbing and electrical inspector, which office is created in section 10-5-2 of this title.
(1991 Code § 4-47; amd. 2011 Code)
10-3-3: PLUMBING CONTRACTORS, JOURNEYMEN AND APPRENTICES:
A. Registration Required: No plumbing contractor, journeyman plumber, or apprentice shall be issued a permit to do plumbing work within the city nor shall
any such person perform plumbing work until and unless such person is registered as provided herein. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a
misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 4-16)
B. Fees: Fees shall be charged on an annual basis for registration and renewal of registration as the city council may, from time to time, prescribe by
resolution. (1991 Code § 4-20)
C. Expiration And Renewal Of Registration: All registrations and renewals shall expire on June 30 of each year. The fee for the initial registration shall be
reduced by fifty percent (50%) when the registration encompasses a period of six (6) months or less. (1991 Code § 4-21)
10-3-4: CONNECTION TO WATER AND SEWER LINES:
No connection shall be made to the water or sewer lines of the city except when all plumbing to which such lines are connected has been installed as
provided by this chapter and the plumbing code; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent any owner of property subject to this
chapter and the plumbing code from performing his or her own plumbing work on property owned and occupied by such person as a residence, but in such
case, the work performed shall be in conformity with the standards of this chapter and the plumbing code. (1991 Code § 4-23)
10-3-5: PERFORMING PLUMBING WORK:
A. Permit Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to proceed with any plumbing work connected or to be connected with any pipe or pipes in the
city or to any private plumbing or any sewer system of the city until a permit for such work has been obtained from the plumbing inspector. No permit
shall be required for the making of minor repairs unless a portion or a section of the plumbing or drain line is cut, removed or replaced.
2. Applicants for the permit described herein shall, prior to proceeding with any work requiring such permit, call the office of the plumbing inspector and
give the name of the plumbing contractor who is to do such work and the address where the work is to be done. The contractor shall be furnished
one copy of the permit. (1991 Code § 4-25)
B. Submission Of Plans:
1. The plumbing inspector may require the submission and approval of plans and specifications in duplicate showing the nature and extent of the
proposed work before a permit is issued. If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make any change from the approved plans and
specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted and, if approved, a supplementary permit
shall be issued to cover the change after the same conditions required to secure the original permit have been satisfied.
2. Plans and specifications, when required by the inspector, shall include a plane view and a riser diagram showing the work and shall show the
direction of flow, pipe size, grade of horizontal piping, elevations, drainage fixture unit loading of both stacks, drains or drain waster and vent, the
supply fixture unit load for water system and branch supplies which serve more than one plumbing fixture, appliance or hose outlet. Symbols used
thereon shall be in accordance with standard engineering practice.
3. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the issuance of a permit for the installation of part of a plumbing system before the entire
plans and specifications of the system have been submitted or approved, if adequate information and detailed statements have been presented for
the same and have been found to comply with the plumbing code. (1991 Code § 4-26)
C. Inspection: It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation doing any plumbing work and who has obtained a plumbing permit to report the same
for rough-in inspection as soon as such work is ready for inspection, and when the work is ready for final inspection. (1991 Code § 4-29)
D. Alteration After Inspection: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter or change any pipe or fixture or to remove any material or
fixture after inspection has been made without first obtaining a permit from the plumbing inspector to do so, and the plumbing inspector shall then
reinspect all work altered or changed, and the same fee shall be charged as hereinabove provided for original inspections. (1991 Code § 4-33)
10-3-6: DEFECTIVE PLUMBING:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 159/269
Whenever the plumbing inspector has reason to believe that defective or unsafe plumbing or fittings exist in or upon any building or premises, or if he be
so requested by the agent, owner or occupant thereof, he shall inspect the plumbing and fittings on such premises and, if he finds that they are defective
or unsafe in any respect, it shall be his duty to notify the agent or owner of the building or premises in writing to forthwith cause such plumbing or fitting to
be altered or repaired so as to conform to standards contained in the plumbing code, or to be changed and made safe in such other manner as the
plumbing inspector may prescribe. If the owner or person having control of such building shall fail to comply with the provision of the notice within ten (10)
days after the service of same, such person shall be deemed guilty of maintaining unsafe plumbing and fittings, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished as provided for herein. (1991 Code § 4-27)
10-3-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
In the discharge of his duties, the plumbing inspector or an authorized representative shall have the authority to enter at any reasonable hour any building,
structure or premises in the jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of the plumbing code. (1991 Code § 4-36; amd. 2011 Code)
10-3-8: TURN ON OF WATER:
Whenever new fixtures are added or alterations or changes made to plumbing, or new jobs have been installed, the water shall be left off by the plumber
or other person doing the work, and no person, firm or corporation shall turn on the water or assist in turning on the water until a final certificate of the
inspection has been issued by the plumbing inspector. After the plumbing inspector has made a finished inspection and placed his tag or label of approval
on the fixtures of such job, and all certificates have been turned over to the water department by the owner, the water department shall turn on the water.
(1991 Code § 4-38)
10-3-9: INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
Waste products from manufacturing or industrial operations shall not be introduced into the public sewer system until it has been determined by the
superintendent of the water and sewer department that the introduction thereof will not cause damage to the public sewer system or interfere with the
functioning of the sewer treatment system. Wastes which, in the opinion of the superintendent of the sewer department are voluminous and not in need of
treatment, shall not be discharged into the sewer system of city but shall be disposed of as stormwater. (1991 Code § 4-44; amd. 2011 Code)
10-3-10: VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the plumbing code shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 4-48)
Chapter 4
MECHANICAL PROVISIONS
10-4-1: MECHANICAL INSPECTOR:
Until such time as the city council shall appoint a mechanical inspector, the duties of that office shall be performed by the plumbing and electrical inspector.
(1991 Code § 4-132; amd. 2011 Code)
10-4-2: MECHANICAL CONTRACTORS:
A. Registration: No person shall perform mechanical work within the city unless such person is a mechanical contractor licensed by the state of Oklahoma
and has registered with the city clerk. A mechanical contractor shall perform only mechanical work for which he is licensed and for which a permit has
been issued. (1991 Code § 4-108; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. Fees: The fees for registration and renewal thereof shall be uniform and shall be assessed on an annual basis and shall be in such amount as the city
council may, from time to time, prescribe by resolution. Until otherwise provided by the city council, the fee for registration shall be twenty dollars
($20.00). (1991 Code § 4-111)
C. Expiration And Renewal Of Registration: All registrations and renewals shall expire on June 30 of each year. The fee for the initial registration shall be
reduced by fifty percent (50%) when the registration encompasses a period of six (6) months or less. (1991 Code § 4-112)
10-4-3: PERFORMING MECHANICAL WORK:
A. Permit Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to proceed with any mechanical work within the city until a permit for such work has been
obtained from the mechanical inspector.
2. Applicants for the permit described herein shall, prior to proceeding with any work requiring such permit, call the office of the mechanical inspector
and give the name of the mechanical contractor who is to do such work and the address where the work is to be performed. The contractor shall be
furnished one copy of the permit. (1991 Code § 4-114)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 160/269
B. Submission Of Plans:
1. No plans shall be approved nor shall any work or repairs be made which are not consistent with the standards and requirements of the international
mechanical code. The mechanical inspector may require the submission and approval of plans and specifications in duplicate showing the nature
and extent of the proposed work before a permit is issued. If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make any change from the approved
plans and specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted and, if approved, a supplementary
permit shall be issued to cover the change after the same conditions required to secure the original permit have been satisfied.
2. All plans and specifications required to be submitted shall be examined by the inspector for conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the
international mechanical code.
3. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the issuance of a permit for the installation of part of a mechanical system before the entire
plans and specifications of the system have been submitted or approved, if adequate information and detailed statements have been presented for
the same and have been found to comply with this chapter and the international mechanical code. (1991 Code § 4-115; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Inspection: It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation doing any mechanical work and who has obtained a mechanical permit to report the
same for rough-in inspection as soon as such work is ready for inspection, and when the work is ready for final inspection. (1991 Code § 4-118)
D. Alteration After Inspection: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter or change any mechanical system or fixture or to remove any
material or fixture after inspection has been made without first obtaining a permit from the mechanical inspector to do so. (1991 Code § 4-122)
10-4-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
In the discharge of his duties, the mechanical inspector or an authorized representative shall have the authority to enter at any reasonable hour any
building, structure or premises in the jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the international mechanical code. (1991 Code § 4-126; amd.
2011 Code)
10-4-5: VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the international mechanical code shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 4-133; amd. 2011
Code)
Chapter 5
ELECTRICAL PROVISIONS
10-5-1: EXTENT OF JURISDICTION:
The provisions of the electrical code1 shall apply to all structures and premises located within the city and to all structures and premises and persons, firms
and corporations outside the limits of city if the same is connected or to be connected, directly or indirectly, to any electrical line of the city. (1991 Code § 5-
25)
10-5-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
The office of inspector of plumbing and electrical inspector is hereby created and shall be filled and the duties of the office performed by some person
appointed by the city. Such position may be filled by the building inspector/code enforcement official of the city. Such person shall not be interested,
directly or indirectly, in any firm or corporation engaged in the plumbing or electrical regulations as set forth in this chapter and chapter 3 of this title. (Ord.
99-17, 9-14-1999)
10-5-3: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS, JOURNEYMEN AND APPRENTICES:
A. Registration Required: No electrical contractor, journeyman electrician, or apprentice shall be issued a permit to do electrical work within the city nor
shall any such person perform electrical work until and unless such person is registered as provided herein. Violation of this subsection shall constitute
a misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 5-2)
B. Fees: The fees for registration and renewal thereof shall be uniform and shall be assessed on an annual basis and shall be in such amount as the city
council may, from time to time, prescribe by resolution. (1991 Code § 5-6)
C. Expiration And Renewal Of Registration: All registration and renewals shall expire on June 30 of each year. The fee for the initial registration shall be
reduced by fifty percent (50%) when the registration encompasses a period of six (6) months or less. (1991 Code § 5-7)
10-5-4: CONNECTION TO ELECTRICAL SYSTEM:
No connection shall be made to the electrical system of the city except when all electrical lines, systems and conduits to which such lines are connected
have been installed as provided by this chapter and the electrical code; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent any owner of
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 161/269
property subject to this chapter and the electrical code from performing his or her own electrical work on property owned and occupied by such person as
a residence; but in such case, the work performed must be in conformity with the standards of this chapter and the electrical code. (1991 Code § 5-9)
10-5-5: PERFORMING ELECTRICAL WORK:
A. Permit Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to proceed with any electrical work connected or to be connected with the electrical system of
the city until a permit for such work has been obtained from the electrical inspector.
2. Applicants for the permit described herein shall, prior to proceeding with any work requiring such permit, call the office of the electrical inspector and
give the name of the electrical contractor who is to do such work and the address where the work is to be done. The contractor shall be furnished
one copy of the permit. (1991 Code § 5-11)
B. Submission Of Plans:
1. The electrical inspector may require the submission and approval of plans and specifications in duplicate showing the nature and extent of the
proposed work before a permit is issued. If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make any change from the approved plans and
specifications on which a permit has been issued, amended plans and specifications shall be submitted and, if approved, a supplementary permit
shall be issued to cover the change after the same conditions required to secure the original permit have been satisfied.
2. All plans and specifications required to be submitted shall be examined by the inspector for conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the
electrical code.
3. Nothing in this subsection B shall be construed to prevent the issuance of a permit for the installation of part of an electrical system before the entire
plans and specifications of the system have been submitted or approved, if adequate information and detailed statements have been presented for
the same and have been found to comply with this chapter and the electrical code. (1991 Code § 5-12)
C. Inspection: It shall be the duty of any person, firm or corporation doing any electrical work and who has obtained an electrical permit to report the same
for rough-in inspection as soon as such work is ready for inspection, and when the work is ready for final inspection. (1991 Code § 5-15)
D. Alteration After Inspection: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter or change any wire conduit or fixture or to remove any material
or fixture after inspection has been made without first obtaining a permit from the electrical inspector to do so, and the electrical inspector shall then
reinspect all work altered or changed, and the same fee shall be charged as hereinabove provided for original inspections. (1991 Code § 5-19)
10-5-6: WIRING AND INSTALLATIONS:
A. Definition: The term "electrical wiring", as used in this section, means the installation of electrical conductors, fixtures, appliances, or apparatus to be
used for the transmitting of electrical current, for electric lights, heat or power, lighting fixtures, or installing electrical apparatus of any nature, kind or
description to be connected to light, heat or power service. (1991 Code § 4-4)
B. Utility Connections: It shall be unlawful for any public service corporation, individual, light, heat, or power company to connect or cause to be connected
any service or building for the supply of electrical current for light, heat, or power until they have been notified by the electrical inspector that the electric
work has been inspected and approved and is ready for service. (1991 Code § 4-9)
C. Right Of Entry: The electrical inspector, while in the discharge of his duty, shall have the authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable
hour, and any person interfering with the electrical inspector while performing his duty shall be fined as prescribed in this section. The inspector shall be
the judge of what constitutes the safe installation of electrical conductors and his decision shall be final and binding. (1991 Code § 4-10)
D. Rulings Of Inspector: The inspector shall have the right to make special rulings, when circumstances warrant, for the safeguarding of life and property
and the improvement of electrical installations, but in all cases, persons engaged in the installing of electrical wires, fixtures and apparatus and holding
an electrical license, must be notified by letter of these decisions. (1991 Code § 4-11)
E. Charges For Installations: Charges may be made by the electrical inspector as provided by the city council for various installations in connection with
work being performed. (1991 Code § 4-13)
F. Penalty: Any person, firm, corporation or individual violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in a sum not less than five dollars ($5.00)
nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every offense; and in cases where electrical defects have been ordered corrected by the
electrical inspector, each and every day shall constitute a separate offense where an order is not complied with. (1991 Code § 4-14)
10-5-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
In the discharge of his duties, the electrical official or an authorized representative shall have the authority to enter at any reasonable hour any building,
structure or premises in the jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the electrical code. (1991 Code § 5-22)
10-5-8: TURN ON OF ELECTRICITY:
Whenever new fixtures, wires or systems are added or alterations or changes made to electrical fixtures, or new lines have been installed, the service shall
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 162/269
be left off by the person doing the work, and no person, firm or corporation shall turn on the electricity or assist in turning on the same until a final
certificate of the inspection has been issued by the electrical inspector. After the electrical inspector has made a finished inspection and placed his tag or
label of approval on the fixtures of such job, and all certificates have been turned over to the electrical department by the owner, the service shall be
established. (1991 Code § 5-24)
10-5-9: DEFECTIVE ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS OR FIXTURES:
Whenever the electrical inspector has reason to believe that defective or unsafe electrical connections or fixtures exist in or upon any building or premises,
or if he be so requested by the agent, owner or occupant thereof, he shall inspect the electrical systems and wiring on such premises and, if he finds that
they are defective or unsafe in any respect, it shall be his duty to notify the agent or owner of the building or premises in writing to forthwith cause such
electrical systems or wiring to be altered or repaired so as to conform to standards contained in this chapter and the electrical code, or to be changed and
made safe in such other manner as the electrical inspector may prescribe. If the owner or person having control of such building shall fail to comply with
the provision of the notice within ten (10) days after the service of same, such person shall be deemed guilty of maintaining unsafe electrical systems and
wiring, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided for herein. (1991 Code § 5-13)
10-5-10: VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the electrical code shall constitute a misdemeanor. (1991 Code § 5-34)
Chapter 6
MOVING STRUCTURES
10-6-1: MOVING PERMIT; HEARING; NOTICE:
A. Permit Required: Any person desiring to move or relocate an existing structure onto any lot or property within the corporate limits of the city shall first
obtain a moving permit, which can only be approved by the Skiatook board of adjustment. (Ord. 2004-05, 7-27-2004)
B. Public Hearing; Notice: A public hearing shall be held and the applicant shall publish notice of such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing; and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to surrounding property owners within three
hundred feet (300') of the property onto which the applicant desires to relocate the structure. (Ord. 2004-05, 7-27-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING CODE OF THE CITY OF SKIATOOK, OKLAHOMA. (1991 Code § 16-11-100)
11-1-2: PURPOSES:
This title is enacted for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity, order, and general welfare; to
reduce the danger and congestion of public transportation; to provide adequate light and air, public utilities, facilities and services, and other public
requirements; to promote productive and enjoyable harmony between man and his environment; to achieve a balance between population and resource
use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of amenities; to prevent overcrowding of land and undue encroachment thereon; to
promote efforts which will prevent or eliminate damage to the environment and biosphere; to stimulate and assure for all citizens safe, healthful,
productive, and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings; to encourage the residential, commercial, and industrial growth of the community as
well as the most appropriate use of land; and to encourage the development of the community in accordance with a comprehensive plan. (1991 Code
§ 16-11-110)
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
A. Validity Of Other Laws: Where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of structures or land or upon bulk of structures, or requires larger
open spaces or yards than are imposed by other ordinances, laws, or regulations, the provisions of this title shall govern. However, nothing in this title
shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances, laws, or regulations which prescribe more restrictive limitations.
B. Severability: In case any portion of this title shall be invalid or unconstitutional, as declared by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the title
shall not thereby be invalid, but shall remain in full force and effect. (1991 Code § 16-11-110)
11-1-4: JURISDICTION; ANNEXED TERRITORY:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 163/269
A. Territorial Jurisdiction: This title shall be in full force and effect and shall apply to all lands within the incorporated limits of the city.
B. Public Property: Property owned, leased, or operated by the city or any other public or governmental body or agency shall be subject to the terms of this
title.
C. Annexed Territory:
1. When any territory shall be brought into the zoning jurisdiction of the city by annexation or otherwise, such territory shall be deemed to be zoned at
the classification assigned to it by the authority having zoning jurisdiction prior to the annexation or by that zoning classification of the city consistent
with the land use prior to annexation. This provision shall not operate to preclude rezoning of such property by amendment in the manner set forth in
chapter 16 of this title.
2. This provision shall not operate to preclude subsequent rezoning of such property by amendment in the manner set forth in chapter 16 of this title.
(1991 Code § 16-11-110)
11-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in this section. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural
construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory. (1991 Code § 16-11-110)
ABUTTING: In the context of a screening or enclosure requirement, "abutting" shall mean contiguous or separated therefrom only by a nonarterial street.
In other instances, "abutting" shall mean contiguous.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use
or structure.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. The operation of commercial feed pens, sales yards and auction yards
for cattle or hogs shall be deemed an industrial and not an agricultural use.
ALL WEATHER MATERIAL: A material capable, during ordinary use, of withstanding, without substantial deterioration, normal weather conditions.
ALLEY: A permanent public way providing a secondary means of access for service and emergency vehicles, and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A multiple-family dwelling. (See definition of Dwelling, Multiple-Family.)
ARTERIAL: A street designated on the major street plan as a primary arterial or secondary arterial.
AUTOMOBILE: A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people, including, but not
limited to, the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters, and motorcycles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or oil fuels, but not butane or
propane fuels, or other automobile accessories, and which may or may not include facilities for lubricating, washing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing
automobiles, but not including the painting thereof.
AUTOMOBILE WASH OR LAUNDRY: A structure designed primarily for washing automobiles using production line methods with a chain conveyor,
blower, steam cleaner, high pressure spray or other mechanical device.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING OR SALVAGE YARD: An area outside of a building where motor vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, junked or "wrecked",
or where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor vehicles are stored.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: The board of adjustment of the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are
provided for three (3) or more but not exceeding twelve (12) persons.
BUILDING: A structure which is permanently affixed to the land, and has one or more floors and a roof, and is bounded by either another building with a
common party wall, open air, or the lot lines of a lot.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building. The building area shall include all overhanging roofs.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be
deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
BUILDING SETBACK: The horizontal distance, from the point of measurement, such as the centerline of an abutting street or the boundary line of an
abutting zoning district to the nearest building wall.
BUILDING SITE: A single parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure.
CARE HOME: Premises used for the housing and caring for the aged or infirm, and includes convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and nursing
homes.
CARPORT: A permanent roofed structure permanently open on at least two (2) sides, designed for or occupied by private passenger vehicles.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 164/269
CHILDCARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years, and not of common
parentage, for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, when received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided,
however, this definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of the state, custody of children fixed
by a court of competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree of the custodial person, or to churches or other religious
or public institutions caring for children within the institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services, meetings or classes or
engaged in church activities.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of the city of Skiatook.
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: A facility for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients; provided, however, that patients are not
kept overnight except under emergency conditions, including, but not limited to, dental and doctor's offices.
COPY AREA: The net geometric area enclosed by the smallest rectangles encompassing the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters, and
delineations contained in the sign.
CURB LEVEL: The mean level of the established curb at the frontage of a lot. Where no curb has been established, the city engineer shall establish such
curb level or its equivalent for the purposes of this title.
DISPLAY SURFACE: The surface of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated.
DISPLAY SURFACE AREA: The net geometric area enclosed by the display surface of the sign, including the outer extremities of all letters, figures,
characters and delineations, but not including the structural supports for freestanding signs if said structural supports are not arranged to become a part of
the attention attracting aspects of the sign; provided, that as applied to wall or canopy signs having a nonilluminated background, "display surface area"
shall mean "copy area".
DISTRICT, ZONING: Any section or sections of the city of Skiatook for which regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height and
area of buildings are uniform.
DRY CLEANING OR LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE: Any attended or unattended place, building or portion thereof, available to the general public for the
purpose of washing, drying, extracting moisture from, or dry cleaning wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics, and textiles of any kind by means of a mechanical
appliance which is operated primarily by the customer.
DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families, but not including house trailers, mobile
homes or travel trailers.
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A building containing two (2) dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME: A detached dwelling unit designed for transportation, after fabrication, on streets or highways on its own wheels or on a
flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundation, connection to utilities, and similar installation activities.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or
trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort type hotels.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building, other than a mobile home, containing one dwelling unit designed for occupancy by not more than one family.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of rooms arranged, intended or designed as a habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath, and sleeping facilities, for not
more than one family living independently of any other family.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit; provided, that unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or other domestic
bonds, no such family shall contain over five (5) persons; but further provided, that domestic servants may be housed on the premises without being
designated as "family".
FLOOD FREQUENCY: See definition of 100-Year Frequency Flood.
FLOODPLAIN: The land area adjoining a watercourse or drainageway which would be inundated by the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood, as
predicted by the city engineer, or as predicted by the U.S. corps of engineers and confirmed by the city engineer.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a watercourse or drainageway and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood as predicted by the city engineer, or as predicted by the U.S. corps of engineers and confirmed
by the city engineer.
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the floodplain which are not reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the 100-year frequency
flood as predicted by the city engineer, or as predicted by the U.S. corps of engineers and confirmed by the city engineer.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including basement, of a building measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. Provided, that for the purpose of determining compliance with the permitted floor
area, the floor area of enclosed required off street parking areas shall not be included.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: A mathematical expression determined by dividing the floor area of a building by the area of the lot on which it is located, as:
Floor area = Floor area ratio
Lot area
FRONTAGE: The linear measurement of a lot boundary which abuts a public street or the linear measurement of the building setback line when the
boundary of the lot abuts a curbed nonarterial street or cul-de-sac.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: The vertical distance measured from the ground floor elevation to the top of the highest top plate.
HEIGHT, SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the curb level to the highest point of the sign.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 165/269
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings; provided, that no
trading in merchandise is carried on and in connection with which there is no advertising or display of merchandise or signs. There shall also be no
mechanical equipment use or activity conducted which creates any noise, dust, odor or electrical disturbance beyond the confines of the lot on which said
occupation is conducted.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION: An incorporated nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which: a) each lot and/or
homeowner in a planned unit development or other described land area is automatically a member; and b) each lot is automatically subject to a charge for
a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common property; and c) the charge if unpaid becomes a lien
against the property.
HOTEL: A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six (6) or more sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied as
the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including an auto or trailer court or
camp, sanatorium, hospital, asylum, orphanage or building where persons are housed under restraint.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, more than six (6) months of age are kept.
LAND AREA: The area of a lot plus one-half (1/2) or thirty feet (30'), whichever is less, of the right of way of any abutting street to which the lot has access.
LIVABILITY SPACE: The open space of a lot which is not allocated to or used for off street parking or loading areas or for paved access to the off street
parking or loading area.
LOADING BERTH, OFF STREET: A space of at least ten feet (10') in width and thirty feet (30') in length and having a vertical clearance of at least
fourteen feet (14'), designed and located on a lot for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT: Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one building or a group of buildings and uses, including such open spaces as required by
this title and other laws or ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a street. Also, a lot of record.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full lengths on a street.
LOT DEPTH: The average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the sidelines of the lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: Any boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street. Where the lot abuts more than one street, the owner may select the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the lot
is located on a parcel of land, the deed of which is recorded in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the parcel is located.
LOT WIDTH: The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines.
MAJOR STREET PLAN: "The City Of Skiatook, Oklahoma, Major Street Plan", as adopted by the mayor and city council of Skiatook, Oklahoma, by
ordinance 246-A, on August 13, 1974, or as it may hereafter be amended by ordinance or resolution.
MINISTORAGE: A building containing small partitioned storage spaces, which are separately and individually rented or leased, for the storage of personal
goods or merchandise, but excluding commercial warehousing as described in use unit 22.
MOBILE HOME: A portable or mobile living unit used or designed for human occupancy on a permanent basis.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Land or property which is used or intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one or more trailers or movable sleeping
quarters of any kind.
n/a: Not applicable.
NEC: Not elsewhere classified.
NAMEPLATE: A sign, attached flush against a building, identifying the name of the building or the name of an occupant thereof.
NONCONFORMANCE: A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. This may
include, but is not limited to, failure to conform to use, height, area, coverage or off street parking requirements.
NONCONFORMING USE: A structure or land lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
100-YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD: A flood having an average frequency of occurrence once in one hundred (100) years although the flood may occur in
any year, based on statistical analyses of stream flow records available for the watershed and analyses of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general
region of the watershed, as predicted by the city engineer, or as predicted by the U.S. corps of engineers and confirmed by the city engineer.
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: A space on a lot intended and reserved for the parking of an automobile. Such space shall be of at least nine feet (9') in
width by twenty feet (20') in length, together with a driveway connecting the space with a street or alley and permitting safe ingress or egress of an
automobile.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 166/269
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: The development of a tract of land under single ownership or control, based on an approved development plan
permitting flexibility of dwelling types, lot sizes, and accessory uses not available under conventional lot by lot restrictions.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The city of Skiatook, Oklahoma, planning commission.
PRIVATE CLUB: A private club or lodge, the chief activity of which is a service and is not operated as a business for profit, and which holds and maintains
an income tax exempt status. This term includes charitable, eleemosynary, educational and recreational establishments.
REST HOME: A health facility where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation.
SANATORIUM: An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment and recuperation using natural therapeutic agents.
SETBACK: A horizontal distance determining the location of a building with respect to a street, use district boundary line, or another use. Where the term
"setback" is used in conjunction with a modifying word or words such as "parking area", the setback shall in its application include, but not be limited to,
buildings.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted on the premises.
SIGN, CANOPY: A sign wholly supported by a canopy projecting from a building or an extended roof or a pitched roof and which does not extend above
the mean height level of the roof of the building.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A temporary sign erected during the period of construction advertising the construction of improvements on the property.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign which is attached to or is a part of a self-supporting structure, other than a building or portion of a building.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment, sold or offered elsewhere than the
premises and only incidentally on the premises, if at all.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign affixed to a building and which extends horizontally more than twelve inches (12") from the sign supporting portion of the
building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A temporary sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign which is affixed to a roof, extended roof, pitched roof or canopy and which extends above the mean height of the roof.
SIGN, WALL: A sign affixed to a building wall which does not project horizontally more than twelve inches (12") from the wall nor extend above the height
of the wall.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') which shows the topographic characteristics of
the site at two foot (2') contour intervals; the location and dimensions of buildings, yards, courts, parking spaces, and other features; the use of each
building and area; adjacent streets, alleys, utility drainage and other easements; and the relationship of the development to adjacent areas which it may
affect.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION: A use or a design element of a use which is not permitted by right in a particular district because of potential adverse effects, but
which, if controlled in the particular instance as to its relationship to the neighborhood and to the general welfare, may be permitted by the board of
adjustment, where specifically authorized by this title, and in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards of this title.
STREET: Any public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET, INTERSECTING: Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other.
STREET WALL: The wall or part of the building nearest to the street line.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or
any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, and
includes buildings, walks, fences, and signs.
SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT: A zoning district to be mapped as an overlay to a use district and which modifies or supplements the regulations of the
general district in recognition of distinguishing circumstances such as unit development or flooding propensity while maintaining the character and
purposes of the general use district area over which it is superimposed.
TOP PLATE: The horizontal timber directly carrying the trusses of a roof or the rafters.
TOWNHOUSE: A row of at least four (4) attached dwelling units separated by party walls and designed for separate ownership of the individual dwelling
units.
TRAILER COURT: See definition of Mobile Home Park.
TRAILER HOME: See definition of Mobile Home.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of a restriction of this title, granted by the board of adjustment, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape,
topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition or circumstance of a particular property, the literal enforcement of the zoning
restriction would result in unnecessary hardship.
YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this title that an accessory building may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main
building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 167/269
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot lines between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between
the front property line and the main building.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
rear lot line and the rear of the main building.
YARD REQUIRED: The minimum permitted distance of open unoccupied space between a building and a lot line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard and the rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side
lot line and the side of the main building. (1991 Code § 16-26-1600; amd. Ord. 93-09A, 12-14-1993; Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007; 2011 Code)
Chapter 2
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
11-2-1: ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The zoning districts set forth below are hereby established. The district symbol is in the column to the left.
AG Agriculture district
RE Residential estate district
RS-1 Residential single-family low density district
RS-2 Residential single-family medium density district
RS-3 Residential single-family high density district
RD Residential duplex district
RM-1 Residential multi-family low density district
RM-2 Residential multi-family medium density district
RMH Residential mobile home park district
OL Office low intensity district
OM Office medium intensity district
CS Commercial shopping center district
CG Commercial general district
CH Commercial high intensity district
IL Industrial light manufacturing and research and development district
IM Industrial moderate district
IH Industrial heavy district
(1991 Code § 16-12-200)
11-2-2: SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; FLOOD HAZARD MAPS ADOPTED:
A. Supplemental Districts Established: The supplemental districts set forth below are hereby established. The district symbol is in the column to the left.
FD Floodway supplemental district
PUD Planned unit development
B. Floodway Hazard Maps Adopted: In addition to the establishment of the FD floodway supplemental zoning districts, the city shall adopt by resolution
maps of the corresponding flood hazard areas prepared by the city engineer, or as prepared by the U.S. corps of engineers and confirmed by the city
engineer, or as prepared by a registered professional engineer and certified by the city engineer, for each creek or tributary mapped in an FD floodway
supplemental district. Such flood hazard boundary maps shall be made available for public inspection in the offices of the Skiatook planning
commission, city engineer, and building inspections department. The following requirements shall be met before building permits are issued within a
floodway fringe area, as depicted on said flood hazard boundary maps:
1. Permitted uses within the floodway fringe area will be those uses permitted in the respective general use district; provided, that after the effective
date hereof, any building constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered shall have the lowest floor at least one foot (1') above the elevation of the
100-year frequency flood as recorded on the appropriate adopted flood hazard boundary maps.
2. Permitted uses shall conform to the bulk and area requirements of the use district in which located. (1991 Code § 16-12-201)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 168/269
11-2-3: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ESTABLISHED:
The locations and boundaries of the various districts as defined herein shall be established by ordinance and shall be shown and delineated on the official
zoning map of the city. The official zoning map shall be maintained by the building inspector or other designated officials and may be divided into parts,
and such parts may be separately employed for identification purposes when adopting or amending the official zoning map or for any reference to the
official zoning map. (1991 Code § 16-12-202)
11-2-4: DISTRICT BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION AND INTERPRETATION:
District boundary lines shall be described by legal description or by a map. When a legal description is used, the boundary line shall be deemed to extend
to the centerline of abutting streets and shall be so designated on the official zoning map. When a map is used, district boundary lines shall be established
by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the centerline of abutting street, alley or railroad rights of way, as the same were of record at the time
of adoption. In all cases where there is doubt as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the same shall be determined by the board of adjustment.
(1991 Code § 16-12-203)
11-2-5: LIMITATION ON LAND USE:
No land or building shall be used and no building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt
which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the use, height, area, yard,
space, and other requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure, or improvement is located, except as provided by chapter
13 of this title. In order to avoid undue hardship:
A. Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building, where a building permit was
lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this title, and pursuant to such permit, construction is diligently carried to completion. Upon completion, such
building or use shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue as regulated by chapter 13 of this title.
B. At any time within two (2) years after the effective date hereof, a building permit and zoning clearance permit may be issued or a use of land
commenced in accordance with the terms and conditions of a special exception or variance granted by the board of adjustment prior to the effective
date hereof. (1991 Code § 16-12-204)
11-2-6: DIVISION OF LOTS:
A lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more lots, unless all lots resulting from such division conform to all the applicable regulations of the zoning
district in which located. (1991 Code § 16-12-205)
11-2-7: LOTS CONTAINING DETACHED RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES:
Within a lot containing more than one detached residential structure (except for the RE, RS and RD residential districts), no structure or portion thereof
shall be permitted to locate a distance greater than five hundred feet (500') from a public dedicated street or public dedicated right of way. (1991 Code
§ 16-12-206)
11-2-8: STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED:
No lot shall contain any building used in whole or in part for residential purposes unless such lot has a minimum of thirty feet (30') of frontage on a public
street or dedicated right of way, except as provided for a substandard lot of record, a lot within an approved planned unit development, or a lot within an
approved townhouse development. (1991 Code § 16-12-207)
11-2-9: ONE SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING PER LOT OF RECORD:
Not more than one single-family dwelling may be constructed on a lot, except in the case of a lot which is within an approved planned unit development.
(1991 Code § 16-12-208)
11-2-10: HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS:
The following structures, except where preempted by other government regulations, shall not be subject to the height limitations of the districts in which
they are located:
A. Farm buildings and structures.
B. Aerials, antennas, belfries, chimneys, cupolas, domes, elevators, penthouses, flagpoles, masts, monitors, smokestacks, spires, towers (cooling, fire
hose), and ventilators; provided, that they are not intended for human occupancy. (1991 Code § 16-12-220)
11-2-11: LOT AREA AND WIDTH EXCEPTIONS:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 169/269
Except for fire protection and ambulance service, the lot area and width requirement of the zoning districts shall not apply to the uses included within use
unit 4, public protection and utility facilities. (1991 Code § 16-12-230)
11-2-12: YARDS:
A. Compliance With Yard Requirements: Except as otherwise provided, required yards shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky. Yards
provided for a building, for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title, shall not be considered the yard for any other building, and yards
provided for a lot shall not be considered the yard of any other lot.
B. Permitted Yard Obstructions: Obstructions are permitted in required yards as follows:
1. Cornices, canopies, eaves and similar architectural features may project not more than two feet (2') into a required yard.
2. Fire escapes may project not more than four and one-half feet (41/2') into a required yard.
3. Fences, hedges, plant materials and walls may be located in any yard; provided, that on any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no
wall, fence, sign, structure, or any plant growth which obstructs sightlines of elevations between two feet (2') and six feet (6') above the crown of the
adjacent roadway shall be placed or maintained within a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot
lines a distance of twenty five feet (25') along said front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a "sight triangle" on the
area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection.
4. Signs which are permitted as accessory uses in residential districts may be located within any yard which is bounded by a public street.
5. In the RE and RS residential districts, a detached accessory building or buildings may be located in a required rear yard, provided:
a. The building or buildings do not cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the minimum required rear yard; and
b. The total gross floor area for any accessory building or buildings located in the rear yard, required rear yard, and/or both, does not exceed six
hundred (600) square feet.
The board of adjustment, upon application, and after notice and public hearing, may grant a variance of subsection B5b of this section.
6. Swimming pools, tennis courts, patios, fallout and other protective shelters shall be located in the rear yard and shall have a minimum setback of ten
feet (10') from any side or rear lot lines. However, the board of adjustment may, upon application and after public hearing, permit the aforementioned
accessory uses in the front yard, provided:
a. The minimum front yard requirement is adhered to; and
b. A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from any side lot line is met.
7. Mobile home hitches.
8. Carports by special exception requiring board of adjustment approval.
9. Customary accessory structures, such as clotheslines, barbecue pits, and playground equipment.
C. Use Of Yard In R Districts: No inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles shall be parked or stored within the front or exterior side yard in R districts. No
vehicle shall be parked except on a hard surfaced area constructed of a dustfree all weather material. Within the RM-1 and RM-2 districts, not more
than one vehicle shall be parked for each six hundred (600) square feet of area contained in a required front or exterior side yard. (1991 Code § 16-12-
240)
11-2-13: EXISTING BUILDING ENCROACHMENT ON FRONT YARDS OR BUILDING SETBACKS:
A. Building Setbacks: Where an existing building or buildings on the same side of the street and within the same block encroach on the required front yard
or building setback, the required front yard or building setback for new construction shall be established as follows:
1. If the proposed building is to be located more than two hundred feet (200') from an encroaching building, the proposed building shall conform to the
front yard setback established for the district in which the proposed building is to be located.
2. If the proposed building is to be located between adjacent buildings which conform to the required front yard or building setback, or between a
conforming building and an intersecting street, the proposed building shall conform to the front yard setback established for the district in which the
proposed building is to be located.
3. If the proposed building is to be located within two hundred feet (200') of encroaching buildings on both sides and there are no intervening buildings,
the front yard or building setback shall be the average or setback of the two (2) nearest front corners of the encroaching buildings.
4. If the proposed building is to be located within two hundred feet (200') of an encroaching building on one side, but not both sides, and there are no
intervening buildings, the front yard or building setback shall be the average of the front corner of the encroaching building.
B. Reduction Of Yard Or Setback: Provided, however, that in the application of subsection A3 or A4 of this section, the front yard or building setback shall
not be reduced to less than five feet (5'), plus one-half (1/2) of the right of way width designated on the major street plan for the abutting street, or five
feet (5'), plus twenty five feet (25'), if the street is not designated on the major street plan. (1991 Code § 16-12-240)
11-2-14: SCREENING WALL OR FENCE:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 170/269
A. Specifications:
1. For the purpose of maintaining a compatible relationship between certain land uses, a screening requirement is hereby established for the initiation
and continuance of particular uses in such instances as may be hereinafter designated.
2. When the provisions of this title require the construction of a screening wall or fence as a condition for the initiation and subsequent continuance of a
use, the screening wall or fence:
a. Shall be constructed, designed, and arranged to provide visual separation of uses, irrespective of vegetation;
b. Shall not be less than six feet (6') in height;
c. Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior, except when both sides are of the same design and appearance;
d. Shall be erected within thirty (30) days following the occupancy of the building or initiation of the use required to screen; and
e. Shall be of the type of materials compatible with the surrounding area.
B. Maintenance: The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the owner of the lot containing the use required to construct the screening. Failure to
maintain after notice by the building inspector shall constitute an offense hereunder.
C. Modification Of Requirements: The board of adjustment, as a special exception, may:
1. Modify or remove the screening requirements where existing physical features provide visual separation of uses;
2. Modify the screening requirement where an alternative screening will provide visual separation of uses;
3. Grant an extension of time to erect a screen where properties which are to be benefited by the screen are undeveloped; and
4. Remove the screening requirement where the purpose of the screening requirement cannot be achieved. (1991 Code § 16-12-250)
11-2-15: PLATTING REQUIREMENT:
For the purpose of providing a proper arrangement of streets and assuring the adequacy of open spaces for traffic, utilities, and access of emergency
vehicles, commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily incident to a change of zoning, a platting requirement is established as follows:
For any land which has been rezoned upon application of a private party, no building permit shall be issued until that portion of the tract on which the
permit is sought has been included within a subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be, submitted to the planning commission for their review and
recommendation, approved by the city council, and filed on record in the office of the county clerk where the property is situated. Provided, that the city
council, pursuant to their exclusive jurisdiction of subdivision plats, may remove the platting requirement upon a determination that the above stated
purposes have been achieved by previous platting or could not be achieved by a plat or replat. (1991 Code § 16-12-260)
11-2-16: MAJOR STREET PLAN:
The "city of Skiatook major street plan", referred to in this title as the "major street plan", as adopted by the city council on August 13, 1974, or as it may
hereafter be amended by resolution, is hereby adopted by resolution and made a part hereof. (1991 Code § 16-12-270; amd. 2011 Code)
11-2-17: STRUCTURE SET BACK FROM ABUTTING STREET:
Every structure shall be set back from the centerline of an abutting street a horizontal distance of not less than one-half (1/2) of the right of way designated
on the major street plan or twenty five feet (25') if the abutting street is not designated on the major street plan. (1991 Code § 16-12-280)
11-2-18: CODE OF ETHICS:
A. Conflict Of Interest: The mayor or any member of the city council, planning commission, or board of adjustment to whom some private benefit, direct or
indirect, financial or otherwise, may come as a result of a public action concerning this title, shall not be a participant in that action. The possibility, not
the actuality, of a conflict shall govern. The individual experiencing a conflict of interest shall declare his interest, abstain from voting on the matter, and
refrain from any deliberations on the matter. The individual shall not discuss the matter with a fellow official for the purpose of influencing a decision
thereon.
B. Absences And Removal Of Members: When a member of the planning commission fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular or special meetings, or if
a member fails to attend two-thirds (2/3) of the regular or special meetings held during any six (6) month period, the planning commission may request
the Skiatook city council to replace that member. The planning commission may also request the city council to replace a member for the following
reasons:
1. Actions and conduct unbecoming a public official of the city; and
2. Repeated acts and conduct detrimental to the peace, health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. (1991 Code § 16-12-290)
11-2-19: MINOR VARIANCES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS NOT REQUIRING NOTICE OF HEARING:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 171/269
A. List Of Minor Variances And Special Exceptions: The board of adjustment hereby adopts as its statement of policy and the city council hereby approves
the following list of minor variances and minor special exceptions, of which said list received prior review and recommendation of the planning
commission, the consideration, granting, or denial of which shall not require public notice of hearing:
1. A variance of twenty percent (20%) or less of a required minimum side or rear yard within an RE, RS, RD or RM-1 district.
2. A variance of ten percent (10%) or less of a required minimum side or rear yard within an RM-2 district.
3. A variance of the 0.25 maximum building floor area ratio to 0.30 or less maximum building floor area ratio within an OL district.
4. A variance of the required setback of a structure, other than a building, as provided in section 11-2-17 of this chapter.
5. A variance of a required lot area or lot width of a lot resulting from a lot split having received the approval of the planning commission and the city
council.
6. A variance of the bulk and area requirements as pertaining to setbacks from interior lot lines to permit the construction of a single-family dwelling on
two (2) lots.
7. A variance to permit private swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar private recreational use, as may be determined by the city council, as the
principal use on a lot, provided the lot is adjacent to and is intended to be an accessory use to a single-family residence.
8. A special exception to permit additions to and modifications of existing structures or facilities as included in use unit 4, public protection and utility
and temporary open air facilities (except for temporary open air facilities), and use unit 5, community services, cultural and recreational facilities;
where permitted in those districts by special exception.
B. Amending List: Provided, that the board of adjustment may from time to time amend the list of minor variances and minor special exceptions in the
statement of policy by adding to, deleting from, or modification thereof. However, the planning commission shall review and make a recommendation
on any proposed changes in the statement of policy prior to subsequent approval by the city council.
C. Authority To Require Notice: Provided, nothing herein shall preclude the board of adjustment from requiring the giving of a public notice of hearing on a
minor variance or special exception listed in subsection A of this section. (1991 Code ch. 16, pages 327, 328)
Chapter 3
AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
11-3-1: PURPOSES:
The agriculture district is designed to:
A. Encourage and protect agricultural land until an orderly transition to urban development may be accomplished.
B. Discourage wasteful scattering of development in rural areas.
C. Obtain economy of public fund expenditures for improvements and services.
D. Conserve open space and increase scenic attractiveness. (1991 Code § 16-13-300)
11-3-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
The principal uses permitted in the agriculture district are designated by use units. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described,
including their respective off street parking, loading, screening requirements and other use conditions in chapter 13 of this title. The use units fully
permitted in the agriculture district are set forth in table 1 of this section.
TABLE 1
USE UNITS PERMITTED IN AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
(Chapter 11 Of This Title)
X - Use By Right E - Special Exception
No. Use Unit District
1 Areawide uses by right X
2 Areawide special exception uses E
3 Agriculture X
4 Public protection and utility facilities X
5 Community services, cultural, and recreational facilities E
6 Single-family dwelling X
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 172/269
9 Mobile home dwelling E
20 Commercial recreation, intensive E
21 Business signs and outdoor advertising X
23 Mining and mineral processing E
(1991 Code § 16-13-310)
11-3-3: ACCESSORY USES:
A. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory uses customarily incident to a principal use permitted in an agriculture district are permitted in such district. In
addition, the uses set forth in table 2 of this section are permitted as accessory uses. (1991 Code § 16-13-320)
TABLE 2
ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
IN AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
Uses Districts
1. Bulletin boards AG
2. Identification signs AG
3. Real estate signs AG
4. Accessory seasonal fruit and vegetable stands AG1
5. Home occupations AG1
Note:
1. By special exception requiring board of adjustment approval.
(Ord. 93-09A, 12-14-1993)
B. Accessory Use Conditions:
1. General Conditions:
a. An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall
therewith, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building.
b. Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum yard or building setback requirements.
c. A detached accessory building shall be located a minimum of six feet (6') from any dwelling.
2. Accessory Signs:
a. One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring announcement of its
activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be
by constant light.
b. One identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a permitted nonresidential use. The sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet in surface area, nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
c. A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of the premises. The sign shall not
exceed eighty (80) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. (1991 Code § 16-
13-320)
11-3-4: BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
TABLE 3
BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS IN AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
AG
District
Lot width (minimum feet) 300
Lot area (minimum acres) 4.6
Land area (minimum acres per dwelling unit) 5
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 173/269
Front yard and any yard abutting a public street (measured from centerline of abutting street; add 1/2 of right of way designated on the
major street plan, or 25 feet if not designated on the major street plan) (minimum feet):
Arterial 35
Not an arterial 25
Side yard (minimum feet):
One side yard 10
Other side yard 10
Rear yard (minimum feet) 40
Building height (maximum feet) n/a
(1991 Code § 16-13-330)
11-3-5: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES:
The special exception uses permitted in the agriculture district, as designated in section 11-3-2, table 1 of this chapter, are subject to the requirements set
out below, and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the board of adjustment.
A. Accessory Signs: The accessory use provisions of the agriculture district pertaining to signs are applicable to accessory signs for uses permitted by
special exception.
B. Mobile Homes: Special exception uses, including mobile homes, shall conform to the bulk and area requirements of the use district in which located,
unless the use unit requirements are more restrictive, in which case the more restrictive shall control. (1991 Code § 16-13-340)
Chapter 4
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
11-4-1: PURPOSES:
A. General Purposes: The residential districts are designed to:
1. Achieve the residential objectives of the comprehensive plan.
2. Protect the character of residential area by excluding inharmonious commercial and industrial activities.
3. Achieve a suitable environment for family life by permitting in residential areas appropriate neighborhood facilities, such as churches, schools, and
certain cultural and recreational facilities.
4. Preserve openness of the living area and avoid overcrowding by requiring minimum yards, open spaces, lot areas, and by limiting the bulk of
structures.
5. Permit a variety of dwelling types and densities to meet the varying needs of families.
6. Control the density of residential development to facilitate the planning for and economical provision of streets, utilities, and other public facilities.
B. RE Residential Estate District: The RE district is designed to permit the development and conservation of single-family detached dwellings in a suitable
environment for family life on large parcels of land at a low rate of urban population density. It is the intent of this district to prohibit any other use which
would substantially interfere with the stated purposes of this district, and discourage any use that generates traffic and creates congestion on
neighborhood streets other than the normal traffic serving the residents on those streets.
C. RS Residential Single-Family Districts: The RS-1, RS-2 and RS-3 districts are designed to permit the development and conservation of single-family
detached dwellings in suitable environments in a variety of densities to meet the varying requirements of families.
D. RD Residential Duplex District: The RD district is designed to permit a more intense yet compatible use of tracts in or near single-family residential and
other neighborhoods which, because of size, topography, or adjacent land use are not ideally suited for single-family use.
E. RM Residential Multi-Family Districts: The RM-1 and RM-2 districts are designed to permit the development and conservation of multi-family dwelling
types, such as garden apartments and townhouses, in suitable environments in a variety of densities to meet the varying requirements of families.
F. RMH Residential Mobile Home Park District: The RMH district is designed to recognize mobile home living as a residential use necessitating location in
residential areas yet requiring regulation to ensure a suitable living environment. (1991 Code § 16-13-400)
11-4-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 174/269
The principal uses permitted in the residential districts are designated by use unit. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described,
including their respective off street parking, loading and screening requirements and other use conditions in chapter 11 of this title. The use units permitted
in residential districts are set forth in table 1 of this section. (1991 Code § 16-14-410)
TABLE 1
USE UNITS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
(Chapter 11 Of This Title)
X - Use By Right E - Special Exception
No. Use Unit
Districts
RE RS RD RM RMH
1 Areawide uses by right X X X X X
2 Areawide special exception uses E E E E E
4 Public protection and utility facilities E E E E E
5 Community services, cultural, and recreational facilities E E E E E
6 Single-family dwelling X X X X E
7 Duplex dwelling E1 X X
8 Multi-family dwelling and similar uses X
9 Mobile home dwelling E2 X
16 Ministorage E
Notes:
1. Duplexes permitted in RS-3 only.
2. Mobile homes permitted in RS-3 only.
(Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007)
11-4-3: ACCESSORY USES:
A. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory uses customarily incident to a principal use permitted in a residential district are permitted in such district. In
addition, the following uses set forth in table 2 of this section are permitted as accessory uses.
TABLE 2
ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED
IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Uses Districts
1. Home occupation All R districts1
2. Roomers and boarders:
2 persons All R districts
More than 2 persons All R districts1
3. Shelters All R districts
4. Signs: All R districts
Bulletin board
Identification sign
Real estate
Construction sign
5. Swimming pool All R districts
6. Management office and private recreation, laundry, and storage facilities RM-1, RM-2, RMH
Note:
1. By special exception requiring board of adjustment approval.
B. Accessory Use Conditions:
1. General Conditions:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 175/269
a. An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall
therewith, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building.
b. A detached accessory building shall not be located in the front or side yard or encroach upon a minimum building setback line, but this limitation
shall not apply to carports, provided the minimum required front yard or side yard or setback is observed.
c. Within the rear yard, a detached accessory building shall be located at least five feet (5') from any interior lot lines.
d. One unoccupied recreational vehicle, a length of thirty feet (30') or less, may be parked upon a lot as an accessory use.
2. Roomers And Boarders: In a dwelling unit occupied as a private residence, one or more rooms may be rented or table board furnished, to not more
than:
a. Two (2) persons who are nonmembers of the family occupying said premises as a permitted accessory use; or
b. More than two (2) persons by special exception requiring board of adjustment approval.
However, in either case, no window display or signboard shall be used to advertise such use.
C. Signs:
1. One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of any educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring announcement of its
activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be
by constant light.
2. One identification sign may be erected on each perimeter street frontage of a multi-family development, mobile home park, single-family subdivision
or permitted nonresidential use. The sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and illumination,
if any, shall be by constant light.
3. During the period of construction, a temporary sign advertising the construction of improvements on the premises may be erected on each perimeter
street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and
illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
4. A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. The sign shall not
exceed eight (8) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. (1991 Code § 16-14-
420)
11-4-4: BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Table 3: Bulk and area requirements in the RE, RS, RD, and RM districts are shown in table 3 of this section.
TABLE 3
BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS IN
RE, RS, RD AND RM DISTRICTS
RE RS-1 RS-2 RS-3
RD RM-1 RM-2
Lot width (minimum ft.):
One-family 1502 100 75 60 60 60 60
Two-family 60 60
Multi-family 100 50
Townhouse development 100 100
Townhouse lot 20 20
Lot area (minimum sq. ft.):
One-family 24,000
13,500
9,000 6,900
6,900
6,000 6,000
Two-family 6,900
6,900 6,900
Townhouse development 12,000
12,000
Multi-family 10,000
6,000
Townhouse lot 1,800 1,800
Land area per DU (minimum sq. ft.):
One-family 28,375
16,000
10,875
8,400
7,500
7,500 7,500
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 176/269
Two-family 4,200
4,200 4,200
Townhouse development 2,400 2,400
Multi-family:
Less than 2 bedrooms 3,100 2,400
2 or more bedrooms 4,357 3,100
Structure height (maximum ft.) 26 26 26 26 26 261 n/a
Livability space per DU (minimum sq. ft.) 12,000
7,000 5,000 4,000
2,000
1,000 400
Front yard abutting a public street:
Measured from centerline of abutting street; add 1/2 of right of way designated on
the major street plan, or 25 ft. if not designated on major street plan (minimum ft.)
Arterial 35 35 35 35 35 35 35
Not an arterial 35 35 30 25 25 25 25
All other yards abutting a public street:
Measured from centerline of abutting street; add 1/2 of right of way designated on
major street plan, or 25 ft. if not designated on major street plan (minimum ft.)
Arterial 20 20 20 20 20 15 15
Not an arterial 15 15 15 15 15 15 15
Rear yards (minimum ft.) 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
Side yards (minimum ft.):
1 side yard 15 10 10 5 10 10 10
Other side yard 15 5 5 5 5 5 10
Notes:
1. In the RM-1 district, a one-story limitation shall apply to structures containing more than 3 dwelling units which are within 50 feet of an adjoining
RE or RS district.
2. The frontage of any lot in the RE district which meets the requirements of minimum lot size may be less than the minimum frontage as long as
the front building line on said lot is a minimum of 125 linear feet.
B. Bulk And Area Requirements In RMH District:
1. Mobile Home Park Development:
Tract area (minimum) 5
acres
Tract width (minimum) 100
feet
Land area per dwelling unit (minimum) 4,356
square
feet
Livability space shall be provided in common area of not less than 7,500 square feet, located so as to be conveniently accessible to the
mobile homes it is intended to serve
300
square
feet
Front yards and any yard abutting a public street: Measured from centerline; add 1/2 right of way width designated on major street plan,
or 25 feet if not designated on major street plan (minimum)
Street plan (minimum):
Abutting an arterial 35 feet
Not abutting an arterial 25 feet
Side yard (minimum) 10 feet
Rear yard (minimum) 10 feet
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 177/269
Height (maximum) 1 story
2. Internal Requirements:
Mobile home space (minimum), exclusive of streets, required off street parking, and required livability space 2,100
square
feet
Separation between mobile homes (minimum) 10 feet
Minimum internal street surfacing width 24 feet
Mobile home setback from centerline of a private internal street (minimum) 22 feet
3. Mobile Home Subdivisions: A mobile home park development containing a tract of not less than 5 acres may be subdivided to permit
individual ownership of mobile home spaces, provided the resulting lots shall comply with the bulk and area requirements set out below,
and a subdivision plat incorporating the bulk and area requirements is submitted to and approved by the planning commission and filed of
record in the office of the county clerk where the property is located:
Land area per dwelling unit (minimum) 5,000
square
feet
Lot size (minimum) 4,000
square
feet
Livability space per dwelling unit (minimum) 600
square
feet
Height (maximum) 1 story
Front yard and any yard abutting a public street: Measured from centerline; add to the distance designated in the column to the right 1/2
of the right of way width designated on major street plan, or 25 feet if not designated on major street plan (minimum)
Abutting an arterial 35 feet
Not abutting an arterial 10 feet
Side yard (minimum) 5 feet
Rear yard (minimum) 10 feet
(1991 Code § 16-14-430)
11-4-5: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES:
The special exception uses permitted in the residential districts, as designated in section 11-4-2, table 1 of this chapter, are subject to the minimum
requirements set out below, and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the board of adjustment:
A. Accessory Signs: The accessory use provisions of the residential districts pertaining to signs are applicable to accessory signs for principal uses
permitted by special exception.
B. Home Occupations:
1. The home occupation shall be engaged in only by the family or person occupying the dwelling as a private residence. No person shall be employed
in the home occupation other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises.
2. One identification sign shall be permitted for each home occupation advertising its use. The sign shall be affixed to the principal building or
customary accessory building and shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area. No illumination of any type shall be permitted.
3. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed principal building or customary accessory building.
4. No mechanical equipment shall be used which creates a noise, dust, odor, or electrical disturbance.
5. No exterior alterations of the structure shall be made which would detract from the residential character of the structure.
C. Duplex Use: In the RS-3 district, duplex use shall comply with the height and yard requirements for single-family use and, in addition, shall comply with
the following requirements:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 178/269
1. Minimum lot area of nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
2. Minimum land area per dwelling unit of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
3. Minimum frontage of seventy five feet (75').
4. Minimum livability space per dwelling unit of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
D. Children's Nurseries: In the RE and RS districts, children's nurseries shall comply with the lot width, lot area, height, and yard requirements for singlefamily
use and, in addition, a maximum floor area ratio of 0.5 shall apply.
E. Single-Family Dwelling: In the RMH district, a single-family dwelling shall comply with the bulk and area requirements for the RS-3 residential district.
F. Special Exception Uses: Except as provided in subsections C, D, and E of this section, and section 11-2-11 of this title, special exception uses shall
comply with the least restrictive yard and height requirements of the district in which located and, in addition, shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Maximum floor area ratio of 0.5.
2. Minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
3. Minimum frontage of one hundred feet (100').
4. A minimum building setback of twenty five feet (25') from abutting properties located within an R district.
Provided, that if the use unit requirements are greater, the use unit requirements shall control. (1991 Code § 16-14-440)
G. Ministorage Facilities: Ministorage facilities located in RM-1 and RM-2 districts shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The building height is limited to twelve feet (12'); provided, however, if the facilities contain an accessory dwelling to be used for management and
security purposes, the height of the dwelling shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
2. The minimum building setback from a public street shall be fifty feet (50'), plus one-half (1/2) the right of way designated on the major street plan
when adjacent to an arterial street or freeway service road and thirty five feet (35') if adjacent to a nonarterial street.
3. The minimum building setback from a freeway and all other boundaries is ten feet (10'); provided, however, the board of adjustment may allow a five
foot (5') building setback in this instance if the wall of the building is also to be used to meet the screening requirement in subsection G11 of this
section. Any spaces between perimeter buildings shall require construction of an eight foot (8') masonry wall between buildings.
4. Exterior building walls shall consist of masonry construction using brick, stone, stucco or concrete tilt-up panels. Metal or standard (smooth) concrete
block exterior walls are not permitted.
5. The floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed 0.5.
6. Access doors to storage units shall not be visible at ground level from an abutting O or R district and shall not be visible from an abutting public
street
7. No hazardous, toxic or explosive materials are permitted to be stored in such facilities.
8. Open air storage is prohibited in the RM-1 district. Open air storage is prohibited on the perimeter of the lot in an RM-2 district, but may be permitted
on the interior of the lot if the storage is not visible at ground level from an abutting O or R district or any public street.
9. The development site should have frontage on and access to an arterial street.
10. Only one ground sign shall be permitted. Location, size and height of such sign shall be determined by the board of adjustment; provided, however,
the sign shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height and thirty two (32) square feet of display surface area or two-tenths (2/10) of a square foot of
display surface per linear foot of street frontage (whichever is greater), and illumination, if any, of the sign shall be by constant light.
11. A screening fence or masonry wall (to be determined by the board of adjustment) a minimum of eight feet (8') tall in height is required along the lot
line or lot lines in common within an R district unless the developer opts to develop in accordance with subsection G3 of this section. (Ord. 2007-04,
10-30-2007)
Chapter 5
OFFICE DISTRICTS
11-5-1: PURPOSES:
A. General Purposes: The office districts are designed to preserve and promote the development of efficient office facilities and to maximize the
compatibility with other land uses by:
1. Establishing bulk and area controls.
2. Requiring off street parking and loading facilities.
3. Establishing the several districts necessary to meet the needs of a variety of office types.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 179/269
4. Controlling the number, area, location, and types of signs.
B. OL Office Low Intensity District: The OL district is designed to facilitate the development and preservation of low intensity office development.
C. OM Office Medium Intensity District: The OM district is designed to provide areas for offices, together with certain community facilities normally
compatible with primary office uses. It is designed to preserve existing medium intensity office development and to facilitate the development of new
medium intensity office areas. (1991 Code § 16-15-500)
11-5-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
The principal uses permitted in the office districts are designated by use units. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described,
including their respective off street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use conditions in chapter 11 of this title. The use units
permitted in office districts are set forth in table 1 of this section. (1991 Code § 16-15-510)
TABLE 1
USE UNITS PERMITTED IN OFFICE DISTRICTS
(Chapter 11 Of This Title)
X - Use By Right E - Special Exception
No. Use Unit
Districts
OL OM
1 Areawide uses X X
2 Areawide special exception uses E E
4 Public protection and utility facilities E E
5 Community services and cultural and recreational facilities E X
8 Multi-family dwellings and similar uses E E
10 Off street parking areas X X
11 Offices and studios X X
16 Ministorage E E
(Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007)
11-5-3: ACCESSORY USES:
A. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory uses customarily incident to a principal use permitted in an office district are permitted in such a district. In
addition, the uses set forth in table 2 of this section are permitted.
TABLE 2
ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED IN OFFICE DISTRICTS
Uses Districts
Business signs All districts
Convenience goods and services OL, OM1
Eating places, other than drive-ins OL, OM
Construction signs All districts
Real estate signs All districts
Private clubs OL, OM1
Note:
1. By special exception requiring board of adjustment approval subject to the requirements set forth in section 11-5-5 of this chapter.
B. Accessory Use Conditions:
1. General Conditions:
a. Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum building setback lines of the applicable district.
b. An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall
therewith, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 180/269
2. Convenience Goods And Services:
a. Permitted accessory goods and services in the OM district are limited to the uses included in use unit 13, chapter 11 of this title.
b. Accessory goods and services in the OM district shall be located entirely within the principal building.
c. Accessory goods and services in the OM district shall not occupy more than fifteen percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the building in which
located.
3. Eating Places Other Than Drive-Ins:
a. Permitted accessory eating places are limited to the uses including in use unit 12, chapter 11 of this title, designed and located for the
convenience of the occupants of the principal building.
b. The eating place shall be located entirely within the principal building.
c. The eating place shall not occupy more than five percent (5%) of the gross floor area of the building in which located. (1991 Code § 16-15-520)
4. Business Signs: Business signs are subject to the requirements set forth in section 11-11-21 of this title. (1991 Code § 16-15-520; amd. 2011 Code)
5. Temporary Signs Advertising Construction Of Improvements: During the period of construction, a temporary sign advertising the construction of
improvements on the premises may be located on each arterial street frontage of the development. The sign shall not exceed one hundred sixty
(160) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
6. Temporary Real Estate Signs: A temporary real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street
frontage of a lot. The sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in surface area, nor fifteen feet (15') in height, and illumination, if any, shall be
by constant light.
7. Private Clubs: Within the OM district, the private club shall be located entirely within the principal building and shall not occupy more than five
percent (5%) of the gross floor area of the building in which located.
8. Combined Uses: Within the OM district, the principal office structure may include an eating place (5 percent maximum), private club (5 percent
maximum), and accessory goods and services (15 percent maximum), or a total of twenty five percent (25%) maximum of the total gross floor area
devoted to these uses. Provided, the eating place, private club, and accessory convenience goods and services do not exceed the maximum
allowable for each individual use. (1991 Code § 16-15-520)
11-5-4: BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
TABLE 3
BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS IN OFFICE DISTRICTS
Districts
OL
OM
Lot area minimum (square feet) n/a n/a
Frontage (minimum feet):
Arterial 75 100
Not an arterial 50 50
Floor area ratio (maximum) 0.25
0.50
Setback from centerline of abutting street (minimum feet): Measured from centerline of abutting street; add, to the distance designated
in the column to the right, 1/2 of the right of way designated on the major street plan, or 25 feet if the street is not designated on the
major street plan
Arterial 50 50
Not an arterial 25 25
Setback from abutting AG or R district boundary lines (minimum feet) 10 101
Building height (maximum feet) 18 n/a
Note:
1. Plus 1 foot of setback for each 1 foot of building height exceeding 18 feet, if the abutting property is within an RE, RS, or RD district.
(1991 Code § 16-15-530)
11-5-5: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 181/269
The special exception uses, permitted in the office districts, as designated in sections 11-5-2, table 1 and 11-5-3, table 2 of this chapter, are subject to the
minimum requirements set out below, and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the board of adjustment.
A. Accessory Use Signs: The accessory use provisions of the office district pertaining to signs apply to signs which are accessory to uses permitted by
special exception; provided, that each sign permitted shall primarily identify the principal office building; permitted accessory convenience goods and
services shall be secondary.
B. Multi-Family Uses: Multi-family uses in the OL and OM districts shall comply with the bulk and area requirements of the RM-1 district.
C. Convenience Goods And Services: Convenience goods and services in the OL district shall comply with the following requirements:
1. No accessory convenience goods and services shall be permitted unless the principal building contains a minimum of twenty five thousand (25,000)
square feet of floor space.
2. The permitted accessory goods and services listed below shall be located entirely within the principal building and shall have its pedestrian entrance
and exit through the principal building.
3. Permitted accessory convenience goods and services in the OL district are limited to the following uses and use groupings:
Barbershop.
Beauty shop.
Bookstore.
Florist.
Gift, novelty and souvenir shop.
Liquor store.
Medical, dental, optical and orthopedic supplies (prescription service only).
Newsstand.
Stationery and office supplies.
Tobacco, candy and nut store.
4. The permitted accessory convenience goods and services listed above shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the
building in which located; provided, that if a private club is requested, that the total gross floor area for all accessory uses, including a private club,
shall not exceed twelve and one-half percent (12.5%).
5. Each accessory use shall be limited to a maximum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area per specific use grouping listed in subsection C3
of this section. (1991 Code § 16-15-540)
6. Ministorage facilities located in the office districts shall comply with the following requirements:
a. The building height is limited to twelve feet (12'); provided, however, if the facilities contain an accessory dwelling to be used for management and
security purposes, the height of the dwelling shall not exceed thirty five feet (35').
b. The minimum building setback from a public street shall be fifty feet (50'), plus one-half (1/2) the right of way designated on the major street plan
when adjacent to an arterial street or freeway service road and thirty five feet (35') if adjacent to a nonarterial street.
c. The minimum building setback from a freeway and all other boundaries is ten feet (10'); provided, however, the board of adjustment may allow a
five foot (5') building setback in this instance if the wall of the building is also to be used to meet the screening requirement in subsection C6k of
this section. Any spaces between perimeter buildings shall require construction of an eight foot (8') masonry wall between buildings.
d. Exterior building walls shall consist of masonry construction using brick, stone, stucco or concrete tilt-up panels. Metal or standard (smooth)
concrete block exterior walls are not permitted.
e. The floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed 0.5.
f. Access doors to storage units shall not be visible at ground level from an abutting O or R district and shall not be visible from an abutting public
street.
g. No hazardous, toxic or explosive materials are permitted to be stored in such facilities.
h. Open air storage is prohibited in the OL district. Open air storage is prohibited on the perimeter of the lot in an OM district, but may be permitted
on the interior of the lot if the storage is not visible at ground level from an abutting O or R district or any public street.
i. The development site should have frontage on and access to an arterial street.
j. Only one ground sign shall be permitted. Location, size and height of such sign shall be determined by the board of adjustment; provided, however,
the sign shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height and thirty two (32) square feet of display surface area or two-tenths (2/10) of a square foot of
display surface area per linear foot of street frontage (whichever is greater), and illumination, if any, of the sign shall be by constant light.
k. A screening fence or masonry wall (to be determined by the board of adjustment) a minimum of eight feet (8') tall in height is required along the lot
line or lot lines in common within an R district unless the developer opts to develop in accordance with subsection C6c of this section. (Ord. 2007-
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 182/269
04, 10-30-2007)
D. Private Clubs: Private clubs in the OL district shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The private club shall be located within the principal building.
2. The private club shall not occupy more than five percent (5%) of the gross floor area of the building in which located.
3. Exterior business signs identifying the private club are prohibited.
E. Frontage Required: Except as provided in section 11-2-11 of this title for public protection and utility facilities, a minimum frontage of one hundred feet
(100') is the requirement of the special exception uses unless the use unit requirements are more restrictive, in which case, the more restrictive shall
apply. (1991 Code § 16-15-540)
Chapter 6
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
11-6-1: PURPOSES:
A. General Purposes: The commercial districts are designed to:
1. Achieve the commercial objectives of the comprehensive plan.
2. Meet the needs for commercial services and goods of the trade area.
3. Preserve and promote the development of efficient commercial facilities and encourage a compatible relationship between commercial facilities and
other land uses and thoroughfares by:
a. Differentiating the types and purposes of commercial activities.
b. Establishing bulk and area controls.
c. Requiring off street loading and parking facilities.
d. Controlling the number, area, location, and types of signs.
e. Protecting the character of commercial districts and their peculiar suitability for commercial uses.
B. CS Commercial Shopping Center District: The CS district is designed to accommodate convenience, neighborhood, subcommunity, community, and
regional shopping centers providing a wide range of retail and personal service uses.
C. CG Commercial General District: The CG district is designed to:
1. Accommodate existing development of mixed commercial uses which are well established, while providing a degree of protection to adjacent
residential areas.
2. Accommodate the grouping of certain commercial and light industrial uses which are compatible with one another.
D. CH Commercial High Intensity District: The CH district is designed to accommodate high intensity commercial and related uses. (1991 Code § 16-16-
600)
11-6-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
The principal uses permitted in the commercial districts are designated by use units. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described,
including their respective off street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use conditions in chapter 13 of this title. The use units
permitted in commercial districts are set forth in table 1 of this section. (1991 Code § 16-16-610)
TABLE 1
USE UNITS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
(Chapter 11 Of This Title)
X - Use By Right E - Special Exception
No. Use Unit
Districts
CS CG CH
1 Areawide uses X X X
2 Areawide special exception uses E E E
4 Public protection and utility facilities X1 X1 X
5 Community services, cultural and recreational facilities X X X
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 183/269
8 Multi-family dwellings and similar uses E E X
10 Off street parking areas X X X
11 Offices and studios X X X
12 Eating places other than drive-ins X X X
13 Convenience goods and services X X X
14 Shopping goods and services X X X
15 Other trades and services X X
16 Ministorage E X X
17 Automotive and allied activities E X X
18 Drive-in restaurants X X
19 Hotel, motel, and recreation facilities X X X
20 Commercial recreation, intensive E E
21 Business signs and outdoor advertising X X X
22 Warehousing and wholesaling E X
24 Light manufacturing and industrial research and development E E
Note:
1. Transmitting towers including, but not limited to, wireless telecommunications, and excluding amateur radio towers, require board of adjustment
approval.
(Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
11-6-3: ACCESSORY USES:
A. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use permitted in a commercial district are permitted in such districts.
B. Accessory Use Conditions:
1. Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum building setback lines of the applicable district.
2. An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be made structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall
therewith, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building.
3. Signs in the commercial district, whether accessory or principal uses, are subject to the use conditions of use unit 21, chapter 13 of this title. (1991
Code § 16-16-620)
11-6-4: BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
TABLE 2
BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Districts
CS
CG
CH
Frontage (minimum feet):
Arterial 150
100
n/a
Not an arterial 50 50 n/a
Floor area ratio (maximum) 0.50
0.75
n/a
Setback from centerline of abutting street (minimum feet): Measured from centerline of abutting street; add 1/2 of the right of way
width designated on the major street plan, or 25 feet if the street is not designated on the major street plan
Arterial 50 50 n/a
Not an arterial 25 25 n/a
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 184/269
Setback from abutting R district boundary lines (minimum feet) 101
101
n/a
Building height (maximum feet) n/a n/a n/a
Note:
1. Plus 2 feet setback for each 1 foot of building height exceeding 15 feet if the abutting property is within an RE, RS, or RD district.
(1991 Code § 16-16-630)
11-6-5: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES:
The special exception uses permitted in commercial districts, as designated in section 11-6-2, table 1 of this chapter, are subject to the minimum
requirements set out below and such additional safeguards and conditions as may be imposed by the board of adjustment.
A. Multi-family use, where permitted by special exception, shall comply with the bulk and area requirements of the RM-2 district.
B. Except as provided in subsection A of this section, all special exception uses shall comply with the bulk and area requirements of the use district in
which located. (1991 Code § 16-16-640)
Chapter 7
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
11-7-1: PURPOSES:
A. General Purposes: The industrial districts are designed to:
1. Achieve the industrial objectives of the comprehensive plan.
2. Meet the needs for industrial services and goods of the city trade area.
3. Preserve and promote the development of efficient industrial areas and to minimize the adverse effects of industrial uses on other land uses and
thoroughfares by:
a. Differentiating the types and purposes of industrial activities.
b. Establishing bulk and area controls.
c. Requiring off street loading and parking facilities.
d. Controlling the number, area, location, and types of signs.
e. Protecting the character of industrial districts and their peculiar suitability for industrial uses.
B. IL Industrial Light Manufacturing And Research And Development District: The IL district is designed to provide an environment conducive to the
development and conservation of modern industrial and scientific research facilities and to provide areas suitable for manufacturing, wholesaling,
warehousing, and other industrial activities which have no objectionable environmental influences.
C. IM Industrial Moderate District: The IM district is designed to group together a wide range of industrial uses which may produce moderately
objectionable environmental influences in their operation and appearance.
D. IH Industrial Heavy District: The IH district is designed to provide areas for manufacturing and other industrial activities which may constitute substantial
environmental influences or hazards. (1991 Code § 16-17-700)
11-7-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
The principal uses permitted in the industrial districts are designed by use units. The use units are groupings of individual uses and are fully described,
including their respective off street parking, loading, and screening requirements and other use conditions in chapter 13 of this title. The use units
permitted in the industrial districts are set forth in table 1 of this section. (1991 Code § 16-17-710)
TABLE 1
USE UNITS PERMITTED IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(Chapter 11 Of This Title)
X - Use By Right E - Special Exception
No. Use Unit Districts
IL IM IH
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 185/269
1 Areawide uses X X X
2 Areawide special exception uses E E E
3 Agriculture X X X
4 Public protection and utility facilities X X X
10 Off street parking area X X X
11 Offices and studios X X X
12 Eating places other than drive-ins E E E
13 Convenience goods and services E E E
14 Shopping goods and services E E E
15 Other trades and services X X X
16 Ministorage X X X
17 Automotive and allied activities X X X
20 Commercial recreation facilities, intensive E X X
21 Business signs and outdoor advertising X X X
22 Warehousing and wholesaling X X X
23 Mining and mineral processing E E
24 Light manufacturing and industrial research and development X X X
25 Moderate manufacturing and industry X X
26 Heavy manufacturing and industry E X
(Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007; amd. Ord. 2015-03, 2-10-2015)
11-7-3: ACCESSORY USES:
A. Accessory Uses Permitted: Accessory uses customarily incident to a principal use permitted in an industrial district are permitted in such districts.
B. Accessory Use Conditions:
1. Accessory buildings shall meet the minimum building setback lines of the applicable district.
2. An accessory building erected as an integral part of the principal building shall be structurally a part thereof, shall have a common wall therewith, and
shall comply with the requirements applicable to the principal building.
3. Accessory storage of materials, equipment, or products within two hundred feet (200') of an abutting R district shall be screened by the erection of a
screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the abutting R district.
4. Business signs for scientific research facilities and institutions not exceeding in the aggregate one-half (0.5) square foot of display surface area per
one linear foot of street frontage may be erected on each street frontage of a lot. Ground signs shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height. No
business signs shall be located within fifty feet (50') of an R district if visible from such district. Illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.
5. Except as provided in subsection B4 of this section, accessory signs in the IL, IM, and IH districts are subject to the use conditions in use unit 21 in
chapter 11 of this title. (1991 Code § 16-17-720)
11-7-4: BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Table 2: The following shall apply, except as provided in table 3 of this section for scientific research facilities and institutions:
TABLE 2
BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS
IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Districts
IL IM IH
Frontage (minimum feet):
Arterial 150
200
200
Not an arterial 50 50 50
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 186/269
Floor area ratio (maximum) n/a
n/a
n/a
Setback from centerline of abutting street (minimum feet): Measured from centerline of abutting street; add to the distance
designated in the column to the right, 1/2 of the right of way width designated on the major street plan, or 25 feet if the street is not
designated on the major street plan
Arterial 50 50 50
Not an arterial 25 25 25
Setback from abutting AG, R, or O district boundary lines (minimum feet) 75 75 75
Building height (maximum feet) n/a
n/a
n/a
B. Table 3:
TABLE 3
BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH FACILITIES AND INSTITUTIONS
Frontage (minimum feet):
Arterial 200
Not an arterial 200
Floor area ratio (maximum) 0.50
Setback from centerline of abutting street (minimum feet): Measured from centerline of abutting street; add to the distance designated in the
column to the right 1/2 of the right of way width designated on the major street plan, or 25 feet if the street is not designated on the major
street plan
Setback from abutting AG, R, or O district boundary lines (minimum feet) 50
Building height (maximum feet) n/a
(1991 Code § 16-17-730)
11-7-5: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES, REQUIREMENTS:
Special exception uses shall conform to the bulk and area requirements of the use district in which located. (1991 Code § 16-17-740)
Chapter 8
FLOODWAY SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT
11-8-1: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The initial boundaries of the floodway supplemental district shall be established only after notice and public hearing before the planning commission and
by approval of the city council. Amendments to the floodway district shall be established in the same manner as amendments to any other zoning district
as set forth in chapter 16 of this title, including provisions for fees and public notice. Lands within the floodway supplemental district shall be identified on
the official zoning map by the suffix FD following the general zoning district designation. The boundaries of the floodway supplemental district may be
amended so as to maintain uniformity with the purposes of this title upon a finding that:
A. A flood control project of the federal, state, county or city government, or a private person, has substantially altered the boundaries of the floodway;
B. Flood data compiled subsequent to the enactment of the district indicates that the boundaries of the district should be adjusted; or
C. Proposed improvements such as berms, dikes, channel improvements, or flood retention reservoirs will substantially alter the boundaries of the
floodway and the actual construction of said improvements has been assured by the submission and acceptance of bond. (1991 Code § 16-18-800)
11-8-2: PURPOSES:
The floodway supplemental district is designed to:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 187/269
A. Protect life;
B. Reduce and prevent flood damage;
C. Reduce public expenditures in areas subject to flooding;
D. Permit reasonable use of land in areas subject to flooding;
E. Promote the general welfare of the community; and
F. Prevent or reduce flood damage by keeping floodways free of manmade obstructions to permit the free flow and discharge of floodwaters. (1991 Code
§ 16-18-810)
11-8-3: GENERAL FLOODWAY REGULATIONS:
The following general regulations apply to the use of land located within an FD floodway supplemental district:
A. Structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand flood conditions.
B. Materials which in time of flood might float away and lodge against bridge abutments or otherwise serve to restrict the flood discharge capacity of the
water channel are prohibited. (1991 Code § 16-18-820)
11-8-4: FD FLOODWAY SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
A. Uses Permitted Subject To Procedural Requirements; Findings: Within an FD floodway supplemental district, uses included within use unit 1 are
permitted by right. Certain uses (listed below) may be permitted by the board of adjustment, after adherence to the procedural requirements for a
special exception and upon the board's finding that:
1. The use will not substantially affect or be affected by the flow of waters during times of flood.
2. The use will not impair the appropriate use, present or future, of neighboring property and the use will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this
title.
B. Uses Permitted By Board Of Adjustment: The uses which may be permitted by the board of adjustment are:
1. Parking.
2. Temporary outside storage of materials.
3. Temporary amusement enterprises.
4. Open air recreational uses such as golf courses, driving ranges, picnic grounds, etc.
5. Other open air uses not requiring the erection of permanent principal structures, but which may require the erection of accessory structures.
C. Other Uses Prohibited: All other uses are prohibited within an FD floodway supplemental district.
D. Time Limit For Certain Uses: Uses approved by the board which are not permitted within the applicable general use district shall abate within one year
from the date of amendment to the official zoning map removing the floodway supplemental district designation from the land upon which the use is
located. (1991 Code § 16-18-830)
11-8-5: NONCONFORMITIES:
A. Continuation Of Nonconforming Structure: A structure lawfully existing within a floodway supplemental district at the effective date of said floodway
supplemental zoning and which would be prohibited in said floodway supplemental district shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue subject
to the following provisions:
1. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged.
2. Should such structure be damaged or partially destroyed by any means to the extent of seventy five percent (75%) of its current replacement cost at
time of damage, said structure shall not be restored.
3. Ordinary repairs may be made on any nonconforming structure, provided said structure is not enlarged. If a nonconforming structure becomes
physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance and a final order of vacation or demolition is entered by a duly authorized official
by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be used, restored, repaired or rebuilt.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 188/269
B. New Construction Prohibited: No construction of a permanent principal structure shall be allowed on any lot located within a floodway supplemental
district even though said lot was filed of record or was within a subdivision approved by the city or its legal predecessor prior to the effective date of the
floodway supplemental zoning in said district. (1991 Code § 16-18-840)
11-8-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR FLOODING:
The fact that land or property is not included within a floodway supplemental district as provided in this chapter or a flood hazard area as authorized by
section 11-2-2 of this title shall not constitute assurance that such land or property is not subject to flooding and shall not be so interpreted. (1991 Code
§ 16-18-850)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 9
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state has in 82 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1601 through 1618, as amended, delegated the responsibility of local governmental
units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
A. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions
in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight
areas.
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-4: INTERPRETATION:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 189/269
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-5: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage.
E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. (Ord.
2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-6: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Structures which are on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of
the principal structure (such as garages and storage sheds).
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in
preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO or A1-99.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base flood or one percent (1%) chance flood.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BOARD: The Oklahoma water resources board.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system
would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the
case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 190/269
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water
surface elevations of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocities.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have
been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: A person accredited by the board and designated by a floodplain board, to administer and implement laws and
regulations relating to the management of the floodplains.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not
limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes
such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of
interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closures and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national flood insurance program
regulations.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 191/269
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. "Permanent
construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure"; provided, that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the
national flood insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10) or (d)
(3) of the national flood insurance program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods
of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-7: LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-8: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 192/269
A. Osage County: The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a scientific and engineering report
entitled, "Flood Insurance Study For Osage County, Oklahoma And Incorporated Areas" dated April 2, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
B. Tulsa County: The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report
entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For Tulsa County, Oklahoma And Incorporated Areas" dated October 16, 2012, with the accompanying flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. However, the current effective flood map
for the city of Skiatook identified by "The Flood Insurance Study For Tulsa County, Oklahoma And Incorporated Areas" dated August 3, 2009, with the
accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) shall be used for this purpose until October 16, 2012. (Ord. 2012-08, 7-31-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-9: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
A. Designation: The city council shall appoint, by resolution, a floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other
appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
B. Duties And Responsibilities: Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
2. Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
3. Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter.
4. Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval are required.
5. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to
be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
6. Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, the Oklahoma water resources board, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency.
7. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
8. Shall obtain certified base flood elevation data from the applicant/developer to administer this chapter effectively and reduce flood damage within the
community.
9. When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
10. Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot
(1'); provided, that the community first complies with 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12.
11. Become accredited by the board in accordance with 82 Oklahoma Statutes sections 1601 through 1618, as amended.
12. After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in the city, determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and
manufactured homes located in the SFHA have been substantially damaged and enforce the substantial improvement requirement. (Ord. 2009-04,
6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-10: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-11: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any
other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2009-04,
6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 193/269
11-9-12: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these
regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-13: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Permit Procedures:
1. Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
a. Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures.
b. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
c. Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 11-9-9B1 of this chapter.
2. Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following
relevant factors:
a. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
b. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
c. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
d. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
e. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
f. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems.
g. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site.
h. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
i. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
j. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-14: VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
A. The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in any court of competent jurisdiction.
D. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency management
agency upon request.
E. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or the state
inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
F. Variances may not be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 194/269
G. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of section 11-9-3 of this chapter.
H. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
I. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
J. Prerequisites for granting variances:
1. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
2. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. Showing a good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances.
3. No variance shall be granted for a structure to be constructed below the base flood elevation.
K. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use; provided, that:
1. The criteria outlined in subsections A through I of this section are met; and
2. The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to
public safety.
L. Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the floodplain board, accompanied by a filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
M. A copy of any variance issued shall be sent to the OWRB within fifteen (15) days of issuance. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-15: GENERAL FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
A. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
B. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
C. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
D. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions
of flooding;
E. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
F. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from
the systems into floodwaters; and
G. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff.
8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-16: SPECIFIC FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 195/269
A. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this section as proposed in subsection 11-9-13B1 of this chapter is satisfied.
B. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood level.
C. Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
D. Manufactured Homes:
1. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. For the
purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
2. Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: a)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; c) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred
"substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the I-beam of the manufactured home is
elevated at a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Also, the home shall be installed by a licensed installer and comply with state law.
3. Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-
30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection be elevated so that:
The bottom of the I-beam of the manufactured home is at a minimum one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, support the manufactured home chassis and also
installed by a licensed installer that complies with state law.
E. Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
3. Meet the permit requirements of subsection 11-9-13B1 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in
subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
F. Accessory Structure:
1. Structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment.
2. Structure shall be small and not exceed six hundred (600) square feet in size.
3. Structure shall be unfinished on the interior.
4. Structure can be used only for parking and limited storage.
5. Structure shall not be used for human habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas).
6. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated at a minimum of one foot (1') above the BFE.
7. Structure is constructed and placed on building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
8. Structure is designed to have low flood damage potential, i.e., constructed with flood resistance materials.
9. Structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
10. Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure.
11. Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below the BFE.
12. Structure is to be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby structures. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 196/269
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-17: SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
A. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 11-9-2, 11-9-3, and
11-9-5 of this chapter.
B. All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit
requirements of sections 11-9-13 and 11-9-15 through 11-9-20 of this chapter.
C. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 11-9-8 or
subsection 11-9-9B8 of this chapter.
D. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
E. All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-18: AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-9-8 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flows may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of
one foot (1') above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
B. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum
of one foot (1') above the highest adjacent grade and at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if
no depth number is specified).
C. A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed
in subsection 11-9-13B1a of this chapter are satisfied.
D. Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
11-9-19: FLOODWAYS:
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-9-8 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply:
A. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of sections 11-9-15 through 11-9-20 of this chapter.
C. Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations; provided, that the community complies with all of 44 CFR chapter
1, section 65.12. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-03 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION. Go to new ordinance.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 197/269
11-9-20: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity violating the requirements of this chapter, or any conditions made pursuant thereto, shall be guilty of
an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined the maximum amount allowed by law. Each day's violation thereof shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. In addition to a fine, the city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or to
correct the violations thereof. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such person from the responsibility to correct
prohibited conditions or to remove prohibited buildings, structures, obstructions or improvements, nor prevent the enforcement, correction, or removal
thereof. (Ord. 2009-04, 6-30-2009, eff. 8-3-2009)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-06 - STATE HIGHWAY-20 . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 10
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS AND OVERLAY DISTRICTS
11-10-1: PURPOSES:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this chapter to encourage unified design of housing, commercial, office, industrial or institutional areas and facilities, or
combinations thereof, to provide for integrated developments having harmony of design and variety of function. It does not permit a greater density or
uses different from those set forth in the regulations of the district in which the development is located, but this chapter shall provide for a greater
flexibility in the design of buildings, yards, courts, and circulation than would otherwise be possible through the strict application of district regulations,
while maintaining density and area coverage permitted in the general zoning district or districts in which the project is located, and to produce:
1. A maximum choice in the types of environment and living units available to the public.
2. Open space and recreation areas.
3. A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding natural topography and geologic features, and prevents soil erosion.
4. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical development.
5. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lower housing costs.
6. An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding development.
7. A more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of other chapters of this title.
B. Design: This chapter is designed to provide for small and large scale developments incorporating a single type or a variety of residential and related
uses, which are planned and developed as a unit. Such development may consist of individual lots or it may have common building sites. Common
land must be an essential and major element of the plan, which is related to and affects the long term value of the homes and other development. A
planned unit development shall be a separate entity with a distinct character in harmony with surrounding development. (1991 Code § 16-19-910)
11-10-2: ADMINISTRATION OF PUD:
A. General:
1. Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination thereof, owning or possessing a property right or interest in or to a tract of not less
than two (2) acres in size located within a residential district or districts may make application for the approval of an outline development plan as
provided in subsections B, C and D of this section.
2. Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination thereof, owning or possessing a property right or interest in or to a tract of not less
than three (3) acres in size located within one or more commercial and/or office districts may make application for the approval of an outline
development plan as provided in subsections B, C and D of this section.
3. Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination thereof owning or possessing a property right or interest in or to a tract of not less
than twenty (20) acres in size located within an industrial, office or residential district may make application for approval of an outline development
plan for an industrial, educational, medical or other types of institutional planned unit developments as provided in subsections B, C and D of this
section.
4. An application for the approval of an outline development plan or the supplemental district designation PUD may be processed simultaneously with
and contingent upon an application for an amendment to the zoning map which, if successful, would result in the tract being placed in an appropriate
zoning district or districts.
B. Application And Outline Development Plans; Fee: An application for a planned unit development shall be filed with the planning commission. The
application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee. Such fee shall not include advertising and sign costs, which shall be
billed to the applicant. The application shall be in such form and content as the planning commission may by resolution establish; provided, that three
(3) complete copies of an outline development plan and fifteen (15) extra copies of the maps shall accompany the filing of the application. The outline
development plan shall consist of maps and/or text, which contain:
1. Existing topographic character of the land.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 198/269
2. Proposed land uses, including public uses and open spaces, and the approximate location of buildings and other structures.
3. The character and approximate density of dwellings. Density shall be expressed in number of dwelling units and quantitative area of each identifiable
segment of the PUD.
4. The approximate location of streets.
5. Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed.
6. An explanation of the character of the planned development.
7. The expected schedule of development; provided, that it meets the requirements of subsection 11-10-3E of this chapter.
C. Public Hearing And Planning Commission Action:
1. The planning commission, upon the filing of an application for the approval of a planned unit development, shall set the matter for public hearing and
give fifteen (15) full days' notice thereof by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. In addition, written notice shall be mailed to all owners
of property, as listed on current tax rolls, within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundaries of the subject property twenty (20) full
days prior to the date of public hearing. Within sixty (60) days after the filing of an application, the planning commission shall conduct the public
hearing and shall determine:
a. Whether the PUD is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
b. Whether the PUD harmonizes with the existing and expected development of the surrounding areas.
c. Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site.
d. Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and standards of this chapter.
2. The planning commission shall then recommend approval, approval with modification, or denial of the application.
3. An application recommended for approval or approval subject to modification shall be forwarded with the text, the outline development plan, and the
recommendations of the planning commission to the city council for further hearing as provided in subsection D of this section. (1991 Code § 16-19-
970)
4. An application recommended for denial shall not be considered further unless the applicant, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the planning
commission action, files a written request with the city clerk for a hearing by the city council. (1991 Code § 16-19-970; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
D. City Council: Upon receipt of the application, outline development plan, and planning commission recommendation, the city council shall hold a hearing,
review the outline development plan, approve, disapprove, modify, or return the outline development plan to the planning commission for further
consideration. Upon approval, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the supplemental designation PUD, and the applicant shall be authorized to
process a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions of the outline development plan.
E. Planned Unit Development Subdivision Plat: A planned unit development subdivision plat shall be filed with the planning commission and shall be
processed in accordance with the subdivision regulations and, in addition to the requirements of the subdivision regulations, shall include:
1. Details as to the location of uses and street arrangements.
2. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space as will reasonably ensure its continuity and conservation. Open space
may be dedicated to a private association or the public; provided, that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the city
council.
3. Such covenants as will reasonably ensure the continued compliance with the approved outline development plan. In order that the public interest
may be protected, the city shall be made beneficiary of the covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of structures, setbacks,
screening, and access. Such covenants shall provide that the city may enforce compliance therewith.
F. Issuance Of Building Permits: After the filing of an approved PUD subdivision plat, and notice thereof to the building inspector, no building permit shall
be issued on land within the PUD except in accordance with the approved plat. In a residential PUD, a building permit for a freestanding or separate
accessory commercial structure shall not be issued until building permits have been issued for at least one-half (1/2) of the number of dwelling units on
which the authorization of the commercial unit is based.
G. Amendments: Minor changes in the platted PUD may be authorized by the planning commission upon a review of a proposed amended subdivision
plat, incorporating such changes, so long as substantial compliance is maintained with the outline development plan and the purposes and standards
of the PUD provisions hereof. The proposed amended subdivision plat shall then be submitted and approved in accordance with the subdivision
regulations. Changes which would represent a significant departure from the outline development plan shall require formal abandonment and the
subsequent filing of a new application for a planned unit development.
H. Abandonment: Where a planned unit development has been processed, its abandonment shall require the city council's approval, after
recommendation by the planning commission, of an application for amendment to the zoning map repealing the supplemental designation of PUD.
Where the planned unit development subdivision plat has been recorded, its abandonment shall also require the vacation of the plat. (1991 Code § 16-
19-970)
11-10-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Authorization: A planned unit development may be authorized upon compliance with all of the general provisions of this section.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 199/269
B. Location: A planned unit development shall be permitted in any district except an AG agriculture district and RE residential estate district.
C. Minimum Site Size: The minimum size of the site upon which a planned unit development shall be located shall be as follows:
1. Not less than two (2) acres in size for residential development.
2. Not less than five (5) acres for commercial or office development.
3. Not less than twenty (20) acres for industrial, educational, medical and other types of institutional development.
D. Design Characteristics: The proposed planned unit development shall be designed to provide for the unified development of the area and in accordance
with the spirit and purposes of the district in which the unit is located. The design may provide for modification of yard, setback, and height
requirements, but the density, intensity of use, and coverage requirements for the district, and the minimum dimensions established for the design of
courts shall not be modified. (1991 Code § 16-19-920)
E. Time Limit: The construction of the planned unit development shall be started within two (2) years of the effective date of approval of the planned unit
development subdivision plat. Failure to begin the development within said two (2) years shall automatically void the development plan requiring
vacation of the plat. The developer shall be notified, in writing, of the expiration of approval within twenty five (25) days from the expiration date by the
office of the building inspector; or by the office of the city clerk. Action shall be taken by the planning commission and the city council to amend the
zoning map to repeal the PUD designation, and the land shall remain in the same zoning classification which existed immediately preceding the
approval of the planned unit development. Failure to file a plat, after approval, for a supplemental PUD designation within two (2) years shall relinquish
the supplemental PUD designation. (1991 Code § 16-19-920; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
F. Homes Association: A homes association shall be created if other satisfactory arrangements have not been made for improving, operating, and
maintaining common facilities including streets, drives, service and parking areas, and recreation areas. When required, the owner(s) shall establish a
homes association in accordance with the requirements and procedures outlined by the planning commission and city council.
G. Review And Approval; Covenants: In every instance, the PUD shall be reviewed as to the proposed location and character of the uses and the unified
treatment of the development of the tract. The regulations of the general zoning district or districts remain applicable except as specifically modified
pursuant to the provisions of this section. No modification of use or bulk area requirements of the applicable general use district or districts shall be
permitted unless a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions and requirements of this section is submitted and approved in accordance with the
subdivision regulations; and in addition to the requirements of the subdivision regulations, shall include such covenants as will reasonably ensure the
continued compliance with the approved outline development plan. In order that the public interest may be protected, the city shall be made beneficiary
of the covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of structures, setbacks, screening, and access. Such covenants shall provide
that the city may enforce compliance therewith. After the plat is approved in accordance with the subdivision regulations, it shall be filed of record in the
office of the county clerk of the county in which the property is located. (1991 Code § 16-19-920)
11-10-4: USES PERMITTED IN PUDs:
The following uses are permitted in various types of planned unit developments:
A. Residential:
1. Principal Uses: When located within an RS, RD, or RM district, the development may consist of one or more of the dwelling types contained in use
unit 6, single-family dwelling; use unit 7, two-family dwelling; and use unit 8, multi-family dwelling and similar uses. When located within an RMH
district, the development may consist of one or more of the dwelling types contained in use unit 6, single-family dwelling; use unit 7, two-family
dwelling; and use unit 8, multi-family dwelling. The uses other than dwellings which are permitted by right or exception in the RS districts may be
included within a PUD, if such uses do not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the PUD and are designed and located so as to
be compatible with the residential uses of the PUD and with the residential use of adjacent properties.
2. Accessory Uses: Accessory uses customarily incident to the principal uses included within the PUD are permitted and shall comply with the
accessory use conditions of that district or districts in which it is located, except as provided below for accessory commercial facilities. Accessory
signs shall comply with the provisions of the residential districts except as hereafter provided for accessory commercial uses. Within a PUD,
accessory commercial facilities may be included within the PUD in accordance with the following standards:
a. The commercial uses shall be limited to the uses contained in use unit 12, eating places other than drive-ins, and use unit 13, convenience goods
and services.
b. The aggregate floor area of the commercial facilities shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet per dwelling unit nor a total of thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet.
c. Each commercial establishment shall be limited to a maximum of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of floor area.
d. Commercial signs shall be limited to one nameplate of not more than sixteen (16) square feet for each establishment. Nameplates shall be
attached flat against a building wall and shall not be animated, flashing, or have other than indirect illumination. Window signs shall not be
permitted.
e. The commercial area shall be designed primarily for the service, convenience, and benefit of the residents of the PUD and shall be designed and
located in such manner as to be compatible with the residential use of the PUD and of adjacent properties.
B. Commercial Or Office: In commercial, office or combination commercial and office planned unit developments, the permitted uses are the same as
those for the use units which are permitted by right in the district or districts in which the PUD is located.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 200/269
C. Industrial, Educational, Medical And Other Types Of Institutional PUDs:
1. In industrial planned unit developments, the permitted uses are the same as those for the use units which are permitted by right in the district or
districts in which they are located.
2. In medical planned unit developments, the permitted uses are the same as those for the use units which are permitted by right in the office district or
districts in which they are located.
3. In educational and other institutional planned unit developments, the uses permitted consist of the principal educational or institutional use and
accessory use necessary in the accomplishment of the principal use.
4. An educational or institutional PUD may contain residences of one or more dwelling types permitted in the RM-2 district; provided, that they are
supplemental to principal uses and used as student dormitories, patient housing or employee housing (of those employees whose job responsibilities
require they live on the premises). The number of permitted dwelling units shall be governed by subsection 11-10-5B of this chapter. Accessory
commercial uses are allowed and shall be governed by subsection A2 of this section. (1991 Code § 16-19-930)
11-10-5: BULK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Width And Lot Area Minimum: Within a PUD, a minimum lot size requirement of two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet shall apply to
townhouse lots utilized for dwelling purposes. A minimum townhouse lot width requirement of twenty feet (20') shall apply to lots utilized for dwelling
purposes.
B. Number Of Permitted Dwelling Units:
1. It is the intent of this chapter that the aggregate density and intensity of use within a residential PUD remain the same as that which would be
permitted if the area were developed conventionally, but that within the PUD the permitted number of dwelling units may be reallocated irrespective
of use district lines or lot lines. The maximum number of permitted dwelling units within a residential PUD shall be computed as follows:
Residential area of permitted DUs = the PUD divided by minimum land area per DU permitted in the applicable use district.
2. The residential area for the purposes of the above described computation shall be the gross area of the PUD less the lot area or areas designated
for any use other than dwellings, quasi-dwellings, residential open space and recreation areas. The minimum land area per dwelling unit for the
purposes of the above described computation shall be the least restrictive minimum land area per dwelling unit permitted in the applicable district as
set forth in chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7 of this title. Each six hundred (600) square feet of a quasi-dwelling, such as a care home, shall constitute a
dwelling unit. If the PUD is within two (2) or more use districts, the permitted density shall be the sum of the permitted dwelling units computed
separately for the residential area within each district.
C. Livability Space: Within a residential PUD, livability space shall be provided in an aggregate amount of not less than the amount of livability space
required by the applicable use district for conventional development of a comparable number of dwelling units. Required livability space may be
provided on the lot containing the dwelling unit or units on which computed, or in common areas. Common livability space shall be designed and
located so as to be accessible to the dwelling units it is intended to serve. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common livability space as
will ensure its continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in compliance with the provisions of subsection 11-10-2E of this
chapter.
D. Building Height: Within a PUD, there shall be no maximum height.
E. Yards: Within a PUD, there shall be no minimum yards, except as provided within section 11-10-6, "Perimeter Requirements", of this chapter. (1991
Code § 16-19-940)
11-10-6: PERIMETER REQUIREMENTS:
The building setback from the exterior boundaries of the PUD shall not be less than the minimum yards customarily required for the district or districts in
which located; provided, that within two hundred feet (200') of any abutting property in an RE and RS classification, structures containing more than two
(2) dwelling units and exceeding fifteen feet (15') in height measured from the ground floor to the top of the top plate shall be set back twenty five feet (25'),
plus two feet (2') of setback for each one foot (1') of building height exceeding fifteen feet (15') measured from the ground floor level to the top of the top
plate. Unenclosed off street parking areas, containing six (6) or more spaces, shall be screened from adjoining RE and RS districts by erection of a
screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the RE and RS districts; provided, that if the parking area is located more than fifty feet
(50') from the RE and RS districts, the screening requirement shall not apply. (1991 Code § 16-19-950)
11-10-7: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Off street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as specified in the applicable use units and in conformance with the requirements of chapter 12 of
this title. Required spaces may be provided on the lot containing the dwelling units for which it is intended to serve or in common areas. Common parking
area shall be designed and located so as to be accessible to the dwelling units it is intended to serve. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of
common parking space as will ensure its continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in compliance with the provisions of
subsection 11-10-2E of this chapter. (1991 Code § 16-19-960)
11-10-8: APPEALS TO DISTRICT COURT FROM ACTIONS OF CITY COUNCIL:
Any person aggrieved may appeal the final action of the city council on a proposed PUD outline development plan, or on a proposed subdivision plat which
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 201/269
incorporates the provision of the PUD, to the district court by filing with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the action a notice of appeal stating the
grounds thereof. There shall be no right of appeal to the district court from any act of the planning commission taken in its recommending or advisory
capacity to the city council. (1991 Code § 16-19-980; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
11-10-9: STATE HIGHWAY 20 (SH-20) CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT:
A. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
ADMINISTRATOR: Any person or persons having the authority to approve building or site plans or issue development permits in the city of Skiatook.
FACADE: The front exterior of a building, typically facing the primary street. Corner buildings may have two (2) front facades.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: The application of an additional layer of development standards, regulations or exceptions that modifies existing land use
regulations. It acts as a supplement to the underlying zoning designation.
SIDE ELEVATION: The side of any building or structure, typically not facing a public street.
WAINSCOT: A decorative building material applied to lower portions of an exterior wall.
B. Purpose:
1. Ensure the corridor is aesthetically pleasing and develops in a coordinated fashion.
2. Protect an area that represents a significant opportunity for business and commercial investment, important to the long term economic health of
Skiatook.
3. Ensure the Skiatook downtown area is protected from unattractive architecture that could negatively impact its charm and character.
4. Protect the investment of existing and new businesses from unattractive architecture.
5. Promote higher property values.
C. SH-20 Corridor Overlay District Designated: The district impacts all lots having frontage on SH-20 between a point beginning at the intersection of SH-
11 and SH-20 westward to a point approximately 1/4 mile west of the intersection of SH-20 and N. 52nd W. Ave. Said lots meeting these criteria shall
be subject to the standards outlined in this section. The district is depicted in figure 11-10-9.1 of this section and is defined on the official zoning map.
The overlay covers an area slightly larger in the original town area of Skiatook, between B Street on the east and the Tulsa/Osage County line on the
west. This area is governed by an additional set of standards described in subsection M of this section.
FIGURE 11-10-9.1
SH-20 OVERLAY DISTRICT
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 202/269
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 203/269
D. Permitted Uses: The base zoning districts of parcels fully or partially within the designated overlay district shall not be affected. All applicable
regulations for use, yard, area, lot dimensions, utility placement, etc., shall be those specified for each zoning district, including any planned
development stipulations.
E. Application: Commencing on the date of the adoption hereof, these overlay district standards shall apply to the following:
1. All new construction of buildings or structures for parcels zoned OL, OM, CS, CG, CH, IL, IM, and IH, or those within planned developments
containing said uses.
2. All exterior building improvements requiring a building permit.
F. Nonconforming Structures: Any building or structure that lawfully exists at the time this section is enacted, which would not otherwise be permitted under
this section, may be continued in the same manner as it existed before the effective date hereof. Any future construction, additions, reconstruction, or
renovations shall be subject to the requirements of this section.
G. Single-Family And Multi-Family Residential: These regulations shall not apply to parcels zoned RE, RS, RD, RM, RMH, or those within planned
developments containing said uses. These uses may continue in perpetuity until such time as they may be redeveloped or rezoned for a use described
in subsection D of this section.
H. General Requirements:
1. All development shall follow city of Skiatook procedures and requirements described in chapter 2, "General Zoning Provisions", of this title except as
noted in this section.
2. Architectural drawings shall be submitted to the community development department at the time the application for a building permit is made. These
drawings shall depict architectural details that consist of:
a. Renderings or drawings of building elevations that clearly define the exterior building materials to be used to indicate compliance with this section.
The administrator shall review the proposed exterior building materials for compliance of this section prior to issuance of a building permit.
I. Building Facades:
1. Blank featureless facades shall not be permitted along any exterior wall facing SH-20 or other public street within the overlay district.
2. Metal may not be used as the primary building material on the front facade of any structure facing SH-20, but may be used as an accent material
comprising no more than ten percent (10%) of the total area of the facade. Exterior building materials shall include brick, split faced concrete block,
stone, stucco, synthetic stucco, cement board or wood siding. Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) may be used but must be accompanied
with another approved material.
3. The front one-third (1/3) of any building side elevation shall use similar materials as the front facade. Metal may be used on the remaining portion of
the building side (figure 11-10-9.2 of this section).
4. Masonry materials may be used as a wainscot along the entire building side elevation as an option to the front one-third (1/3) requirement. The
wainscot must be at least three feet (3') in height.
5. In the case of flat faced buildings not using a pitched roof, a parapet wall is required along the front facade and along the front one-third (1/3) of any
building side to screen rooftop equipment. The parapet wall shall utilize material that is similar to that of the facade and be of sufficient height to
screen rooftop equipment (figure 11-10-9.2 of this section). Metal may not be used as the exterior material for the parapet wall.
6. Roofs may utilize metal material.
7. Metal may be used as an accent material for awnings or sheltering elements for pedestrians (figure 11-10-9.2 of this section).
FIGURE 11-10-9.2
TYPICAL FRONT FACADE
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 204/269
J. Corner Lots: If any building is located on a lot or parcel with a second frontage on a public street other than SH-20 (figure 11-10-9.3 of this section), then
both sides of the building shall have an equally detailed facade as described in subsection I of this section.
FIGURE 11-10-9.3
CORNER BUILDING TREATMENT
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 205/269
K. Building Entrances: Primary building entrances shall be clearly defined, and shall be recessed or framed by a sheltering element such as an awning,
arcade, overhang, or portico (in order to provide weather protection for pedestrians). Said elements may be constructed out of metal. Public entrances
flush with the building wall with no cover are not allowed (figure 11-10-9.4 of this section).
FIGURE 11-10-9.4
BUILDING ENTRANCE
L. Multiple Buildings In Commercial Centers: In order to ensure unity between all buildings in a commercial development consisting of more than one
building, all buildings in such a development, including pad site buildings, shall employ a consistent architectural style or theme, be constructed of
similar exterior materials, and feature similar colors. Design criteria for large and multi-phase developments shall be provided for review.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 206/269
M. Original Town Area: A special set of criteria has been established for buildings that reside in the "original town area" of Skiatook, which for purposes of
this section are defined as parcels within an area between the Tulsa/Osage County line on the west and North B Street on the east. The general area
is illustrated in figure 11-10-9.5 of this section.
FIGURE 11-10-9.5
ORIGINAL TOWN AREA DEFINED
1. Standards: Within the original town area the following standards shall apply:
a. Metal may not be used on the front facade or side elevation of any building. This includes awnings, porticoes, shelters, or similar features.
b. Metal is permitted on the back side of the building in the service areas only.
c. Brick shall be the preferred building material and shall match or approximate that of adjoining structures in color and texture when possible. The
administrator may vary this requirement in certain situations, so long as the intent of this section is maintained.
2. Exemptions: Buildings on the national historical register shall be exempt from the provisions of this section that conflict with requirements for
maintaining the building's integrity as a historical building.
N. Wall Articulation: In order to prevent large flat expanses of featureless exterior walls, structures having single walls exceeding fifty feet (50') in length
shall incorporate two (2) or more of the following features at least every fifty feet (50') in length (figure 11-10-9.6 of this section):
1. Changes in color, graphical patterning, changes in texture, or changes in material.
2. Projections, recesses, and reveals, expressing structural bays or other aspects of the architecture with a minimum change of plane of twelve inches
(12").
3. Windows and fenestration.
4. Gable projections.
5. Horizontal/vertical breaks.
6. Other similar techniques.
The administrator may approve variations or alternate treatments, so long as the intent of this section is met.
FIGURE 11-10-9.6
WALL ARTICULATION
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 207/269
O. Commercial Drive-Through Lanes: Drive-through facilities associated with commercial uses shall be architecturally integrated with the building.
P. Screening Of Refuse Collection And Loading Areas: Refuse areas shall be screened in order to reduce the visual and acoustic impacts of these
functions on adjacent properties and public streets. Nonenclosed service, storage, and off street loading areas shall be screened with opaque sight
obscuring walls and/or fences of between six feet (6') and eight feet (8') in height made of durable materials. (Ord. 2015-07, 6-30-2015)
Chapter 11
USE UNITS
11-11-0: INTRODUCTION OF USE UNITS:
A. Use Unit Described: The use unit is a grouping of individual uses having similarities in characteristics of function and/or performance which enable
systematic consideration of location and other regulations. Within each zoning district, the permitted uses are the included uses of the designated use
unit. The use units, herein established, are identified by number and name. Set forth in each use unit is a descriptive statement, an alphabetical listing
of the included uses, use conditions, and off street parking and loading requirements.
B. Interpretation: Questions of the inclusion or exclusion of a particular principal use within a use unit shall be decided by the board of adjustment. A use, if
specifically listed in a use unit, shall not by interpretation be included as a principal use within any other use unit.
C. Applicability Of Use Conditions: A use shall be subject to the provisions of the district in which located and, in addition, shall be subject to the use
conditions specified in the applicable use unit. Where the requirements of the use unit are greater than the requirements of the use district, the use unit
requirements shall govern.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 208/269
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements: The off street parking and loading requirements shall not apply to uses located within the CH
commercial high intensity district. (1991 Code § 16-20-1000)
11-11-1: USE UNIT 1 AREAWIDE USES BY RIGHT:
A. Description: Certain public uses, agricultural uses, open land uses, and similar uses which are either subject to other public controls or which do not
have adverse effects on other land uses.
B. Included Uses: Passive agricultural uses such as: cultivation, forestry, grazing, planting; open land uses such as: arboretum, flood management project,
reservoir, wildlife preserve; public uses such as: fire alarm, historical marker, street sign, thoroughfare, utility line.
C. Use Conditions: None.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements: None. (1991 Code § 16-20-1001)
11-11-2: USE UNIT 2 AREAWIDE SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES:
A. Description: Uses which in some instances may be suitable for location in any use district but, because of their potential adverse influence on adjacent
properties, require site review and are, therefore, permitted in all use districts as a special exception requiring board of adjustment approval.
B. Included Uses: Airport, heliport, bus station, cemetery, crematory, hydroelectric generation plant, mausoleum, post office, rifle and skeet range, gun
club, sanitary landfill, sewage disposal facility, water treatment plant, and off site construction facility.
C. Use Conditions: Construction facilities:
1. The use may continue for a period not to exceed two (2) years in the same location.
2. Ingress and egress must be from arterial or collector streets; provided, that the board of adjustment may approve a location with access to a minor
street upon a finding that such location would not result in increased traffic on streets in residential areas.
3. The use shall not be located nearer than one hundred feet (100') to any lot containing an occupied dwelling without the consent of the owner thereof.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Airport 1 per each 500 sq. ft. of enclosed passenger
terminal area
1 per 2,000 - 4,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 per 40,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per
each additional 100,000 sq. ft.
Other
uses
As may be required by the board of adjustment in granting the special exception use
(1991 Code § 16-20-1002)
11-11-3: USE UNIT 3 AGRICULTURE:
A. Description: Agricultural uses and services, and certain other uses suitable for location in an agricultural environment.
B. Included Uses: Animal and poultry raising, farming, fishery, ranching, chick hatchery, guest or dude ranch, and riding stable or academy, and dairy
farming.
C. Use Conditions: None.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements: None. (1991 Code § 16-20-1003)
11-11-4: USE UNIT 4 PUBLIC PROTECTION AND UTILITY FACILITIES AND OPEN AIR FACILITIES (TEMPORARY):
A. Description: Public protection, wireless telecommunication and utility facilities that may have technical location requirements necessitating specific
locations in or around area services, and certain temporary open air land uses that may be objectionable to certain other uses and are, therefore,
permitted in certain districts by special exception and in other districts by right.
B. Included Uses: Ambulance service, electric regulation station (excluding storage or service garages and yards), fire protection facility, pressure control
station (gas or liquid, excluding storage or service garages and yards), shelter (civil defense or storm), transmitting towers (including, but not limited to,
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 209/269
wireless telecommunications and excluding amateur radio towers), water storage facility, temporary open air facilities such as carnival, Christmas tree
sales, circus, and tent revival.
C. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ANTENNA: Any structure or device used to collect or radiate electromagnetic waves, including both directional antennas, such as panels or dishes,
and omnidirectional antennas, such as whips, but not including satellite earth stations.
ANTENNA ARRAY: A structure attached to a telecommunication tower that supports telecommunication antennas.
EIA-222: Electronic industries association standard 222, "Structural Standards For Steel Antenna Towers And Antenna Support Structures".
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT LANDSCAPES AND ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT STRUCTURES: Shall apply to those areas identified as such
within the national register of historic places.
NONWHIP ANTENNA: An antenna that is not a whip antenna, such as dish antennas, etc.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, or information of the user's choosing, without change in
the form or content or information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA: An antenna used to provide a telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A structure more than ten feet (10') tall, built primarily to support one or more telecommunications antennas.
WHIP ANTENNA: An omnidirectional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape that is no more than six inches (6") in diameter.
D. Telecommunication Towers:
1. Permitted By Right: Telecommunication towers are a permitted use in all CH, IL, IM, and IH districts if proposed towers satisfy the following
requirements. Telecommunication towers permitted under this subsection may exceed compatibility and base district height restrictions.
a. Aesthetic Protection: Telecommunication facilities shall be so located to ensure that historically significant landscapes are protected. The views of
vistas from architecturally and/or historically significant structures should not be impaired or diminished by the placement of telecommunication
facilities.
b. Setback: Tower shall be a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from any RS-3 or more restrictive district.
c. Height: Tower height, excluding antenna array, does not exceed:
(1) Seventy five feet (75'), if the tower is at least two hundred feet (200'), but less than two hundred fifty feet (250'), from any RS-3 or more
restrictive district.
(2) One hundred feet (100'), if the tower is at least two hundred fifty feet (250'), but less than three hundred fifty feet (350'), from any RS-3 or more
restrictive district.
(3) One hundred twenty feet (120'), if the tower is three hundred fifty feet (350') or greater, from any RS-3 or more restrictive district.
d. Antenna Array Height: The antenna array does not exceed the tower height by more than ten feet (10').
e. Setback Of Guywires: All guywires and guy anchors are set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from any property line.
f. Tower Type: The tower is of monopole design, or one of equal or lesser impact, if located within three hundred fifty feet (350') of any RS-3 or more
restrictive district.
g. Collocation: A telecommunication tower must be designed and built so as to be capable of use by at least three (3) wireless communication
providers such as cellular or PCS providers using antenna arrays of nine (9) to twelve (12) antennas each within fifteen (15) vertical feet of each
other with no more than three degrees (3°) twist and sway at the top elevation. The owner of the tower and the property on which the tower is
located must certify to the city that the antenna is available for use by at least two (2) other wireless telecommunication providers on a reasonable
and nondiscriminatory basis and at a cost not exceeding the market value for the use of the facilities. If the property on which the tower is
proposed to be located is to be leased, the portions of the actual or proposed lease that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
subsection D1g shall be submitted with the building permit application.
h. Security Fencing: The base of the tower is enclosed by security fencing.
i. Compliance With Applicable Regulations: The tower is constructed and operated in compliance with current federal communications commission
and other applicable federal and state standards.
j. Neighborhood Impact: The proposed tower location will not cause a negative impact on any residential neighborhood. In determining neighborhood
impact, the director shall consider the opinion of record property owners within three hundred feet (300'), but the director shall not be bound by
such opinions expressed.
k. Removal Of Tower: Upon the discontinuance of use of any such tower for a period of thirty (30) days, said tower is to be removed by the
applicant/owner.
2. Replacement Of Existing Poles: Telecommunication towers erected to replace existing poles are permitted in all zoning districts; provided, that:
a. The pole replaced is a functioning utility pole or light standard within an established utility easement or public right of way, recreational facility light
pole, or telecommunication tower.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 210/269
b. Replacement tower height, including antenna array, does not exceed:
(1) The height of the original utility, light standard, or recreational facility light pole by more than ten feet (10'); or
(2) The height of the original telecommunication tower and antenna array.
c. The pole replacement does not obstruct a public sidewalk, public alley, or other public right of way.
d. Pole appearance and function, except for antenna, are not significantly altered.
3. Placement On Existing Poles: Such placement is permitted in all zoning districts; provided, that:
a. Telecommunication antennas are permitted on existing utility, lighting, telecommunication towers, and sign structures at or exceeding fifty feet (50')
in height.
b. Provided, that the antenna does not exceed the height of the structure by more than ten feet (10') if a nonwhip type or fifteen feet (15') if a whip
type.
c. Telecommunication antennas located on existing structures are not subject to the five thousand foot (5,000') separation requirement.
d. If any additions, changes, or modifications are to be made to the monopole, the director of community development shall have the authority to
require proof, through the submission of engineering and structural data, that the addition, change, or modification conforms to structural wind load
and all other requirements of the current building code adopted by the city.
4. Roof Mounted Telecommunication Antennas: This is allowed on nonresidential buildings in all districts; provided, that:
a. Nonwhip antennas do not exceed the height of the building by more than ten feet (10') and are screened from view from any adjacent public
roadway.
b. Whip antennas do not exceed the height of the building by more than fifteen feet (15') and are located no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the
perimeter of the building.
c. Prior to the installation of a roof mounted antenna, the community development department shall be provided with an engineer's certification that
the roof will support the proposed antenna and associated roof mounted antennas and equipment.
d. Roof mounted antennas and associated equipment may either be screened with enclosures or facades having an appearance that blends with the
building on which they are located or by locating them so they are not visible from an adjacent public roadway.
5. Building Mounted Telecommunication Antennas Of Nonwhip Type: These are allowed on nonresidential buildings in all zoning districts; provided,
that:
a. The antenna is mounted flush with the exterior of the building so that it projects no more than thirty inches (30") from the surface of the building to
which it is attached.
b. The antenna's appearance is such as to blend with the surrounding surface of the building.
c. Associated equipment shall be placed either within the same building or in a separate building that matches the existing building in character and
materials or blends with landscaping and other surrounding material adjacent to the separate building housing the equipment. Associated
equipment for roof mounted antennas may be located on the roof of the building if it is screened from view from any adjacent public roadway.
6. Application For Building Permit; Photographs Required: When an application for a building permit to locate a telecommunication antenna on an
existing building or other structure is made, the community development department shall be provided with color photo simulations showing the site
of the existing structure with a photorealistic representation of the proposed antenna and the existing structure as it would appear viewed from the
closest residential property. The applicant shall also submit photographs of the same views showing current appearance of the site without the
proposed antenna. Applications for building permits made pursuant to this section shall be acted upon within a reasonable period of time.
7. Distance Measurement: Distances in this section shall be measured along a single straight line between the center of the tower base and the
nearest point on any property line of identified historic property, or RS-3 or more restrictive district or use. For the purposes of applying restrictions
set forth in this section, "RS-3 or more restrictive zoning district or use" excludes property that is:
a. Used as public or private primary or secondary educational facility;
b. Used as a college or university educational facility;
c. Owned by the U.S., state of Oklahoma, Osage County, Tulsa County, or the city of Skiatook, and not used for RS-3 or more restrictive residential
uses;
d. Used primarily for religious assembly;
e. Used as a cemetery;
f. Occupied by nonresidential, nonconforming use(s); or
g. Any other site similar to those listed above and determined by the director of community development to be consistent with the purposes of this
section.
8. Exceptions And Exemptions:
a. A telecommunication tower that fails to meet the requirements of this section may be authorized by obtaining a special exception through the
board of adjustment.
b. Towers erected by a public agency for police, fire, EMS, 911 or other similar public emergency communication shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section. (Ord. 2000-09, 9-12-2000)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 211/269
11-11-5: USE UNIT 5 COMMUNITY SERVICES, CULTURAL AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES:
A. Description: Community services, cultural and recreational facilities which are needed in residential areas to serve the residents or need a residential
environment, but which are or can be objectionable to nearby residential uses. These uses are permitted by special exception in some districts, by right
in some districts, and prohibited in other districts.
B. Included Uses: Aquarium, art gallery (not operated for profit), care home, sanatorium, children's nursery, church, college, community center, convent,
cultural facility NEC, day camp, golf course, hospital, library, marina, monastery, museum, novitiate, planetarium, private club or lodge (the chief activity
which is a service and is not operated as a business or for profit, and which hold and maintain an income tax exempt status. Includes charitable,
eleemosynary, educational and recreational establishments).
C. Use Conditions:
1. Churches When Located Within An AG Or R District:
a. Minimum lot area of one acre.
b. No parking shall be permitted within a required front yard.
2. Schools: High schools shall have their principal vehicular entrance and exit on an arterial street.
3. College, University, Convent, Monastery, Novitiate, Hospital: A minimum site area of one acre shall apply.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Area Loading Berths
Aquarium, art gallery, museum,
planetarium, cultural facility NEC
1 per 440 sq. ft. floor area 1 per 10,000 - 200,000, plus 1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Care home, nursing home 1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Children's nursery 1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area n/a
Church 1 per 40 sq. ft. of chapel or sanctuary floor area 1 per 10,000 - 200,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional area 200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
College, university 1 per 400 sq. ft. of classroom floor area, plus 1 per 4
dormitory beds, plus 1 per 3 stadium seats
1 per 10,000 - 200,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Community center 1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Convent, monastery 1 per 800 sq. ft. 1 per 10,000 novitiate of floor area 200,000 sq. ft.,
plus 1 per each additional 200,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
Golf course 6 per green, plus 1 per 400 sq. ft. of clubhouse floor area
1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Hospital 1 per bed 1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Library 1 per 300 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 10,000 - 200,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Private club 1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Public park 1 per 3 stadium seats, plus 200 sq. ft. of community
center or recreation building, plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. of pool
area
1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Sanatorium 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Schools:
Elementary and junior high 1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Senior high:
If parking areas are
combined
1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 10,000 - 200,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per additional
200,000 sq. ft.
If parking is separate and if
stadium does not exist
1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 per 3 stadium seats
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 212/269
Tennis court 2 per court, plus 1 per 400 sq. ft. of clubhouse area of
floor area
1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft.
(1991 Code § 16-20-1005)
11-11-6: USE UNIT 6 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING:
A. Description: Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Included Uses: Single-family detached dwelling.
C. Use Conditions: None.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Single-family detached dwelling unit 2 per dwelling unit n/a
(1991 Code § 16-20-1006)
11-11-7: USE UNIT 7 DUPLEX DWELLING:
A. Description: Duplex dwelling.
B. Included Uses: Duplex dwelling.
C. Use Conditions: None.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Duplex dwelling 2 per dwelling unit n/a
(1991 Code § 16-20-1007)
11-11-8: USE UNIT 8 MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING AND SIMILAR USES:
A. Description: Multi-family dwelling and similar uses.
B. Included Uses: Fraternity or sorority houses, multi-family dwelling, rooming/boarding house, and townhouse.
C. Use Conditions:
1. Fraternity, Sorority, Rooming/Boarding House: In the determination of the applicable bulk and area requirements, a fraternity, sorority, or
rooming/boarding house shall be considered a multi-family dwelling, with each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area constituting a one bedroom
dwelling unit.
2. Townhouse: A townhouse use is subject to the submission to and approval of a subdivision plat by the city council after receiving prior review and
recommendations of the planning commission, in accord with existing laws and regulations, and the subsequent filing in the office of the county clerk
of the county where the property is located.
3. Screening Requirements: The uses included in use unit 8, when located on a lot abutting an RE, RS, or RD district, shall be screened from the
abutting RE, RS, and RD district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with these R
districts.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Fraternity or sorority 1 per 2 beds 1 per 10,000 - 200,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 213/269
house 200,000 sq. ft.
Multi-family dwelling 1.5 per efficiency or 1 bedroom dwelling unit; 2 per 2
bedroom dwelling unit
Rooming/boarding
house
1 per 1 bed 1 per 10,000 - 200,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft.
(1991 Code § 16-20-1008)
11-11-9: USE UNIT 9 MOBILE HOME DWELLING:
A. Description: Mobile home dwelling.
B. Included Uses: Mobile home dwelling.
C. Use Conditions: The mobile home dwelling when located within an RMH district and located on a lot which is abutting an RE, RD, or RS district shall be
screened from the abutting RE, RS, or RD district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line in common with the
RE, RS, or RD district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Mobile home 2 per each mobile home dwelling unit None
(1991 Code § 16-20-1009)
11-11-10: USE UNIT 10 OFF STREET PARKING AREAS:
A. Description: Off street parking areas which are principal uses.
B. Included Uses: Off street parking areas.
C. Use Conditions: Off street parking areas shall conform to the design, lighting, and improvement requirements for off street parking contained in chapter
12 of this title.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements: Not applicable. (1991 Code § 16-20-1010)
11-11-11: USE UNIT 11 OFFICES AND STUDIOS:
A. Description: Offices, studios, medical and dental laboratories, and certain other compatible or supporting services.
B. Included Uses: Abstract company, advertising agency, artist's studio, broadcasting or recording studio, computing service, copying service, data
processing service, drafting service, dental clinic and laboratory, employment agency, financial institution (other than pawnshop), funeral home, medical
and dental offices, clinics and laboratories, general business offices (excluding on premises sale of merchandise), optician or optical laboratories,
photography studio, prescription pharmacy (provided, that no sundry or other merchandise is sold or offered for sale), studio or school for teaching
ballet, dance, drama, fine arts, music, language, business, or modeling, transportation ticket office, travel agency, and veterinary office (excluding
boarding services).
C. Use Conditions: The uses included in use unit 11, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by
the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Funeral home 1 per 40 sq. ft. of assembly floor area, plus 1 per 300
sq. ft. of nonassembly floor area
1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Medical and dental offices,
clinics, and laboratories
1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 10,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Other uses 1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area Same as above
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 214/269
(1991 Code § 16-20-1011)
11-11-12: USE UNIT 12 EATING PLACES OTHER THAN DRIVE-INS:
A. Description: Eating places offering on premises consumption of food and drink within the principal structure and/or providing carryout service if no curb
service is provided, and if no in-car on premises consumption is permitted. Use unit 12 is established in recognition of the desirability of providing
dining facilities in certain environments in which commercial facilities of a higher use intensity would be objectionable.
B. Included Uses: Eating places such as: cafeteria, coffee shop, delicatessen, and restaurant.
C. Use Conditions: The uses included in use unit 12, when located within a district other than an R district and located on a lot which is abutting an R
district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common
with the R district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Eating places 1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 2,000 - 10,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1012)
11-11-13: USE UNIT 13 CONVENIENCE GOODS AND SERVICES:
A. Description: Retail trade and service establishments which are desirable conveniences in certain residential and office districts. Use unit 13 is
established to permit the location of convenience goods and services in certain environments in which commercial facilities of a higher use intensity
would be objectionable.
B. Included Uses: Retail trade establishments such as drugstores, florist, bakery, candy and confection and/or nut store, dairy store, food specialty store,
grocery, health food store, ice cream store, gift, novelty, and souvenir shop, liquor store, newsstand, tobacco store; and service establishments such as
dry cleaning and pick up, barbershop, beauty shop, and laundry and pick up.
C. Use Conditions:
1. In the CS district, there shall be no open air storage or display of merchandise offered for sale within two hundred feet (200') of an abutting R district.
2. The uses included in use unit 13, when located within a district other than an R district and located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be
screened from the abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R
district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Grocery store 1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 2,000 - 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Retail trade and service 1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 5,000 - 10,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1013)
11-11-14: USE UNIT 14 SHOPPING GOODS AND SERVICES:
A. Description: Retail establishments engaged in the merchandising of shopping goods and services. (1991 Code § 16-20-1014)
B. Included Uses: 1) Retail trade establishments such as: commercial art gallery, antique shop, artist supply store, automotive parts and accessories store,
bicycle shop, bookstore, business and office machine sales establishment, camera and photographic supply store, clothing and accessories store,
cosmetic shop, department store, dressmaking shop, dry goods store, fur storage, furriers, garden supply store, gasoline service station, hardware
store, hobby shop, home furnishing store (selling appliances, china, glassware, metalware, draperies, curtains, upholstery, floor coverings, and
furniture), jewelry store, leather goods and luggage store, medical, dental and orthopedic appliances and supply store, musical instrument and supply
store, office furnishing establishment, office supplies store, paint store, pet shop, phonograph and record shop, radio and TV sales, reducing salon,
shoe repair shop, shoe store, sporting good store, stationery store, tailor shop, toy shop, variety store, wallpaper store, wig shop; and 2) retail building
material establishments, exclusive of fabrication or repair, such as: building materials, electrical supply, and plumbing fixtures; and 3) service
establishments, such as: caterer, costume rental service, dry cleaning (limited to 7,000 square feet of floor area), gunsmith, household appliance repair,
interior decorating, self-service laundromat (coin operated), locksmith, photofinishing, picture framing, radio and television repair, and watch and
jewelry repair. (1991 Code § 16-20-1014; amd. Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 215/269
C. Use Conditions:
1. In the CS district, there shall be no open air storage or display of merchandise offered for sale within two hundred feet (200') of an abutting R district.
2. The uses included in use unit 14, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection
and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot lines or lines in common with the R district. (1991 Code § 16-20-1014)
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Gasoline service
stations
1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area with a minimum of 5
spaces
n/a
All other uses 1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of
floor area
(Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007)
11-11-15: USE UNIT 15 OTHER TRADES AND SERVICES:
A. Description: Trade establishments primarily providing business and household maintenance goods and services ordinarily not found in the primary retail
districts because of differing market and site requirements.
B. Included Uses: Trade establishments, including: incidental fabricating, processing, installation, and repair: air conditioning and heating, bait shops,
wholesale bakery, bottled gas, carpeting, decorating, fence, fuel oil, general merchandising establishment NEC, glass, greenhouse, heating equipment,
ice plant, lumberyard, monument (excluding shaping), pawnshop, plastic materials, plumbing shop, printing and publishing, reproduction services, and
vending machines sales and services; service establishments such as: disinfecting and exterminating services, janitorial service, and window cleaning;
contract construction service such as: air conditioning, carpentry, decorating, electrical, furnace cleaning, painting, paperhanging, plastering, plumbing,
sign painting, tile setting; armored car service; and personal services such as: auctioneer, bindery, cabinetmaker, drapery service, frozen food locker,
kennel, laundry, linen supply and industrial laundry, packing and crating of household and other similar goods, rug cleaning, taxidermist, woodworking
shop; repair services such as: armature rewinding repair, business machine repair, computer repair, data processing machine repair, electrical repair
service, furniture, mattresses and pillow, reupholstery, and rug repair; and schools such as: barber, beauty, and trade.
C. Use Conditions: The uses included in use unit 15, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by
the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Trade establishments 1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Service establishments 1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1015)
11-11-16: USE UNIT 16 MINISTORAGE:
A. Description: A structure which contains separate, small size, self-service storage facilities leased or rented to individuals or small businesses. These
facilities are designed to accommodate access only from regular size passenger vehicles and two-axle trucks.
B. Included Uses: Ministorage.
C. Use Conditions:
1. The uses included in use unit 16, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection
and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
2. Within the CS district, there shall be no open air storage of any kind that is visible at ground level from an R district, O district or from a public street.
3. The development site should have frontage on and access to an arterial street.
4. Within the RM-1 and RM-2 districts, the development conditions contained in subsection 11-4-5G of this title shall apply as well as conditions
contained herein.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 216/269
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Uses Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Ministorage 1 per 5,000 sq. ft. of ministorage floor area, plus 2 for an accessory dwelling n/a
(Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007)
11-11-17: USE UNIT 17 AUTOMOTIVE AND ALLIED SERVICES:
A. Description: Automotive and allied activities.
B. Included Uses: Sales: aircraft, agriculture implement, automobile (new and used), boat, camper, mobile home, motorcycle, and truck; and services:
automobile rental, auto wash, and vehicle repair and service.
C. Use Conditions:
1. The uses included in use unit 17, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection
and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
2. Within the CS district, there shall be no open air storage or display of merchandise offered for sale within two hundred feet (200') of an adjoining R
district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Agriculture implements, automotive,
camper, mobile home, motorcycle,
and truck sales
1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of open air display
storage, or service area
1 per 5,000 - 10,000 sq. ft., plus 1
per each additional 15,000 sq. ft.
of floor area
Automobile rental 1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor area, plus adequate off street parking shall be
provided for storage of rental vehicles; no on street parking of rental
vehicles shall be permitted
n/a
Vehicle repair 1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area n/a
(1991 Code § 16-20-1017)
11-11-18: USE UNIT 18 DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS:
A. Description: Eating establishments providing curb service or offering food or drink for on premises consumption within parked motor vehicles, or
permitting the on premises consumption of food or drink within the parked motor vehicles or outside the principal structure.
B. Included Uses: Drive-in restaurants.
C. Use Conditions: The uses included in use unit 18, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by
the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Drive-in restaurants n/a 1 per 5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1018)
11-11-19: USE UNIT 19 HOTEL, MOTEL AND RECREATION FACILITIES:
A. Description: Commercial amusement establishments ordinarily not requiring large sites and which have use characteristics permitting their location in or
near developed commercial trade areas.
B. Included Uses: Billiard parlor, bowling alley, dance hall, enclosed commercial recreation establishments NEC, gymnasium, health club, hotel, motel,
motion picture theater (enclosed), nightclub, skating rink (enclosed), slot car track, swimming pool (enclosed), and tavern. (1991 Code § 16-20-1019)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 217/269
C. Use Conditions: The uses included in Use Unit 19, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by
the erection of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lot lines in common with the R district. Selected uses must comply with ordinance 2007-04.
(1991 Code § 16-20-1019; amd. 2011 Code)
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Hotel,
motel
1 per sleeping room, plus 1 per 200 sq.
ft. of accessory facilities such as
restaurants and taverns
1 per 40,000 - 150,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 150,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 per
5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft. of accessory facilities such as restaurants and taverns, plus 1 per each
additional 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area
All
other
uses
1 per 200 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1019)
11-11-20: USE UNIT 20 COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITIES, INTENSIVE:
A. Description: Commercial recreation facilities, the principal activities of which are usually open air, located in undeveloped outlying sections of the City.
B. Included Uses: Amusement activities NEC, arena, drag strip, drive-in theater, fairgrounds, go-cart track, golf driving range, miniature auto track, outdoor
recreation NEC, racetrack (auto, dog, horse), rodeo grounds, and stadiums NEC.
C. Use Conditions: The uses included in Use Unit 20, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by
the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Drive-in theater n/a n/a
Golf driving range 1 per tee n/a
Uses providing spectator seating such as stadiums, arenas,
and rodeo grounds
1 per 3 seats 1 per 5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000
sq. ft. of floor area
Other uses 1 per 600 sq. ft. of
site area
1 per 5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000
sq. ft. of floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1020)
11-11-21: USE UNIT 21 BUSINESS SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING:
A. Purpose: This section is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the City.
2. To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth.
3. To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property.
4. To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of the sign restrictions.
5. To maintain the integrity of the original or downtown area of Skiatook.
B. Definitions And Interpretation: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ADMINISTRATOR: The Community Development Director, Administrator, City Planner or any individual given the responsibilities for enforcement of
this section.
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign that uses movement or change in lighting to depict an action or create a special effect or scene for the purposes of drawing
attention to a specific location.
BALLOONS, FLOATING DEVICE(S), OR INFLATABLES: A visible airtight or air-flow through apparatus commonly made of latex, mylar, or other
similar material that extends by a cord, rope, string, wire, or other similar material. No person shall erect, maintain, or allow the installation of any
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 218/269
floating device(s) anchored to the ground, any vehicle, any structure or any other fixed object for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention to a
business, commodity, service, sale, or product, except as otherwise permitted in this section. Balloons and all other floating device(s) are prohibited
in the City.
BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric, vinyl, plastic or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or poles at one (1) or more edges.
National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners for the purposes of this
section. For the purposes of this section, a banner is considered a temporary sign.
BILLBOARD: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is located.
BRACKET SIGN: A small, pedestrian-oriented sign that projects perpendicularly from a structure.
EXAMPLE OF A BRACKET SIGN
CANOPY SIGNS: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover (excluding a
marquee) over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the
face or surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight (8) times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this section. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electric or mechanical indication of the time or
temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign, for the purpose of this section.
FEATHER FLAG: A wind device that contains a harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the ground for support that is used for the purposes of
advertising. For the purposes of this section a feather flag is considered a temporary sign.
EXAMPLE OF A FEATHER FLAG
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or
other entity.
GROUND LEVEL: Immediate surrounding natural grade. Berms used to intentionally modify the grade at a sign base is not considered natural grade.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A sign (generally informational), that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking",
"entrance", "loading only", "telephone" and other similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the
sign is located shall be considered incidental.
LOT: Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record,
that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership.
MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding sign that is detached from a building and having a support structure that is a solid-appearing base constructed of
a permanent material, such as concrete block or brick. All other freestanding sign types not meeting the definition of a monument sign shall be either
a pole sign or a pylon sign.
EXAMPLE OF A MONUMENT SIGN
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 219/269
MULTI-TENANT SIGN: A sign containing copy for two (2) or more tenants or occupants located on the same non-residential parcel or in the same
non-residential building.
EXAMPLE OF A MULTI-TENANT SIGN
MURAL SIGN: A picture or sign painted on the exterior wall of a building.
NON-CONFORMING SIGN: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this section.
NONPROFIT: A corporation or an association that conducts business for the benefit of the general public without shareholders or a profit motive.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign directing attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at the
location other than upon the premises where the sign is maintained. This includes but is not limited to, billboard signs.
OFFICE PARK: A project of one (1) or more buildings that has been planned as an integrated unit or cluster on property that is under unified control
or ownership.
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, that is suspended from a rope, wire, or
string, usually in series designed to move in the wind.
POLE SIGN: A sign that is supported by one (1) or more poles, uprights, or braces in the ground that is not a part of or attached to the building.
EXAMPLE OF A POLE SIGN
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 220/269
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but
not limited to: signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used as
advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public rights-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal
day-to-day operations of the business.
EXAMPLE OF A PORTABLE SIGN
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than eighteen inches (18") beyond
the surface of such building or wall.
PYLON OR GROUND SIGN: A freestanding sign that is detached from a building and is supported by one (1) or more poles, uprights, masonry
base, or braces in the ground and that is not a part of a building. Said sign may include space for multiple tenants.
EXAMPLE OF A PYLON OR GROUND SIGN
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign advertising the sale or lease of real property. The sign may include the identification and contact information
of the person and/or company handling such sale, lease, or rent.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of this title.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The real property covered by a public highway, street, road, or alley, as well as that land adjacent to such public highway, street,
road or alley which has been dedicated for public use, or dedicated to or acquired by a governmental entity, whether the United States of America,
the State of Oklahoma, Tulsa or Osage Counties, or the City of Skiatook, Oklahoma, or any political subdivision of such governmental entity, whether
by easement, statutory right, dedication, purchase, condemnation or otherwise.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.
SETBACK: The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
SHOPPING CENTER: A commercial area consisting of two (2) or more retail businesses providing convenience goods, general merchandise, office,
or recreational activities and providing for off street parking adjacent to such activities.
SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 221/269
SINGLE OFFICE BUILDING: An office building containing four (4) or fewer tenants.
SNIPE SIGN: An illegal commercial sign posted on a utility pole, street sign, or other street furniture; or any other sign placed within a public right-ofway
or public property or on private property such that it is visible from a public street. Snipe signs are generally less than six (6) square feet in size
and are made of vinyl, paper, cloth or fabric, polyboard, coroplast, corrugated plastic, poster board, plastic core, cardboard, wood, or plywood and
are mounted in the ground with wood or wire framing, posts, or stakes or stapled or taped or attached to utility poles, street signs, or other street
furniture.
EXAMPLE OF SNIPE SIGNS
STREET: A strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic (as well as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to property, including,
but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, terraces, trails, or other thoroughfares.
STREET FRONTAGE: The distance for which a lot line adjoins a public street, from one (1) lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot
line intersecting the same street.
STRIP PLAZA: A linear arrangement of two (2) or more businesses under one (1) or many ownerships or management providing off street parking
and consisting of a similar compatible architectural or graphic character or theme.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign intended to display or convey a message of a transitory or temporary nature that is not permanently affixed to a
building structure or ground. Said sign may include banners, feather flags, displays constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, cardboard, plywood or other
light material with or without a frame, and is designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign parallel to the plane of such
wall. A banner placed on a wall shall not be considered a wall sign.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity,
event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
C. Sign Heights:
1. The maximum sign height in the City of Skiatook for pole, pylon, or ground signs shall be thirty five feet (35') unless the sign is within the SH-20
Overlay District. Pole signs shall have a minimum of eight and one-half feet (8.5') of clearance from the ground to the bottom of the sign.
2. Maximum sign height for monument style signs shall be six feet (6') from ground level, unless approved for a greater height by the City Planning
Commission.
3. Sign height shall be measured from ground level. Figure 11-11-21.1 of this subsection C illustrates how to measure sign height.
FIGURE 11-11-21.1
MEASURING SIGN HEIGHT
D. Sign Requirements For Commercial, Office And Industrial Districts: The following types of signs, subject to the limitations prescribed for them, shall be
the only signs permitted for uses authorized in the commercial, office, and industrial zoning districts of the City. In no instance will a sign be allowed to
be placed in the public right-of-way. No sign that constitutes a traffic hazard shall be permitted. Pole, pylon and ground signs shall be set back a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') from any side property line, unless abutting a residential district in which case the sign shall be set back thirty feet (30')
and have a maximum height of ten feet (10'). However, monument style signs may be set back fifteen feet (15') if adjacent to a residential district. The
following restrictions also apply:
1. Signs For Single Business Locations (1 Building/1 Tenant):
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 222/269
a. The occupant of a single business structure may have no more than one (1) free standing (pole, pylon, ground, monument) sign on each street
upon which the structure fronts. The total area of signage shall not exceed one (1) square foot of sign for every linear foot of street frontage of the
applicable building subject to the following restrictions.
b. A single business on one (1) lot may have no more than one (1) wall sign for each street upon which the structure fronts. The total area of signage
shall not exceed one and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign for every linear foot of front footage of the applicable building with a maximum wall
sign size of three hundred (300) square feet.
c. If the occupant of a single business structure elects to use a wall sign, the wall sign shall not be higher than the roofline or fascia of the building.
d. If the occupant elects to use an animated or changeable copy sign, only one (1) of the signs (wall, pole, pylon, monument, or ground sign), may
have changeable copy.
e. If the sign is illuminated, illumination shall be constant, indirect lighting directed away from any adjoining residential use. If said sign is placed
between fifty feet (50') and one hundred feet (100') from residential property, then the maximum height shall be ten feet (10'). No flashing,
animated, or twinkling signs may be placed any closer than one hundred feet (100') from adjoining residential property.
f. In all cases any illuminated, animated, twinkling, or changeable copy signs shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candle at the property line of adjoining
residential property. Sign applications shall include a photometric plan or technical specifications indicating brightness of said signs. Said signs
shall operate during normal business hours or until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. whichever is the earliest.
g. Illuminated wall signs shall not face residential property.
h. Signs shall only include the professional or occupational nameplate that includes only the name and/or address and occupation of the occupant, or
name of the business, firm, or company.
i. Pole, pylon, or ground signs shall be limited to thirty feet (30') in height and one hundred (100) square feet in area. If the lot or tract has a frontage
in excess of one hundred (100) linear feet, additional area may be allowed on each side of the sign equal to thirty percent (30%) of the front
footage in excess of the first one hundred feet (100') of said tract or lot up to a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
j. All illuminated, animated, or changeable signs in direct view of traffic signals shall not contain lighting that is red, green, or amber, and shall be
illuminated only during business hours or until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. whichever is the earliest.
k. No sign shall be located within a sight triangle formed by two (2) curb lines (or edge of street) at the intersection of two (2) streets and extending
for a distance of fifty feet (50') each way from the intersection of the curb lines (or edge of street) on any corner.
l. Any sign closer than fifty feet (50') to residential property shall be a monument sign and the side facing the residential property may not be
changeable copy, animated, or twinkling.
2. Signs For A Single Office Building (With 4 Or Fewer Tenants):
a. Each business within a single office building that has an exterior entrance shall be allowed one (1) wall mounted sign no larger than four (4)
square feet adjacent to the entrance and subject to the total sign square footage limitations and requirements set in subsection D1 of this section.
3. Signs In Strip Plazas, Office Parks, And Shopping Centers:
a. Strip plazas, office parks, and shopping centers shall be allowed one (1) sign on each street upon which the structure or structures front. Multiple
signs for individual businesses shall not be allowed. The intent of this is to consolidate businesses on one (1) sign. The maximum height for all
pole, pylon, or ground signs in strip shopping plazas, office parks, and shopping centers shall be thirty five feet (35'). The maximum size of the sign
for the shopping center name shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet, plus a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet for each additional tenant in
the case of multi-tenant signs. The overall allowed square footage shall be three hundred (300) square feet. The minimum clearance from the
ground must be no less than eight and one-half feet (81/2'). Signs shall not be placed within any right-of-way.
b. Each individual business within the strip plaza, office park, or shopping center shall be allowed to display one (1) wall sign. The size of the wall
sign shall be computed by taking the length of the wall of the tenant's leased area and multiply it by 1.5 (the length of the wall in linear feet times
1.5 = total square feet allowed for sign). The maximum square footage wall sign allotment shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. For
strip plazas that are "L" shaped or have an end unit, one (1) wall sign may be permitted for each wall face of the end unit.
c. For any illuminated, animated, or changeable copy sign, all applicable provisions of subsection D1 of this section shall apply.
E. Residential Signs: The following types of signs, subject to the limitations prescribed for them, shall be the only signs permitted for use within the
residential, apartment, and manufactured housing zoning districts of the City.
1. Subdivision Entrance Signs: In single-family detached residential developments that have an approved plat of record, two (2) signs may be placed at
the entrances to the subdivision. Said signs shall be permanent signs constructed of brick, stone, concrete, or other similar material and shall contain
only the name of the subdivision. The sign may be indirectly lighted and shall not produce glare that would impact the vision of motorists. The
Planning Commission must approve height and size of the sign, as well as the setback distance from the road right-of-way. No subdivision entry sign
may be placed within the ultimate right-of-way area of an arterial road.
2. Temporary Real Estate Signs:
a. In residential districts, one (1) temporary sign identifying the property for sale shall be permitted per property. Said signs shall not exceed the
dimensions of two feet by three feet (2' x 3'), with a total maximum sign face area of six (6) square feet, with a maximum of two (2) faces on a
single plane of material. The maximum height of said signs shall be five feet (5') and said signs shall be set back no less than five feet (5') outside
of the right-of-way. A banner may be placed on a fence of the subject property no greater than twelve (12) square feet in size advertising a home
or property for sale. All signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the sale, lease or rental of the property.
b. Two (2) temporary signs conveying information about new residential subdivisions are permitted. Signs shall be limited to twenty four (24) square
feet in area and shall be placed on the property where the new subdivision is being developed. Signs shall not be allowed on any right-of-way.
Signs shall be removed within one (1) year of issuance.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 223/269
c. One (1) real estate sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area located on the private property on the premises of the sale. Additionally, one (1)
directional, open house, or real estate sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area may be placed at each entrance to the subdivision in which
the property for sale is located; however each real estate company may only display one (1) sign at each entrance. Any such sign shall not be
placed in the public right-of-way, shall not be placed or located farther than the nearest major arterial roadway from the site of the sale. Open
house signs shall be removed the day after the open house was conducted.
d. In commercial, industrial, office, or agriculturally zoned districts, one (1) real estate sign may be placed on said property but may not exceed thirty
two (32) square feet of display area and shall be no more than eight feet (8') in height. All signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the
sale of the property. All other requirements of this section shall apply.
3. Temporary Contractor Signs: For contractors performing remodeling or site improvement work for individual properties in residential districts, one (1)
sign measuring two (2) square feet may be placed in an area located on the property upon which the house is located. Said sign must be removed
once the work is completed. Said signs may not be placed within the right-of-way.
F. Civic And Non-Profit Signs: The following types of signs, subject to limitations prescribed for them, shall be the only signs permitted for use by places of
worship, schools, clubs, and other nonprofit organizations located within the City. In no instance will a sign be allowed to be placed in the public rightof-
way.
1. Pole, Monument, Pylon/Ground Signs: Each civic organization shall be allowed one (1) sign per location. Sign size, height and placement shall
follow the restrictions outlined in subsection D1 of this section.
2. Wall Signs: Each civic organization may have one (1) wall sign. The total area of the signage shall not exceed one and one-half (11/2) square feet of
sign for every foot of front footage of the applicable building.
3. Changeable Copy Sign: In lieu of the ground sign set out in subsection F1 of this section, the civic organization may have a changeable copy or
animated sign.
4. Illuminated, Animated Or Changeable Copy Signs: For any illuminated, animated, or changeable copy sign, all applicable provisions of subsection
D1 of this section shall apply.
G. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs, which may include but are not limited to banners and feather flags, cannot be a portable sign, affixed to a portable
sign or any type of utility apparatus and shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in size nor be higher than six feet (6') for a banner and eight feet
(8') for a feather flag. The following requirements apply to temporary signs:
1. Placement: No temporary sign may be placed in the right-of-way or placed in such a way as to block the view of motorists. Signs may not be placed
in the sight triangle as described under subsection D1k of this section. Temporary signs may be placed on the building of the business, on the
property of the business, or on another element that is part of the business, such as fencing or on the structure supporting an existing permanent
sign. No sign, temporary or permanent, may be placed within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
2. Single Businesses Including Multi-Family Complexes: Each place of business is allowed two (2) temporary signs, but only one (1) sign may be
properly staked or mounted in the ground.
3. Strip Shopping Centers And Multi-Tenant Buildings: Each leased space or business within the strip shopping center is allowed one (1) temporary
sign. Said sign may be placed along the street frontage or on the building itself.
4. Temporary Signs As Permanent Signs: A temporary sign may be used as a permanent sign for a period not to exceed one (1) year after the
issuance of the occupancy permit. After this period has expired said sign must be replaced with a permanent sign and an application for a sign
permit submitted and approved. For the Downtown Area (businesses located between N. Osage Avenue and N. "B" Street on W.C. Rogers
Boulevard) a permanent sign must be installed six (6) months after the issuance of an occupancy permit. The Administrator may grant an extension if
the applicant provides in writing the reason for the request and an estimated time by which they will have a permanent sign.
5. Multiple Smaller Temporary Signs: Smaller temporary signs that are less then twenty four (24) square feet in size may be grouped together so long
as the cumulative square footage of all the signs does not exceed twenty four (24) square feet. Said signs may not be scattered around the building
or lot, but must be grouped together.
6. Mural Signs: Any mural sign painted on a building must be approved by the City Council (see figure 11-11-21.2 of this subsection).
FIGURE 11-11-21.2
EXAMPLE OF A MURAL SIGN
7. Non-Profit Organizations: Nonprofit organizations may include, but are not limited to, places of worship, civic organizations, youth sports
organizations, rotary clubs and, veteran centers. Each lot on which the non-profit is located is allowed two (2) temporary signs, but only one (1) sign
may be staked or mounted in the ground. Non-profit organizations may place one (1) off-premises temporary sign on another property with the
owner's permission. However, this will restrict the recipient parcel from adding additional temporary signs as part of the allowances as described
above. Signs may not be placed in the sight triangle as described in subsection D1k of this section or with the public right-of-way.
8. Sandwich Boards: Sandwich boards are permitted in the Downtown Area (see subsection S, "Downtown Area", of this section).
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 224/269
H. Exempt Signs: The following signs are exempt from provisions of this section:
1. Official public notices and notices by public officers in the performance of their duties.
2. Governmental signs for the control or direction of traffic and other regulatory purposes.
3. Flags or emblems of the United States, the State of Oklahoma, or their political subdivisions. The flag shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area
and shall be flown from a pole, the top of which is more than forty feet (40') in height. Feather flags may be used for the sole purpose of expressing
patriotism or for a celebration or holiday decoration. A maximum of two (2) feather flags of this type would be permitted per lot.
4. Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets, and the like.
5. Signs not legible off the lot upon which they are situated, such as drive-up menu boards at drive-in eating places.
6. Corporate or commercial flags (figure 11-11-21.3 of this subsection) are permitted so long as they do not extend more than five feet (5') above the
roofline of the building and are no more than fifteen (15) square feet in area. Corporate flags may not advertise a specific product or service for sale.
Said flags must be spaced at least ten feet (10') apart. A maximum of eight (8) corporate flags may be placed on any one (1) lot or structure.
FIGURE 11-11-21.3
EXAMPLE OF CORPORATE FLAGS
7. Small illuminated or non-illuminated incidental signs such as directional signs, not exceeding four (4) square feet in surface area or higher than four
feet (4'). Said signs may not be snipe signs.
8. Small temporary signs placed adjacent to menu boards, entrances to buildings, or in the landscape bed adjacent to the building foundation. Said
signs shall be within fifteen feet (15') of the building foundation. Said signs shall be no greater than three (3) square feet. In no instance shall these
signs be placed in parking lot islands or in any yard adjacent to the public street right-of-way.
9. Light pole bracket signs are signs placed on light poles located on interior parking lots of commercial developments. Signs shall be placed in a metal
frame and the sign shall be no greater than ten (10) square feet (see figure 11-11-21.4 of this subsection) and a minimum of eight feet (8') high from
finished grade. Signs greater than ten (10) square feet shall be deemed a temporary sign and regulated accordingly. Light poles shall be structural
rated to allow for the sign.
FIGURE 11-11-21.4
LIGHT POLE BRACKET SIGN
10. Political signs. Political signs, not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area, which make known the name of and information concerning a political
campaign of any nature, provided that such signs shall not be placed or erected sooner than thirty (30) days before the primary election and are to
be removed no later than seven (7) days following the general election. No political sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way. Political signs shall
not be placed on any private property without the express permission of the owner or occupant of such property.
11. Public information signs include signs such as a gateway entry sign to the City or other jurisdiction or a sign identifying a public park or other public
facility.
12. Real estate signs (see subsection E2, "Temporary Real Estate Signs", of this section).
13. Signs placed on single family residential lots that are designed to communicate school pride or recognize an individual athlete, cheerleader, etc.,
who attends a local school.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 225/269
14. Signs that are shrink-wrapped on personal vehicles.
15. Garage sale sign. One (1) garage sale sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area located on the private property of the premises where the
sale is conducted. Additionally, one (1) directional or sale sign may be placed at each entrance to the subdivision in which the sale is located,
provided the sign announces only the address and date of the sale being conducted. One (1) additional sign may be posted on each side of the
community board (located on the corner of East 3rd Street and South "A" Street). Any such sign shall not be placed in the public right-of-way, or
located farther than the nearest arterial roadway from the site of the sale, and shall not be posted for more than three (3) consecutive days. All signs
shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours of the conclusion of the sale.
16. Temporary signs at sports fields and on sports field fences do not require permits and will not be required to follow the provisions of this section.
However, said signs shall require approval through user agreements.
17. Gas price signs as long as they only display the price of gasoline and nothing else. Said sign must not be located within a public right-of-way. Gas
pricing signs shall not count against the temporary sign allowances.
I. Non-Conforming Signs:
1. Intent: Signs that were legally in existence prior to the adoption of this section that do not conform to the provisions of this section are declared
nonconforming signs.
2. General Nonconforming Sign Provisions: Subject to the exceptions hereinafter set forth, any nonconforming sign(s) may be continued in operation
and maintenance after the effective date of this section; provided, that nonconforming sign(s) shall not be:
a. Changed to or replaced with another nonconforming sign.
b. Structurally altered so as to extend their useful life.
c. Expanded.
d. Relocated.
e. Reestablished after damage of more than fifty percent (50%) of the value at the time of such damage or destruction.
f. Modified in any way that would increase the degree of nonconformity of such sign.
3. Improvements: Nothing in this section shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a sign or structure declared
unsafe by the Administrator. Such signs may be improved only to the extent that such improvement does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
current market value of the existing sign structure.
J. Termination Of Nonconforming Signs:
1. Any non-conforming sign or sign structure that is partially destroyed by fire, accident, or natural cause beyond fifty percent (50%) of its current
market value shall thereafter be removed or reconstructed in conformance to the provisions of this section.
2. Any non-conforming sign or sign structure that is improved or altered to comply with provisions of this section shall thereafter be considered as
conforming.
3. Any nonconforming on-premises sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with this section immediately upon a change in the principal use
or ownership of the site.
K. Prohibited Signs:
1. General:
a. Off premises signs that carry a commercial message.
b. Signs that are not securely affixed to the ground, or are not otherwise affixed in a permanent manner to an approved supporting structure.
c. Portable signs (see figure 11-11-21.5 of this subsection) are prohibited; however, one (1) such sign existing on the property before the passage of
this section may continue. For said signs to continue, they must be maintained in good working order and wired properly with conduit and a
weatherproof GFCI. Signs shall not be wired with an extension cord. If such a sign is destroyed by vandalism, vehicle accident, or act of nature, it
may not be replaced. No such sign may be placed in a position to obscure the view of motorists or inside City right-of-way or on any utility
easement. Portable signs in excess of one (1) shall be removed.
FIGURE 11-11-21.5
EXAMPLE OF A PORTABLE SIGN
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 226/269
d. Bracket or projecting signs (exception, see subsection S, "Downtown Area", of this section).
e. Roof signs.
f. Billboards.
g. No sign or other device regulated by this section shall be erected or shall continue to be displayed in such a manner as to obstruct the free and
clear vision of vehicle drivers; or at any location where, by reason of position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be
confused with any authorized traffic or government sign, signal, or device; or that makes use of the words "stop", "look", "danger", or any word,
phrase, symbol, or character with such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
h. No sign or advertising device shall be erected on, be placed on, projected, or overhang any right-of-way, walkway, street, alley, or easement
(exception, see subsection S, "Downtown Area", of this section).
i. It shall be unlawful to use a vehicle or a trailer as a sign in circumvention of this section.
j. No signs shall be placed on any private property without the consent of the owner thereof.
k. No signs shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock.
l. No signs shall be placed on any utility pole except for utility identification or similar purposes.
m. Balloons, floating devices and inflatables.
n. No portable, mobile, vehicular or snipe sign shall be permitted within the City, and no motorized vehicle or trailer shall be parked upon public or
private property within the City for the obvious purpose of advertising, provided that commercial vehicles may be identified only by business name,
type of business, business address, business telephone number, and contractor's State/County/City license number when required. Shrink
wrapped signs on personal vehicles are exempt (see subsection H, "Exempt Signs", of this section).
o. Signs placed on public sidewalks except as noted in subsection S, "Downtown Area", of this section.
2. Placing Signs On Public Property: No signs shall be allowed on public property except for the following:
a. Permanent signs, including:
(1) Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
(2) Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company that contain no commercial message.
(3) Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities.
(4) Public information signs as described in subsection H of this section.
b. Temporary signs for which a permit has been issued in accordance with this section that shall be issued only for signs containing no commercial
message.
c. Emergency signs, including emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, public utility company or a contractor doing authorized
or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
L. Structural Requirements: All signs shall comply with the pertinent requirements of the International Building Code and the National Electrical Code.
M. Sign Maintenance: All signs permanent, temporary, or otherwise shall be maintained in good working order at all times. Torn or tattered temporary signs
shall be replaced or removed immediately. Lighted signs shall have all bulbs and fixtures in working order.
N. Unified Sign Plan: A Unified Sign Plan (USP) is an application requesting approval of a comprehensive sign permit establishing the size, location, and
design on the property being developed as a unit. The purpose of the USP is to provide for the establishment of signage criteria that is tailored to a
specific development or location and which may vary from the provisions of this Code. The intent of the USP section is to provide for some flexibility in
the sign criteria of this Code that promotes superior design through architectural integration of the site, buildings, and signs. The USP shall not be used
to circumvent the provisions of this Code and shall not be used for single lot developments.
National or international franchises shall be given reasonable consideration with respect to company standard logos and lettering styles that are an
integral part of the franchise image and identity. The consideration shall not be without restriction and shall be within the boundaries of sound zoning
practice and planning, and in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the USP.
All unified sign plans are subject to the following:
1. All USPs shall include location, size, height, construction material, color, type of illumination, and orientation of all proposed signs.
2. All USPs shall be reviewed by the City of Skiatook Planning Commission and shall conform to all conditions imposed by said commission prior to the
issuance of a sign permit.
3. USPs shall include all signage to be located within the perimeters of the subject site whether in excess of the provisions of this Code or not.
4. USPs may not propose a total sign square footage exceeding three (3) square feet of signage per every one (1) linear foot of street frontage of
subject property.
5. USPs may not include any prohibited sign.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 227/269
O. Inspection, Removal, And Safety:
1. Inspection: All signs shall be inspected periodically by the Administrator/Code Enforcement Officer for compliance with this section.
2. Maintenance: All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair and in safe, neat, clean, and attractive condition.
3. Removal Of Sign: The inspector shall give written notice of the removal of any permanent sign erected or maintained in violation of this section.
Upon failure to comply with this notice, the inspector shall issue a summons to the owner into Municipal Court. Temporary signs erected or
maintained in violation of this section may be removed by the inspector without notice. The inspector shall remove any sign immediately and without
notice if the sign presents an immediate threat to the safety of the public. Any sign that is not in compliance with this section may be removed by the
City. Any sign removal shall be at the expense of the property owner.
P. Permits And Fees:
1. Permit And Fee Requirement: All permanent signs permitted under this section shall require a permit.
2. Application For Permit: The permit application shall contain:
a. Location of the sign structure;
b. Name and address of the sign owner and company;
c. A drawing showing the design, location, materials, and colors of the sign;
d. Pertinent information as may be required to ensure compliance with this section and requirements of the City; and
e. Applications shall be on forms provided by the City.
3. Fee Establishment: Fees for sign permits are one dollar ($1.00) per square foot, with a minimum of thirty dollars ($30.00). All signs over six feet (6')
in height are an additional twenty dollars ($20.00) per foot over the original six feet (6') limit established in this section.
4. Nullification: A sign permit shall become null and void if:
a. The work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months after the date of the permit; or
b. The sign varies in any respect from the approved design or location.
5. Permit Exceptions: The repairing, cleaning, and other normal maintenance to prolong the life of the sign as originally approved shall not be
considered as creating a sign and does not require a sign permit.
6. Unified Sign Plan: Requires Planning Commission approval and application fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00).
Q. Administration And Penalties:
1. Enforcement: The Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this section. Upon presentation of proper
credentials, the Administrator may enter at reasonable times any building, structure, or premises in the City to perform any duty imposed upon them
by this section.
2. Penalties: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day's continuance of violations shall be considered a
separate offense. The owner of any sign, building, or premises, or part thereof, where any matter in violation of this section shall be placed, or shall
exist, and any person who may have knowingly assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense.
R. Appeals:
1. Any person served with a notice of violation shall have the right to appeal to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hear each
duly filed appeal and decide whether to affirm, amend, or reverse the notice of violation or other action appealed. In doing so, the Planning
Commission may interpret the provisions of this section.
2. An appeal shall be in writing and shall be in such form and provide such information as the Planning Commission may require. An appeal must be
delivered to the Office of the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice of violation. Only those matters of issues specifically
raised by the appellant in the written appeal shall be considered in the appeal hearing.
3. The timely filing of an appeal to the Planning Commission shall stay enforcement of the notice of violation or action appealed, including abatement,
until the appeal is finally determined. Failure of a person entitled to appeal under this section either to make appeal or to timely file their appeal shall
constitute a waiver of their right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of their complaint, and such person will be unable to deny the validity of
any order or action that could have been timely appealed.
S. Downtown Area: The following are special requirements covering signage in the Downtown Area. The Downtown Area shall be defined by the following
boundary: Osage Avenue on the west, B Street on the east, 2nd Street on the north, and 3rd Street on the south.
1. No pole signs, banners, or feather flags.
2. Wall signs are permitted but may not take up more than twenty five percent (25%) of the wall area, including window area, on which the sign is
placed.
3. Neon lighting is prohibited.
4. Canopy signs are permitted with a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet of sign area.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 228/269
5. Window signs are allowed if they are semi-opaque in nature and the sign area does not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the window.
6. Decorative flags hung diagonally off the building face are permitted so long as they do not convey an advertising message. One (1) flag may be
erected that says "open" or "closed". Flags shall be spaced a minimum of six feet (6') apart and shall have a dimension of no greater than six (6)
square feet. A clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained from the lowest point of the flag with the ground. Said flags shall not require a permit.
7. Sandwich board or "A" frame signs are permitted so long as the maximum height is limited to forty two inches (42"). Said signs may not reduce
pedestrian sidewalk width to less than five feet (5').
8. All other signage is subject to the restrictions of this section.
T. SH-20 Overlay District:
1. Maximum sign height of any sign within the SH-20 Overlay District shall be twenty five feet (25').
2. Maximum sign area for pole, pylon, ground, or wall signs shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet for a single tenant.
3. All other requirements shall be subject to the restrictions of this section.
U. Variances: Variances from the Sign Code shall only be approved by the Board of Adjustment. In the case of a variance the presence of a hardship must
be proven. (Ord. 2017-03, 6-13-2017)
11-11-22: USE UNIT 22 WAREHOUSING AND WHOLESALING:
A. Description: Warehousing, wholesaling, and trucking often located adjacent to the central business district, in industrial parks served by rail and
highway transportation, and port areas.
B. Included Uses: Warehouses NEC, wholesale establishments NEC, storage NEC, trucking establishments and truck rentals.
C. Use Conditions: The uses included in Use Unit 22, when located on a lot which is abutting the boundary of an R district, shall be screened from the
abutting R district by the erection and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
All uses 1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor area 1 per 5,000 - 25,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 25,000 sq. ft. of floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1022)
11-11-23: USE UNIT 23 MINING AND MINERAL PROCESSING:
A. Description: Extractive operations, certain mineral processing operations, and manufacturing operations which directly utilize minerals at or near the
source.
B. Included Uses: Mining, quarrying, or extraction of coal, ores, stone, sand, or gravel; processing of mineral products such as crushing, washing, and
grading of coal, ore, stone, sand, or gravel; manufacture of portland cement, concrete, or asphaltic concrete, at the source of supply of crushed rock,
sand, or gravel, for utilization off the premises.
C. Use Conditions: The Board of Adjustment, in granting a mining and mineral processing use by special exception, shall consider potential environmental
influences, such as dust and vibration, and shall establish in the particular instance appropriate protective conditions, such as setbacks, screening, and
method of operation as will mitigate the adverse effect on approximate land uses.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
All uses 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area n/a
(1991 Code § 16-20-1023)
11-11-24: USE UNIT 24 LIGHT MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT:
A. Description: Light manufacturing and industrial uses having slight or no objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat,
smoke, noise, or vibration; and facilities for scientific research, development, and testing, which are customarily located on large, landscaped sites and
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 229/269
the operation of which does not produce objectionable environmental effects.
B. Included Uses: Enclosed scientific research, testing, and development, bottling plant, building contract construction service and storage such as
cesspool cleaning, concrete construction service, grain elevators, heavy construction contracting service, masonry, oil well drilling and cleaning,
roofing, sheet metal, stonework, water well drilling and cleaning, and welding shop; any light industrial or manufacturing use except the following:
aluminum, brass, copper, iron or steel foundry or works, acetylene gas manufacture in excess of fifteen (15) pounds' pressure per square inch,
ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture, asphalt manufacture or refining, auto salvage yards, blast furnace, except as a minor and
incidental part of another permitted industrial use, boiler works or forge works, brick, tile, or terra cotta manufacture, celluloid manufacture, coke
manufacture, creosote manufacture or treatment, disinfectant or insecticide manufacture, distillation of bones, coal, tar, or wood, dyestuff manufacture,
fat rendering, fertilizer manufacture (organic), gas (heating or illuminating) manufacture or storage, except where such gas is to be entirely consumed
on the same premises, glue, gelatin, or size manufacture, incineration or reduction of dead animals, garbage, offal or refuse other than that
accumulated and consumed within or on the same premises, lampblack manufacture, match manufacture, lime, cement, or plaster of paris
manufacture, oilcloth or linoleum manufacture, pickle, sausage, sauerkraut, or vinegar manufacture, paint, oil, varnish, or turpentine manufacture,
paper or pulp manufacturing by sulfide processes emitting noxious gas or odors, printing ink manufacture, rayon or cellophane manufacture, refining of
petroleum or other crude materials, rolling mill, rubber manufacture from crude materials, shoddy manufacture, soda ash, caustic soda and washing
compound manufacture, slaughtering of animals, exclusive of poultry and rabbit killing, smelting, soap manufacture, starch, glucose, dextrine
manufacture, stockyards, storage of dismantled automobiles or any form of junk, sugar refining, acid manufacture for wholesale, tallow, grease, or lard
manufacture or refining, tanning or curing of leather, rawhides, or skins or storage of rawhides or skins, tar distillation or manufacture, tar roofing or tar
waterproofing manufacture, wool scouring, hair manufacture, yeast manufacture for wholesale, trades, industries, or uses having moderately
objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise, or vibration.
C. Use Conditions:
1. Enclosed scientific research, testing, and development facilities included in use unit 24, when located in an IL district, shall be conducted within the
enclosed building.
2. All other uses included in use unit 24, which are located within three hundred feet (300') of an R district, shall be conducted within enclosed
buildings.
3. The uses included in use unit 24, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the abutting R district by the erection
and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Research and development
facilities
1 per 500 sq. ft. of
floor area
1 per 5,000 - 40,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per 40,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
All other uses 1 per 800 sq. ft. of
floor area
1 per 2,000 - 40,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per 40,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1024)
11-11-25: USE UNIT 25 MODERATE MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY:
A. Description: Manufacturing and industrial uses having moderately objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat,
smoke, noise, or vibration.
B. Included Uses: All industrial and manufacturing uses except the following: cement, lime, gypsum, plaster of paris, or asphalt manufacturing; chlorine or
hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulfurous, sulfuric acid, or ammonia manufacture; distillation of bones; explosive manufacture or storage; fat rendering;
fertilizer manufacture from mineral or organic materials; garbage, offal, or dead animal reduction or dumping; glue manufacture, petroleum refining;
refuse dump; slaughter of animals; smelting, stockyards; and trades, industries, or uses that have heavily objectionable environmental influences by
reason of the emission of odor, heat, smoke, noise, or vibration.
C. Use Conditions:
1. The uses included in use unit 25, which are located within three hundred feet (300') of an R district, shall be conducted within the enclosed building.
2. The uses included in use unit 25, when located on a lot which is abutting an R district, shall be screened from the adjacent R district by the erection
and maintenance of a screening wall or fence along the lot line or lines in common with the R district.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
All uses
1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 2,000 - 40,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per 40,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of
floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1025)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 230/269
11-11-26: USE UNIT 26 HEAVY MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRY:
A. Description: Manufacturing and industrial uses having substantial objectionable environmental influences by reason of the emission of odor, heat,
smoke, noise, or vibration.
B. Included Uses: Manufacturing or industrial uses not elsewhere classified.
C. Use Conditions: None.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements:
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
All uses
1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 2,000 - 40,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per 40,000 - 100,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. of
floor area
(1991 Code § 16-20-1026)
Chapter 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
11-12-1: APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS:
The off street parking and off street loading facilities, whether they are principal uses, accessory uses, or a minimum requirement for the initiation,
enlargement, or change of use, shall meet the requirements of this chapter as follows:
A. Pursuant To Applicable Use Unit: For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date hereof, parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required by the applicable use unit.
B. Increase In Intensity Of Use: When the intensity of use of any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units,
floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as
required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
C. Existing Use Changed To New Use: Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading
facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the building or structure is erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional
parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use, if the
latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this title.
D. Accessory Facilities: Accessory off street parking and loading facilities in existence on the effective date hereof and located on the same lot as the
building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar
new building or use under the provisions of this title. (1991 Code § 16-21-1100)
11-12-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Occupancy Of Appropriate Space: Off street parking and off street loading facilities shall not occupy required livability space. Space allocated to any
required off street loading berth shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking facilities. Space allocated to any required
off street parking shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street loading facilities.
B. Front And Exterior Side Yards: Within the front and exterior side yards in the RM-1 and RM-2 districts, not more than one vehicle shall be parked for
each six hundred (600) square feet of area contained in the front or exterior side yards.
C. Storage, Sale Or Dismantling Prohibited: Required off street parking spaces and required off street loading berths shall not be used for the storage,
sale, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials, or supplies.
D. Location Of Parking Or Loading Areas: Required off street parking spaces and required off street loading berths shall be located on the lot containing
the use for which the required spaces or berths are to be provided.
E. Bulk And Area Requirements: Required enclosed off street parking and loading areas shall meet the bulk and area requirements of the use district in
which located, except that enclosed off street parking and loading areas which are required shall not be included in the computation of permitted floor
area.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 231/269
F. Parking Area Capacity: The capacity of an off street parking area shall be the number of parking spaces having minimum dimensions of ten feet by
twenty two feet (10' x 22') that are located thereon in such a manner that each space can be entered without passing through another space, except in
RE and RS districts, where access may be obtained through another parking space. (1991 Code § 16-21-1110)
11-12-3: SETBACKS:
A. Location Restriction Near R Districts: Off street loading areas shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of any abutting property which is within an R
district unless it is wholly within an enclosed building or screened on all sides abutting the R district by a screening wall or fence.
B. Table 1, Requirements: Unenclosed off street parking and loading areas shall be set back from abutting streets as set forth in table 1 of this section.
TABLE 1
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREA SETBACK
FROM CENTERLINE OF ABUTTING STREETS1
Parking Area
1 - 5 Spaces
Parking Area
6+ Spaces Loading Area
In an R district:
Accessory to a dwelling 28 feet 35 feet n/a
Accessory to another use 40 feet 50 feet 50 feet
Not in an R district but within 50 feet of an R district 40 feet 50 feet 50 feet
Note:
1. If the right of way width designated on the major street plan exceeds 50 feet, add 1/2 of the amount by which the designated right of way exceeds 50
feet.
(1991 Code § 16-21-1120)
11-12-4: OFF STREET PARKING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Space Size And Clearance: A required off street parking space shall be at least ten feet (10') in width and at least twenty two feet (22') in length
exclusive of access drives or aisles. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least six feet six inches (6'6").
B. Accessible From Public Street: Each required parking space shall be accessible from a public street without passing through another required space,
except in the RE and RS districts.
C. Lighting: Lighting used to illuminate an off street parking area, if any, shall be by constant light and shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from
properties within an R district which do not contain uses for which the parking is being provided. (1991 Code § 16-21-1130)
D. Surfacing: Unenclosed off street parking areas, including the access and approach thereto from a road or street, shall be surfaced from the edge of the
street or road with a minimum of six inches (6") of stabilized aggregate base on compacted subgrade, with a minimum of three inches (3") of asphaltic
concrete surfacing or a minimum six inches (6") of portland cement surfacing. (Ord. 2014-03, 2-11-2014)
E. Screening: Unenclosed off street parking areas which are principal uses shall be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line or
lines in common with an R district. Unenclosed off street parking areas, containing six (6) or more spaces, which are accessory to uses not required to
provide screening shall be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line or lines in common with an RE or RS district; provided,
that if the parking lot area is located more than fifty feet (50') from the RE or RS lot line or lines, the screening requirement shall not apply. (1991 Code
§ 16-21-1130)
11-12-5: OFF STREET LOADING AREA DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Berth Size And Clearance: Unless otherwise specified, a required off street loading berth shall be at least ten feet (10') in width and thirty feet (30') in
length, exclusive of aisles, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14'). However, every off street loading berth shall be of sufficient
size and design to permit the safe and efficient loading and unloading of merchandise and materials without obstructing or impeding aisles, driveways,
alleys, public streets and rights of way and public walkways.
B. Access From Public Street: Required off street loading berths shall be provided access to and from a public street or alley by an access drive of at least
fifteen feet (15') in width designed to permit convenient access to the berth by semitrailer trucks.
C. Surfacing: Unenclosed off street loading areas shall be surfaced with a dust free all weather material.
D. Screening: Unenclosed off street loading berths shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of any property in an R district unless it is screened on all sides
abutting the R district by a screening wall or fence.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 232/269
E. Lighting: Lighting used to illuminate an off street loading area, if any, shall be by constant light and shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from
properties within an R district which do not contain uses for which the loading area is being provided. (1991 Code § 16-21-1140)
Chapter 13
NONCONFORMITIES
11-13-1: CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMITIES:
Within the districts established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist uses, structures, and lots which were lawful before this
title was adopted or amended but which would be prohibited under the terms of this title or future amendments to this title. These uses, structures, and
lots, herein referred to as "nonconformities", may continue as regulated by this chapter. A use lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this title or
amendment thereto, which does not comply with a parking, loading, screening, bulk and area, accessory sign, or enclosure requirement or requirements,
but which is otherwise lawful, shall not constitute a nonconforming use within the meaning of sections 11-13-2 and 11-13-3 of this chapter. (1991 Code
§ 16-22-1200)
11-13-2: NONCONFORMING USES OF UNIMPROVED LAND:
A. Termination: When, at the effective date of this title or amendment thereto, a lawful use of land exists, which would not be permitted by the terms of this
title or amendment thereto, and the only structures employed in connection with such use are all accessory or incidental to such use, and in the
aggregate do not cover more than ten percent (10%) of the lot area devoted to the nonconforming use, such use shall be deemed a nonconforming use
of unimproved land and shall terminate as follows:
1. If the replacement cost of the accessory structures (other than fences) is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the nonconforming use shall
terminate within five (5) years from the effective date of this title or from the date the use became nonconforming, whichever is later.
2. If the replacement cost of the accessory structures (other than fences) is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, the nonconforming use shall be
terminated on the basis of amortization of the replacement cost of the accessory structures at a rate of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year from
the effective date of this title or from the date the use became nonconforming, whichever is later.
B. Continuation Of Use; Conditions: Pending termination, the nonconforming use of land may be continued provided:
1. No such nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use, nor enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of
land than was occupied at the effective date of this title or amendment thereof.
2. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective
date of this title or amendment thereof.
3. No additional structure (other than fences) shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
4. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than ninety (90) days (except when government action impedes
access to or use of the premises), any subsequent use of such land shall conform in all respects to the regulations of the district in which located.
(1991 Code § 16-22-1210)
11-13-3: NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDING AND LAND IN COMBINATION:
When at the effective date of this title or amendment thereto, there exists a lawful use of a building, or use of a principal building and land, or use of land
and accessory structures, such structures covering more than ten percent (10%) of the lot area, and such use would not be permitted by the terms of this
title or amendment thereto, such use shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue subject to the following provisions:
A. Enlarging Or Extending: No building devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended, except in changing the use of the building to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.
B. Portion Of Building: A nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be extended to the remaining portions of the building if such portions were
manifestly arranged and designed for such use, but such use shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the building.
C. Nonconforming Use Superseded By Permitted Use: A nonconforming use of a building or building and land in combination, if superseded by a
permitted use, shall not thereafter be resumed.
D. Discontinuance: A nonconforming use of a building, or building and land in combination, if discontinued for twenty four (24) consecutive months or for
twenty four (24) months during any three (3) year period (except when governmental action impedes access to or the use of the premises), shall not
thereafter be resumed.
E. Termination Of Use Of Building: Where nonconforming use status applies to a building and land in combination, termination of the use of the building
within the meaning of subsection D of this section shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the use of the land.
F. Changing Of Use; Special Exception: A nonconforming use of a building or of a building and land in combination when located within a residential
district shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the district in which located. A nonconforming use of a building or of a building and
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 233/269
land in combination, when located within a district other than a residential district, may, as a special exception, be changed upon approval of the board
of adjustment after a finding that the proposed use will not result in any increase of incompatibility with the present and future use of proximate
properties. The change of a use to another use contained within the same use unit shall not constitute a "change of use" within the meaning of this
section.
G. Damaged Structure: Should the structure containing a nonconforming use be damaged or partially destroyed to the extent of more than fifty percent
(50%) but less than seventy five percent (75%) of its current replacement cost at the time of damage, the restoration of the structure shall be subject to
the board of adjustment's findings, after adherence to the procedural requirements for a special exception, that the contemplated restoration is
necessary for the continuance of the nonconforming use, and will not result in any increase of incompatibility with the present and future use of
proximate properties. Should the structure containing a nonconforming use be damaged or destroyed to the extent of more than seventy five percent
(75%) of its replacement cost at the time of damage, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter continue or be resumed. (1991 Code § 16-22-1220)
11-13-4: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs shall comply with the requirements of section 11-11-21 of this title pertaining to such uses. (1991 Code § 16-22-1230; amd. 2011
Code)
11-13-5: NONCONFORMING LOTS:
A. Residential Districts: In the residential districts, on any lot which title is filed of record on or before August 13, 1974, or on any lot within a subdivision
having received the approval of the city council on or before August 13, 1974, a single-family detached dwelling may be erected without complying with
the required area or width on the required side yard which abuts a public street; provided, that no side yard shall be less than five feet (5') and shall
comply with all other requirements of the use district.
B. Districts Other Than Residential: In districts other than residential districts, any use permitted by right in the applicable district may be located on any lot
of official record at the effective date of this title, irrespective of its area or width, provided such use district complies with the other requirements of the
use district. (1991 Code § 16-22-1240)
11-13-6: STRUCTURAL NONCONFORMITIES:
A structure, lawfully existing at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this title, but which would be prohibited by the terms of this title by
reason of restriction on floor area, density, intensity, height, yards, its location on a lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, shall be deemed
nonconforming and may continue, subject to the following provisions:
A. Increase Of Nonconformity: No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any manner which increases its nonconformity, but any
structure may be altered to decrease its nonconformity; provided, that the addition of a mezzanine or similar alteration which does not increase the
cubic content of the structure shall not constitute an "increase of nonconformity".
B. Damaged Structure: Should such structure be damaged or partially destroyed by any means to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its current
replacement cost at time of damage, the restoration as a nonconforming structure shall be subject to the board of adjustment's findings, after
adherence to the procedural requirements for a special exception, that its restoration to a conforming structure cannot reasonably be made in view of
the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the nature and extent of the damages.
C. Moving Structure: Should such structure be moved for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which located.
(1991 Code § 16-22-1250)
11-13-7: REPAIRS:
A. Ordinary Repairs And Maintenance: On any building containing a nonconforming use or any nonconforming structure, ordinary repairs and maintenance
may be made; provided, that the cubic content of the building is not increased, and structural nonconformity is not increased.
B. Unsafe Structures: If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of
repairs and maintenance, and a final order of vacation or demolition is entered by any duly authorized official by reason of physical condition, it shall
not thereafter be used, restored, or repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the provisions of the district in which located. (1991 Code § 16-22-
1260)
Chapter 14
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-14-1: DUTY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR AND OTHER OFFICIALS:
A. Enforcement Duties; Notice Of Violations: It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce this title. If the building inspector shall find that any of
the provisions of this title are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it, and shall take such other action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions as is
authorized by law.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 234/269
B. Issuance Of Permits And Licenses: All departments, officials, and employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses
shall comply with the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for any use, purpose, excavation, construction, structure, building, or
sign in conflict with the provisions of this title. (1991 Code § 16-23-1300)
11-14-2: ZONING CLEARANCE PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, move, add to, or structurally alter any building or structure, or to use or change the use of
any building or land, or to permit the aforementioned actions, until a zoning clearance permit has been issued by the building inspector.
B. Application For Permit: An application for a zoning clearance permit shall be accompanied by a legal description of the lot, and plans in duplicate, drawn
to scale in black line or blueprint, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot; the location, size and height of any existing buildings or
structures; and the location, size, and height of any buildings or structures to be erected or altered; the existing and intended use of each building or
structure and portion of the lot; the number of dwellings the building is intended to accommodate, if any; and such other information with regard to the
lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this title.
C. Time Limit For Action Of Building Inspector: The building inspector shall act upon each application for a zoning clearance permit within three (3) days
after it is filed in compliance with the provisions herein. He shall return one copy of the plans and issue a zoning clearance permit or notify the
applicant, in writing, of his refusal to issue a permit, setting forth the reasons therefor.
D. Permit Fees: No zoning clearance permit shall be issued until a fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall have been paid; provided, that, upon the payment of ten
dollars ($10.00), a group zoning clearance permit may be issued covering five (5) or more residential lots in the same subdivision. (1991 Code § 16-23-
1310)
11-14-3: PENALTIES:
A. Penalty Imposed: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this title or failing to comply with any of its requirements, including violations
or conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1991 Code § 16-23-1320; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Remedial Action: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or its authorized officials from taking action, authorized by law, to remedy violations.
(1991 Code § 16-23-1320)
Chapter 15
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
11-15-1: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS; REMOVAL:
A. Board Established; Appointments: There is hereby established a board of adjustment of the city, with the powers and duties hereinafter set forth. The
board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city, and appointments of said members shall be made by the city
council.
B. Compensation; Terms; Vacancies: Each member shall serve without pay for a term of three (3) years, and vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired
term of any member in the manner set forth for appointments to a full term.
C. Removal Of Members: A board member, upon written charges and after public hearing, may be removed by the appointing city council for any one of
the following causes:
1. Failure to attend three (3) consecutive regular or special meetings, or failure to attend two-thirds (2/3) of the regular or special meetings held during a
six (6) month period;
2. Actions and conduct unbecoming to a public official of the city; and
3. Repeated acts and conduct detrimental to the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Skiatook. (1991 Code § 16-24-1400)
11-15-2: POWERS OF BOARD:
The board shall have the power to hear appeals from the determinations of the building inspector in enforcing this title, to grant special exceptions, to grant
variances, and to make interpretations of the zoning map and text, in accordance with the substantive and procedural standards hereinafter set forth.
(1991 Code § 16-24-1410)
11-15-3: MEETINGS AND BOARD PROCEEDINGS:
Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting
chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings, deliberations, and voting of the board shall be open to the public. The
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 235/269
board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be public
record. In all matters, the board shall decide within ninety (90) days after the filing of an application for relief. The quorum, notice, filing, and substantive
requirements of the board shall be as set forth in this chapter concerning the board's exercise of a particular power. (1991 Code § 16-24-1420; amd. Ord.
2013-3, 2-12-2013)
11-15-4: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING:
A. Notice Required; Exception: The board of adjustment shall give fifteen (15) full days' public notice and conduct a public hearing before acting on any
appeal from a determination of the building inspector or before granting any special exception or variance, except for a minor variance or special
exception as the board has set forth in an adopted statement of policy constituting a minor variance or special exception, and which statement has
been approved by the city council. Nothing herein shall preclude the board of adjustment in the particular instance from requiring the giving of notice of
public hearing on a minor variance or special exception.
B. Manner Of Giving Notice: Whenever a notice of public hearing is required, the notice shall be given as follows:
1. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation; and
2. By mailing written notice to all owners of property, as listed on current tax rolls, within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundaries of
the subject property twenty (20) full days prior to the date of public hearing.
C. Contents Of Notice: The notice shall contain:
1. The legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location of the property.
2. The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the relief sought.
3. The date, time and place of the hearing.
D. Responsibility Of Applicant: The applicant shall be responsible for submitting a certified list of all owners of property within a three hundred foot (300')
radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property, and shall be responsible for the accuracy thereof. Any action taken by the Board of Adjustment
on an application at a public hearing shall become null and void if the applicant fails to comply with requirements set forth in this section. (1991 Code
§ 16-24-1430)
11-15-5: APPLICATION FEE:
An application for an appeal from the building inspector, variance, or special exception shall be accompanied by the payment of a one hundred twenty five
dollar ($125.00) application fee, plus the cost of mailing as required. In addition, the applicant will be required to pay all notice and publication expenses
incurred prior to action by the Board of Adjustment. The City Council may amend the fees and expenses as set forth in this section by ordinance or
resolution. (Ord. 2018-01, 4-24-2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
11-15-6: APPEAL FROM BUILDING INSPECTOR DECISION:
A. Right To Appeal Decision Of Building Inspector: An appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the City affected, where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building
inspector in the enforcement of this title. (1991 Code § 16-24-1450)
B. Notice Of Appeal: An appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from the determination complained of by filing with the building inspector and with the
Secretary of the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds therefor. The building inspector, upon receipt of notice, shall transmit to the Secretary
of the Board and the City Clerk, certified copies of all the papers constituting the record of said matter. Upon receipt of the record, the Secretary shall
cause an investigation to be made upon the appeal and shall set the matter for public hearing.
C. Board Of Adjustment Action: The Board shall hold the public hearing. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to
that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Board shall make its decision within thirty (30) days after the final
hearing, and the decision shall be in writing and filed of record in the Office of the City Clerk. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building inspector. A decision of the Board shall not become
final until the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date such decision is made, unless the Board shall find the immediate making of said decision is
necessary for the preservation of property or personal rights and shall so certify on the record. (1991 Code § 16-24-1450; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
D. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector from whom the appeal is
taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order
granted by the Board or by the court of proper jurisdiction on due and sufficient cause shown. (1991 Code § 16-24-1450)
11-15-7: INTERPRETATION:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 236/269
A. Text And Zoning Map: The board shall interpret the text of this title or the official zoning map upon an appeal from a determination of the building
inspector after compliance with the procedural standards of section 11-15-6 of this chapter.
B. Zoning District Classification: Where a question arises as to the zoning district classification of a particular use, the board of adjustment, upon written
request of the building inspector, may find and determine the classification of the use in question and may, prior to such determination, order the giving
of notice and hold a public hearing. (1991 Code § 16-24-1460)
11-15-8: VARIANCES:
A. Authority To Grant Variances:
1. The board of adjustment, upon application, and after notice (when notice is required) and public hearing, and subject to the procedural and
substantive standards hereinafter set forth, may grant such variance from the terms of this title as will not cause substantial detriment to the public
good or impair the spirit, purposes and intent of this title, or the comprehensive plan, where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
shape, topography, or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, condition, or circumstance peculiar to a particular property, the literal enforcement
of this title will result in unnecessary hardship.
2. The board shall not vary any jurisdictional requirement, such as notice, when it is required.
3. The board shall not permit by variance a principal use not otherwise permitted in the applicable district, it being the expressed spirit and intent of this
title that a change of the permitted principal uses shall be made by ordinance amendment of the zoning title or official zoning map. (1991 Code § 16-
24-1470)
B. Application: A request for a variance shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the city clerk and shall set forth public hearing by the secretary
in accordance with the rules established by the board. (1991 Code § 16-24-1470; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
C. Board Of Adjustment Action:
1. The board shall hold the public hearing and, upon the concurring vote of three (3) members, may grant a variance after finding:
a. That by reason of extraordinary or exceptional conditions or circumstances which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved, the literal
enforcement of the terms of this title would result in unnecessary hardship;
b. That such extraordinary or exceptional conditions or circumstances do not apply generally to other property in the same use district; and
c. That the variance to be granted will not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes, spirit, and intent of this title, or the
comprehensive plan.
2. Provided, that the board in granting a variance shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, and may require such evidence and guarantee
or bond as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with the conditions attached.
D. Time Limitations On Variances: A variance which has not been utilized within one year from the date of the order granting the variance shall thereafter
be void. For the purpose of this provision, "utilization" shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building permit, when applicable, provided
construction is diligently carried to completion. (1991 Code § 16-24-1470)
11-15-9: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
A. Granting Of Special Exceptions: The board of adjustment, upon application, and after notice (when notice is required) and public hearing, and subject to
the procedural and substantive standards hereinafter set forth, may grant the following special exceptions:
1. Special exception uses as designated and regulated within the permitted use provisions of the zoning districts.
2. The change of a nonconforming use as provided in subsection 11-13-3F of this title.
3. The restoration of a partially destroyed structure containing a nonconforming use as provided in subsection 11-13-3G of this title.
4. The restoration of a partially destroyed nonconforming structure as provided in section 11-13-6 of this title.
5. The modification of a screening requirement, as provided in section 11-2-14 of this title.
6. Off street parking use of property located within a residential district, when the property is abutting an office, commercial, or industrial district. (1991
Code § 16-24-1480)
B. Application For Special Exception: A request for a special exception shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the city clerk and shall be set for
public hearing by the secretary in accordance with the rules established by the board. (1991 Code § 16-24-1480; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
C. Board Of Adjustment Action: The board of adjustment shall hold the public hearing and, upon the concurring vote of three (3) members, may grant the
special exception after finding that the special exception will be in harmony with the spirit and intent of this title, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. Provided, that the board in granting a special exception shall prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards, and may require such evidence and guarantee or bonds as it may deem necessary to enforce compliance with the
conditions attached.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 237/269
D. Time Limitation On Special Exceptions: A special exception which has not been utilized within one year from the date of the order granting same shall
thereafter be void. For the purposes of this provision, "utilization" shall mean actual use or the issuance of a building permit, when applicable, provided
construction is diligently carried to completion. (1991 Code § 16-24-1480)
11-15-10: APPEALS TO DISTRICT COURT:
A. Procedure: An appeal from any action, ruling, decision, judgment, or order of the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or any
taxpayer or officer, department, board, or bureau of the city to the district court, and by filing with the city clerk and with the secretary of the board within
ten (10) days from the date of such action, a notice of appeal, which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal,
the city clerk shall transmit to the court clerk of the county the original or certified copies of all the papers constituting the record in the case, together
with the order, decision, or ruling of the board. Said case shall be heard and tried de novo in the district court of Tulsa County or Osage County,
Oklahoma. An appeal shall lie from the action of the district court as in all other civil actions. All issues in any proceedings under this section shall have
preference over all other civil actions and proceedings. Costs shall not be allowed against the board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with
gross negligence or in bad faith, or with malice in making the decision being appealed. (1991 Code § 16-24-1490; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
B. Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal to the district court stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the chairman of the board
certifies to the court clerk, after notice of appeal shall have been filed that by reasons of fact stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril
to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the district court. (1991 Code § 16-24-
1490)
Chapter 16
AMENDMENTS
11-16-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions, and limitations imposed and the districts created by this title may from time to time be amended, supplemented,
changed, modified, or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the Planning Commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the
City a report and recommendation on the proposed change. In addition to the procedural provisions hereinafter set out, the Planning Commission shall
adopt procedural rules for the conduct of zoning public hearings. (1991 Code § 16-25-1500)
11-16-2: POLICY ON AMENDMENTS:
It shall be the policy of the City that in the consideration of proposed amendments to this title that amendments will be adopted to recognize changes in the
comprehensive plan, to correct errors, or to recognize changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the jurisdictional area generally. (1991
Code § 16-25-1510)
11-16-3: ZONING TEXT AMENDMENTS:
The Planning Commission, upon its own motion, may, or at the direction of the City Council, shall hold a public hearing giving notice thereof, of a proposed
text amendment. After holding the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall, within thirty (30) days, transmit its report and recommendation to the
City Council. (1991 Code § 16-25-1520)
11-16-4: ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS:
A. Application And Fees:
1. An amendment to the zoning map shall be initiated by the filing of an application with the City Clerk. An application shall be in such form and content
as the Planning Commission may by motion or resolution establish and shall be accompanied by the payment of a one hundred twenty five dollar
($125.00) application fee, plus a twenty dollar ($20.00) site sign fee, plus the cost of mailing as required. In addition, the applicant will be required to
pay all notice and publication expenses incurred with regard to the requested zoning map amendment prior to action by the Planning Commission.
The City Council may amend the fees, expenses and requirements as set forth in this subsection by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2018-01, 4-24-
2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
2. An application shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be set for public hearing. (1991 Code § 16-25-1530; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. Notice Required: The Planning Commission shall give fifteen (15) full days' notice of a public hearing on a proposed map amendment by publication in
a newspaper of general circulation and shall also require the mailing of written notice to all owners of property, as listed on the current tax rolls, within a
three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundaries of the subject property twenty (20) full days prior to the date of public hearing. The notice
shall contain:
1. Date, time, and place of public hearing.
2. Legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location of the property.
3. Present zoning district classification of the property and the proposed zoning district classification, provided:
a. Notice of a proposed RM-2 rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon RM-2, RM-1,
RD, RS-3, RS-2, RS-1 and RE, or combinations thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like manner, notice of any R district, including
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 238/269
RMH, shall confer jurisdiction to consider any less dense R district, except RMH.
b. Notice of a proposed CH rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon CH, CG, CS,
OM, and OL or combinations thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like manner, notice of any C district shall confer jurisdiction to
consider any less intense C district or any O district, and notice of any O district shall confer jurisdiction to consider any less intense O district.
c. Notice of a proposed IH rezoning shall confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to consider and act upon IH, IM, IL, or
combinations thereof in the disposition of the application, and in like manner, notice of any I district shall confer jurisdiction to consider any less
intense I district.
d. Specific notice of a proposed AG or RMH District shall be required to confer jurisdiction on the Planning Commission and City Council to consider
such AG or RMH Districts.
C. Planning Commission Action:
1. After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to:
a. Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modifications; or
b. Recommend to the City Council that the application be denied.
2. Any application recommended for approval or approval subject to modification shall be transmitted, with the report and recommendation of the
Planning Commission, to the City Council within fifteen (15) days from the date of Planning Commission action. (1991 Code § 16-25-1530)
3. Any application recommended for denial shall not be considered further unless the applicant, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning
Commission action, files a written request with the City Clerk for a hearing by the City Council. The request for hearing shall be accompanied by the
payment of a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee. Upon notice of such request, the Planning Commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its
report and the recommendation to the City Council. (1991 Code § 16-25-1530; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
4. In the event the Planning Commission arrives at a tie vote, the application shall be transmitted, with a report and notation of the tie vote, to the City
Council within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission action.
5. Prior to the submission to the City Council, all data, materials, recommendations and other pertinent information transmitted to the City Council from
the actions taken by the Planning Commission at a public hearing shall be approved for accuracy by the Chairman, or in his absence, the Secretary
of the Planning Commission.
D. City Council Action:
1. The City Council shall hold a hearing on each application regularly transmitted, and on each application transmitted pursuant to a written request for
further hearing and shall approve the application as submitted or as amended or approve the application subject to modification, or deny the
application. Provided, however, in case of a proposed amendment, change, or repeal of this title or any part thereof, that was not previously
recommended for approval by the Planning Commission, or if written public protests against such proposed amendment, change, or repeal shall
have been filed at public hearing, signed and acknowledged by the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more either of the area of the lots included in
such proposed change, or by fifty percent (50%) or more of the owners of the area of the lot immediately abutting any side of the territory included in
such proposed change, or separated therefrom only by an alley or street and extending two hundred feet (200') therefrom, such amendment,
change, or repeal shall not become effective except by a unanimous vote of all the members present. (1991 Code § 16-25-1530)
2. Prior to the adoption and publication of a rezoning ordinance, the applicant shall remit to the Office of the City Clerk the payment necessary to cover
the cost of the ordinance publication. The City Clerk shall not cause the ordinance to be published prior to such payment. (1991 Code § 16-25-1530;
amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
E. Time Limit For Resubmittal Of Denied Application: When the City Council has denied an application to amend the zoning classification of a particular
tract of land, or when the Planning Commission has denied such application and no appeal was made to the City Council, no subsequent application
on such tract or portion thereof shall be set for public hearing by the Planning Commission until one hundred eighty (180) days have elapsed from the
date of the Planning Commission action on the original application. (1991 Code § 16-25-1530)
Chapter 17
APPENDICES
11-17-1: APPENDIX A; INDEX OF LAND USES:
Land Use Use Unit Ch. 11
A
Abstract company 11
Acetylene gas manufacturing 25
Acid manufacturing 25
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 239/269
Advertising agency 11
Advertising signs 21
Agricultural implement sales 17
Agriculture 3
Air conditioning service 15
Aircraft sales 17
Airport 2
Aluminum works on foundry 25
Ambulance service 4
Ammonia manufacturing 25
Amusement activities NEC 20
Animal raising 3
Animal rendering 26
Antique shop 14
Apartment hotel 8
Apartments 8
Appliance repair 14
Appliance store 14
Aquarium 5
Arboretum 1
Areawide use by exception 2
Areawide use by right 1
Arena 20
Armature rewinding repair 15
Armored car service 15
Art gallery 5
Art gallery, commercial 14
Art school 11
Artist's studio 11
Artist's supply store 14
Asphalt refining, manufacturing 25
Auctioneer 15
Automobile rental 17
Automobile sales, new or used 17
Automobile salvage yards 25
Automobile wash 17
Automotive and allied activities 17
Automotive parts and accessories store 14
B
Bait shop 15
Bakery 13
Bakery, wholesale 15
Ballet school 11
Bank 11
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 240/269
Bar 19
Barber school 15
Barbershop 13
Beauty school 15
Beauty shop 13
Bicycle shop 14
Billboards 21
Billiard parlors 19
Bindery 15
Blast furnace 25
Bleaching powder manufacturing 25
Boarding house 8
Boat sales 17
Boiler works 25
Bookstore 14
Bottled gas 15
Bottling plant 24
Bowling alley 19
Brick manufacturing, tile manufacturing 25
Broadcasting studio 11
Building, contract construction 24
Building materials store 14
Bus stations 2
Business machine repair 15
Business machine sales 14
Business schools 11
Business signs 21
C
Cabinetmaker 15
Cafe 12
Cafeteria 12
Camera and photography supply 14
Camper sales 17
Camps, day 5
Candy store 13
Care home 5
Carnival 2
Carpentry 15
Carpet installation and repair 15
Carpet store 14
Caterer 14
Cellophane manufacturing 25
Celluloid manufacturing 25
Cement, portland 23
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 241/269
Cemetery 2
Cesspool cleaning 24
Chick hatchery 3
Children's nursery 5
China, glassware, and metalware store 14
Chlorine manufacturing or processing 26
Christmas tree sales 2
Church 5
Circus 2
Clothing and accessories store 14
Clubs (nightclubs) 19
Clubs, social and fraternal 5
Coffee shop 12
Coke manufacturing 25
College, university 5
Commercial, convenience 13
Commercial recreation, enclosed 19
Commercial recreation, intensive 20
Commercial shopping 13
Community center 5
Computer repair 15
Computing service 11
Concrete construction service 24
Confectionery store 13
Construction facility 2
Construction, heavy 24
Convalescent homes 5
Convenience goods and services 13
Convent 5
Cosmetic shop 14
Costume rental service 14
Crematory 2
Creosote manufacturing, or treatment 25
Cultivation 1
Cultural and recreation facility 5
D
Dairy store 13
Dance hall 19
Data processing 11
Data processing machine repair 15
Day camps 5
Decorating, interior 15
Delicatessen 12
Dental clinic, lab 11
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 242/269
Dentist office 11
Department store 14
Disinfectant or insecticide manufacturing 25
Distillation of bones, coal, tar or wood 26
Doctor's office 11
Drafting service 11
Drag strip 20
Drama school 11
Draperies, curtains, upholstery store 14
Drapery service 15
Dressmaking shop 14
Drive-in restaurant 18
Drive-in theater 20
Driving range, golf 20
Drugstore 13
Dry cleaning 14
Dry cleaning pick up 13
Dry goods store 14
Dude ranch 3
Duplex 7
Dyestuff manufacturing 25
E
Eating places other than drive-ins 12
Electric regulating station 4
Electrical repair service 15
Electrical supply store 14
Employment agency 11
Enclosed commercial recreation 19
Explosive manufacturing or storage 26
Extended care facility 5
Exterminating service 15
Extraction, mining 23
F
Fairgrounds 20
Farming 3
Fat rendering 26
Fence 15
Fertilizer manufacturing 26
Filling station 14
Financial institution 11
Fine arts school 11
Fire alarm 1
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 243/269
Fire station 4
Fishery 3
Flood management project 1
Floor coverings store 14
Florist 13
Food specialty 13
Forestry 1
Foundry, metal 25
Fraternity house 8
Frozen food locker 15
Fuel oil 15
Funeral home 11
Fur storage 14
Furnace cleaning 15
Furniture repair 15
Furniture store 14
Furriers and fur shops 14
G
Garbage dump 26
Garden supply store 14
Gas manufacturing or storage 25
Gasoline service station 14
General business office 11
General merchandising 15
Gift shop 13
Glass store 15
Glue, gelatin, or size manufacturing 26
Go-cart track 20
Golf course 5
Golf driving range 20
Grain elevators 24
Gravel operation 23
Grazing 1
Greenhouse 15
Grocery store 13
Guest ranch 3
Gun club 2
Gunsmith 14
Gymnasium 19
H
Hardware store 14
Health club 19
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 244/269
Health food store 13
Heating construction contract service 24
Heating equipment 15
Heliport 2
Historical marker 1
Hobby shop 14
Home furnishing store 14
Home occupation (see subsections 11-3-3A and 11-4-3A of this title)
Hospital 5
Hotel 19
Household appliance repair 14
Hydroelectric generation plant 2
I
Ice cream store 13
Ice plant 15
Ice skating rink 19
Incineration, reduction of dead animals, garbage, refuse 25
Industry:
Light 24
Moderate 25
Heavy 26
Insecticide manufacturing 25
Interior decorating 14
J
Janitorial service 15
Jewelry repair 14
Jewelry store 14
Junkyard 25
K
Kennel 15
L
Laboratory, dental and medical 11
Lampblack manufacturing 25
Language school 11
Laundromat, self-service 14
Laundry, industrial 15
Laundry, pick up 13
Laundry service 15
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 245/269
Leather goods store 14
Library 5
Lime, cement, plaster of paris manufacturing 26
Linen supply 15
Linoleum manufacturing 25
Liquor store 13
Loan office 11
Locksmith 14
Lodge 5
Luggage store 14
Lumberyard 15
M
Machine shop 24
Manufacturing:
Light 24
Moderate 25
Heavy 26
Marina 5
Masonry construction service 24
Match manufacturing 25
Mattress and pillow repair 15
Mausoleum 2
Meat market 13
Medical clinic, lab 11
Medical, dental supply 14
Metal foundry 25
Mineral products processing 23
Miniature auto track 20
Mining 23
Ministorage 16
Mobile home 9
Mobile home sales 17
Modeling school 11
Monastery 5
Monument sales 15
Motel 19
Motion picture theater, enclosed 19
Motorcycle sales 17
Moving and storage facility 22
Multi-family dwelling 8
Museum 5
Music schools 11
Musical instrument sales 14
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 246/269
N
Newspaper publishing 15
Newsstand 13
Nightclub 19
Novelty 13
Novitiate 5
Nursery horticultural 2
Nursing home 5
Nut store 13
O
Off street parking 10
Office and studio 11
Office building 11
Office furnishings sales 14
Office machine sales 14
Office supplies 14
Oil products 26
Oil refinery 26
Oil well drilling and cleaning 24
Oilcloth or linoleum manufacturing 25
Optician or optical lab 11
Other trades and services 15
Outdoor advertising 21
Outdoor recreation NEC 20
P
Packing and crating of goods 15
Paint, oil, varnish, turpentine manufacturing 25
Paint store 14
Painting contractor 15
Paper or pulp manufacturing by sulfide process 25
Paperhanging 15
Parking 10
Parking garage 10
Pawnshop 15
Pet shop 14
Petroleum refining 26
Pharmacy 11
Phonograph and record sales 14
Photo finishing 14
Photocopying 11
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 247/269
Photography studio 11
Photography supply store 14
Pickle, sausage, sauerkraut, vinegar manufacturing 25
Picture framing 14
Planetarium 5
Planting 1
Plastering service 15
Plastic materials sales 15
Plumbing construction service 15
Plumbing fixtures sales 14
Plumbing shop 15
Pool hall 19
Post office 2
Poultry raising 3
Pressure control station 4
Printing 15
Printing ink manufacturing 25
Private club or lodge 5
Processing of mineral products 23
Protection and services 4
Public park 5
Q
Quarrying 23
R
Racetrack: auto, dog, horse 20
Radio and television sales 14
Radio repair and television repair 14
Radio station 11
Ranching 3
Rayon or cellophane manufacturing 25
Record shop 14
Recording studio 11
Recreation and cultural facilities, community 5
Recreation, indoor commercial 19
Reducing salon 14
Refining, petroleum and other crude materials 25
Refuse dump 26
Rendering plant 26
Reproduction service 15
Research scientific 24
Reservoir 1
Residential:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 248/269
Single-family 6
Duplex 7
Multi-family 8
Mobile home 9
Restaurant 12
Restaurant, drive-in 18
Reupholstering 15
Riding stable or academy 3
Rifle and skeet range 2
Rodeo grounds 20
Rolling mill 25
Roofing construction services 24
Rooming house 8
Rubber manufacturing 25
Rug cleaners 15
Rug repair 15
S
Salvage yards 25
Sanatorium 5
Sand operations 23
Sanitary landfill 2
Sausage manufacturing 25
Schools:
Art 11
Ballet 11
Barber 15
Beauty 15
Business 11
Dance 11
Drama 11
Fine arts 11
Language 11
Modeling 11
Music 11
Public 5
Trade 5
Other schools, offering a compulsory education curriculum 5
Scientific research, testing, development 24
Self-service laundromat 13
Service station 17
Services and protection 4
Sewage disposal facility 2
Sheet metal contracting service 24
Shelter, civil defense, storm 4
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 249/269
Shoddy manufacturing 25
Shoe repair 14
Shoe store 14
Shopping goods and services 14
Sign advertising 21
Sign painting 15
Single-family dwelling 6
Skating rink, enclosed 19
Slaughtering of animals NEC 26
Slot car track 19
Smelting 26
Soap manufacturing 25
Soda ash, caustic soda and washing compound manufacturing 25
Sorority house 8
Souvenir shop 13
Sporting goods store 14
Stable 3
Stadium NEC 20
Starch, glucose, dextrine manufacturing 25
Stationery store and card shop 14
Stockyards 26
Stonework contracting service 24
Storage, general 22
Storage of dismantled autos in any form 25
Street sign 1
Studio and office 11
Sugar refining 25
Swimming pool, enclosed 19
T
Tailor shop 14
Tallow, grease, lard manufacturing or refining 25
Tank farm, petroleum 26
Tanning of leather or hides 25
Tar distillation or manufacturing 25
Tar roofing manufacturing 25
Tavern 19
Taxidermist 15
Television repair 14
Television sales 14
Tennis court 5
Tent revival 2
Theater, motion picture, enclosed 19
Thoroughfare 1
Ticket office 11
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 250/269
Tile setting office 15
Tobacco shop 13
Townhouse 8
Toy shop 14
Trade schools 15
Trades emitting objectionable odor, heat, smoke, noise 25
Transmitting tower 4
Transportation ticket office 11
Travel agency 11
Truck rentals 22
Truck sales 17
Trucking establishments 22
Turpentine manufacturing 25
U
University 5
Upholstery repair 15
Utility line 1
V
Variety store 14
Varnish manufacturing 25
Vehicle repair and service 17
Vending machine sales, service 15
Veterinary office 11
Vinegar manufacturing 25
W
Wallpaper store 14
Warehouses NEC 22
Washing compound manufacturing 25
Wastepaper salvage and reclamation 25
Watch repair 14
Water storage facility 4
Water treatment plant 2
Water well drilling and cleaning service 24
Welding shop 24
Wholesale establishments NEC 22
Wig shop 14
Wildlife preserve 1
Window cleaning 15
Woodworking shop 15
Wool scouring, hair manufacturing 25
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 251/269
Y
Yeast manufacturing 25
(1991 Code zoning app. B; amd. Ord. 93-09A, 12-14-1993; Ord. 2007-04, 10-30-2007)
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
JURISDICTION; DEFINITIONS
12-1-1: SCOPE AND SEVERABILITY:
A. Scope: This title shall provide for governing the control of the subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of the city, the preparation of plats of such
subdivisions and the splitting of lots, filing procedures, improvement requirements and standards of design. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-1)
B. Invalidity Of Part: The various provisions of this title are not interdependent, and in case any provision of this title shall be held to be invalid, or
unconstitutional, the remainder of the title shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and effect. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-9)
12-1-2: JURISDICTION:
The rules and regulations governing plats of subdivisions of land and lot splits contained in this title shall apply within the city in accordance with the
provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 41-101 et seq., and other applicable statutes. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-2; amd. 2011 Code)
12-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms are defined as follows:
ALLEY: A passage or way affording generally a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation.
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS: The board of county commissioners of Tulsa or Osage Counties.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Skiatook.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city of Skiatook.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive plan of the city of Skiatook, whether in whole or in part, as adopted by the Skiatook city planning
commission, approved by the city of Skiatook and duly recorded in the offices of the county clerks of Tulsa County and Osage County.
COUNTY ASSESSOR: The county assessor of Tulsa or Osage County.
COUNTY ENGINEER: The county engineer of Tulsa or Osage County.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short street having one end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
ENGINEER: A registered, professional engineer in good standing in the state of Oklahoma.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The cooperative health departments of the city and counties of Tulsa and Osage.
HIGHWAY: A major street ordinarily, but not necessarily, designated as a numbered federal, state or county highway and designed to accommodate
primarily intercity and rural traffic movements.
IMPROVEMENTS: Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, culverts, bridges, water and sanitary and storm sewer lines, and
other utilities, and other required features.
LOT SPLIT: Any division of land into two (2) or more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer or of ownership, and which does not
constitute a "subdivision" as herein defined.
MASTER PLAN: The comprehensive plan of the city of Skiatook, whether in whole or in part, as adopted by the Skiatook city planning commission,
approved by the legislative body, and duly recorded in the offices of the county clerks of Tulsa County and Osage County.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC: The land which may be dedicated or reserved for acquisition for general use by the public including parks, recreation areas,
school sites, community or public building sites, and other lands.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Skiatook city planning commission.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 252/269
PLAT, FINAL: The final plat, plan or drawing and any accompanying required data or information which is submitted to the legislative body for final
approval of a proposed subdivision.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: The preliminary or tentative plat or plan, map or drawing on which the layout and design of a proposed subdivision is submitted to
the legislative body for consideration and tentative approval.
RECREATION PLAN: The plan for recreation areas, including parks, playgrounds, and other open space adopted by the Skiatook city planning
commission, approved by the city council, and duly recorded in the offices of the county clerks of Tulsa County and Osage County.
ROADWAY WIDTH OR SURFACE WIDTH: That portion of any street designated for vehicular traffic and, where curbs are laid, that portion of the street
between curbs.
STAFF: The staff of the Skiatook city planning commission.
STREET: The full width between the property lines bounding every way of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to use by the public as a matter
of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic and whether designated as a street, highway, freeway, expressway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or however otherwise designated.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street intended to serve and to provide access to neighborhoods or subneighborhoods.
STREET, FRONTAGE: A minor street which is located parallel to and adjacent to a major street or thoroughfare for the purpose of providing access to
abutting properties. A frontage street or road is normally separated from the abutting major street by a fence, curb, walk, land especially reserved,
designated or acquired for the purpose of such separation.
STREET, MAJOR: A street designated as a major street or thoroughfare in the official thoroughfare plan and designed to accommodate primarily major
traffic movements.
STREET, MINOR: Any street not designated as a major street or collector street and intended to serve and to provide access exclusively to the properties
abutting thereon.
SUBDIVISION: A. The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding tax role, into five (5) or more parcels,
sites or lots, any one of which contains less than five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership; provided, however,
that the division or partition of land into parcels of more than five (5) acres not involving any new street or easements of access, shall be exempted;
B. The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential, commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or
allocation of land for the opening, widening, or extension of any street or streets, except internal private streets serving industrial structures; the
division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupiers or leaseholders or as easement for the extension and
maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage and other public facilities.
C. And provided further, that the following shall not constitute a subdivision: transfer of interests by will or pursuant to court order; leases for a term not
to exceed ten (10) years; mortgages or easements; and the sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining property if additional
lots are not thereby created and the lots resulting are not reduced below minimum sizes required by law.
THOROUGHFARE: A major street.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN: The official plan of highways, primary and secondary thoroughfares, parkways and other major streets, including collector
streets, adopted by the Skiatook city planning commission, approved by the city council and duly recorded in the offices of the county clerks of Tulsa
County and Osage County.
THOROUGHFARE, PRIMARY OR SECONDARY: A major street so designated in the official thoroughfare plan.
UTILITY BOARD: The utility board of the city of Skiatook.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The zoning ordinance of the city of Skiatook.
ZONING REGULATIONS: The zoning regulations of Tulsa County and Osage County. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-3; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 2
GENERAL PLATTING PROCEDURE
12-2-1: APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIRED:
A. Approval: No person, firm or corporation proposing to make or having made a subdivision within the territorial jurisdiction of this title shall enter into any
contract for the sale of, or shall offer to sell, any subdivision or any part thereof, or shall proceed with any construction work on such proposed
subdivision, including grading, until he or it has obtained from the city council tentative approval of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision.
B. Developer: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the dividing or subdividing of land into lots or parcels for the purpose of conveyance within the
scope and application of this title shall be known as the "developer". (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4)
12-2-2: COMPLIANCE WITH DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
In planning and developing a subdivision, the developer shall comply with the general principles of design and minimum requirements for the layout of
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 253/269
subdivisions set forth in chapter 7 of this title, and with the rules and regulations concerning required improvements set forth in chapters 4 and 7 of this
title; and in every case shall pursue the procedure set out in this chapter. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4)
12-2-3: PREAPPLICATION PROCEEDINGS:
A. Consultation: No less than forty five (45) days before preparing and submitting the preliminary plat to the city council, the developer or his engineer shall
consult with the city clerk or his/her designee while the plat is in sketch form, to ascertain the location of proposed highways, primary or secondary
thoroughfares, collector streets, parkways, parks, playgrounds, school sites and other community facilities or planned developments and to acquaint
himself with the city council requirements. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
B. General Features; Required Improvements: During preapplication proceedings, the general features of the subdivision, its layout, facilities and required
improvements shall be determined to the extent necessary for preparation of the preliminary plat. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4)
12-2-4: PRELIMINARY PLAT PROVISIONS:
A. Plat Preparation; Filing Of Application: The developer shall prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision which shall conform with the
requirements set forth in this section, and shall file with the planning commission an application in writing, on forms provided by the planning
commission, for the tentative approval of said plat accompanied by fifteen (15) black line or blue line prints at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of
the planning commission at which action is desired. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Checking; Review By Other Agencies: The preliminary plat shall be checked by the planning commission as to its conformity with the comprehensive
plan of the city as to the plat's compliance with the standards, requirements, and principles hereinafter prescribed; and the planning commission shall
cause said preliminary plat to be checked by the planning commission staff to ascertain compliance with all applicable additional requirements of
municipal, county, state and federal departments and agencies concerned, and with applicable regulations of public utility companies.
C. Tentative Approval:
1. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the staff concerning the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall tentatively approve or reject the
plat, or tentatively approve it with modifications, noting all such modifications on said plat. The planning commission shall then submit said
preliminary plat with recommendations and/or modifications to the city council for its action. The city council shall approve in whole or in part, modify
or deny and shall so state its action, noting all modifications or changes.
2. One copy of the tentatively approved or rejected preliminary plat shall be returned to the developer with the date of said tentative approval or
rejection endorsed thereon, and all agencies, public and private, as in the discretion of the city council are affected, shall be advised of the action of
the city council.
3. In any conditional approval, or approval subject to modifications, the city council may require the developer to submit a revised preliminary plat.
(1991 Code § 16-2-16-4)
4. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be an approval of the design features of the tract only, and the city clerk or other official
having jurisdiction may be necessary for the protection of the public interest. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
12-2-5: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS; BOND:
A. Tentative Approval; Construction Of Improvements; Permits: Upon tentative approval, which shall be effective for a period of two (2) years, unless
extended by the city council, the developer may proceed to install all required improvements and, for this purpose, may secure from the appropriate
authorities the necessary permits; provided, however, that the developer, at his option and immediately following tentative approval of the preliminary
plat, may request approval of the final plat.
B. Bond Or Other Security: In the event approval of the final plat is requested prior to installation of improvements, the developer shall post with the city
council a corporate surety bond or such other security as may be acceptable to the city council, in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of installing all
required improvements as estimated by the officials having jurisdiction, to assure the satisfactory construction and performance of said improvements
at the time and terms fixed by the city council and in accordance with this title. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4)
12-2-6: FINAL PLAT PROVISIONS:
A. Filing Of Final Plat: Upon completion of all required improvements or posting of appropriate securities as stipulated in section 12-2-5 of this chapter, the
developer shall file with the planning commission the final plat of the subdivision. The final plat may include all or any reasonably acceptable part of the
tentatively approved preliminary plat, and completion of improvements, or the bond therefor, and need only cover that portion of the plat for which final
approval is requested. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4)
B. Number Of Copies; Certificate Of Title: The developer shall file with the planning commission fifteen (15) black line or blue line prints of the final or
record plat which shall conform in every respect with the requirements specified in this section. These shall be accompanied by a certificate of title
showing the ownership of all lands to be dedicated to the public and that the title thereof is free and unencumbered. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4; amd.
2011 Code)
C. Checking By City Clerk And Planning Commission: A copy of the final or record plat thus filed shall be transmitted to the city clerk or his/her designee,
who will check the final plat. If found satisfactory, the city clerk or his/her designee shall return said plat to the planning commission within twenty (20)
days from the filing date, together with a two-fold certificate showing: a) that the engineering data and particulars of the plat itself have been checked
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 254/269
and found satisfactory; and b) that all improvements (streets, utilities, drainageways and others) required to be completed by the subdivider prior to
approval of the final plat have been satisfactorily made as stipulated in the preliminary plat and in this title. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-4; amd. 2011 Code;
Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
D. Approval By City Council:
1. The approval of the city council or the refusal to approve shall take place within thirty (30) days from and after the submission of the plat for final
approval, unless the developer agrees, in writing, to an extension of this time period; otherwise, said plat shall be deemed to have been approved;
and the certificate of said city council as to the date of the submission of the plat for approval and as to the failure to take action thereon within such
time shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or evidence of approval herein required.
2. The grounds for refusal of any plat submitted or regulations violated by the plat shall be stated upon the record of the city council. (1991 Code § 16-
2-16-4)
Chapter 3
PRELIMINARY PLAT
12-3-1: COPIES TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION:
The preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, fifteen (15) black line or blue line prints prepared by a qualified registered professional engineer, shall
accompany an application in writing to the planning commission for the tentative approval of the subdivision and shall contain the information as set out in
this chapter. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-5; amd. 2011 Code)
12-3-2: VICINITY SKETCH:
A. Required: A vicinity sketch at a scale of four hundred feet (400') or more to the inch shall be drawn on or shall accompany the preliminary plat. (1991
Code § 16-2-16-5)
B. Contents Of Sketch: The sketch shall show:
1. All existing subdivisions and the street and tract lines or acreage parcels immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-5;
amd. 2011 Code)
2. The nearest existing highways or thoroughfares, streets and alleys in neighboring subdivisions or unplatted property involved in producing the most
advantageous development of the entire neighborhood.
3. Section, range and township. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-5)
12-3-3: SCALE AND PROFILES:
The horizontal scale of the preliminary plat shall be one hundred feet (100') or less to the inch, and the vertical scale of street and sewer profiles ten feet
(10') or less to the inch. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-5)
12-3-4: EXISTING AND PROPOSED FEATURES AND INFORMATION:
The preliminary plat shall clearly show the following features and information:
A. Name: The proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the area.
B. Designation: The tract designation according to real estate records of the office of the county where located.
C. Owners Of Record: The names and addresses of the owner or owners of record, the developer and the engineer.
D. Abutting Owners: The name of adjacent subdivisions and the names of record owners of adjacent parcels of unplatted land.
E. Boundary Lines: The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract to be subdivided.
F. Streets And Other Features: The location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract, and other
important features such as existing permanent buildings, large trees and watercourses; railroad lines, corporation and township lines; pipelines and oil
and gas lines, easements or wells as shown in the records of the Oklahoma corporation commission, including abandoned gas or oil wells and dry
holes; etc.
G. Existing Utilities: Existing telephone and/or electrical conduits, sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes and grades indicated.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 255/269
H. Topography: Contours, normally with intervals of two feet (2') referenced to local datum, or as may be otherwise required by the planning commission.
I. Proposed Design Of Street And Drainage:
1. The layout, names and widths of proposed streets, alleys and easements.
2. The location and approximate sizes of catch basins, culverts and other drainage structures.
3. The layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots.
4. Proposed street names shall be established to the satisfaction of the city council, and shall not duplicate or closely approximate any existing street
names in the area, except extensions of existing streets.
J. Zoning: Zoning boundary lines if any, proposed uses of property, and proposed front yard setback lines.
K. North Point, Scale: North point, scale, date (written and graphically), and title.
L. Deed Restrictions: Copies of any private restrictions to be included in the deeds should be attached to the preliminary plat. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-5)
12-3-5: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
A. Construction Plans And Engineering Data: Construction plans and other engineering data, prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer
and as required under chapter 7 of this title, shall be submitted to the respective office, department or agency having jurisdiction over such
improvements prior to the approval of the final plat; provided, however, that a general statement describing proposed improvements and drainage
systems accompany the preliminary plat; and provided further, that the city council may require submission of all or any of the construction plans prior
to its review of the preliminary plat.
B. As Built Plans: As built plans of the improvements shall be filed with the department having jurisdiction within thirty (30) days after their completion.
(1991 Code § 16-2-16-5)
Chapter 4
IMPROVEMENTS GENERALLY
12-4-1: REQUIRED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Compliance With Requirements: Minimum improvements shall be installed within the jurisdiction of the city council in accordance with the requirements
of chapter 7 of this title.
B. Acknowledgment By Developer: The developer shall acknowledge the several improvement requirements as set forth in this title by notation on the final
plat. Said notation shall be worded substantially as follows: (1991 Code § 16-2-16-6)
All streets shall be graded, base material applied and surface paved in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city of Skiatook, to
include curbs and gutters, street name signs erected, planting screens established and trees planted, utilities and streetlights installed, sidewalks
constructed, drainage structures constructed in accordance with the approved plans on file in the office of the city clerk by the developer, at his
expense, and in compliance with and to the standards, plans and specifications of the city clerk. All required improvements shall be constructed within
two (2) years of approval of the final plat by the city council, and the same shall be maintained and kept in good repair by the subdivider for a period of
five (5) years after construction thereof has been approved in writing by the city clerk.
(1991 Code § 16-2-16-6; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-2013)
Chapter 5
FINAL OR RECORD PLAT
12-5-1: COPIES TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION:
A. Submission Of Copies With Application: Fifteen (15) black line or blue line prints of the final or record plat of the subdivision, or of any part of a larger
subdivision, shall be submitted to the planning commission by the developer together with a written application for approval on forms provided by the
planning commission. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-7; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Specific Plat Requirements:
1. The final plat shall be a print or prints on linen tracing cloth, Cronaflex, mylar or similar durable material. When more than one sheet is used for any
plat, each sheet shall be numbered consecutively and shall contain a notation giving the total number of sheets. There shall be a binding margin of
one and one-half inches (11/2") on all sides. The plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet (100') or less to the inch. Said scale shall be
indicated on the plat graphically and written.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 256/269
2. When a street is on a circular curve, the main chord of the centerline shall be drawn as a dotted line in waterproof, nonfading red ink, in its proper
place; and on it shall be noted its bearing and length, the angle subtended, the bearing of the radius at the point of curve, and the chord length and
deflecting angles used in staking out the survey. The lot lines on the street sides may be shown in the same manner or by bearings and distances.
When a curve of two hundred feet (200') radius or less is used, it is sufficient to show in waterproof, nonfading red ink the length and bearing of the
main chord, the radius at one end of the curve, and the central angle subtended. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-7)
12-5-2: FEATURES AND INFORMATION:
In addition to the requirements specified in section 12-5-1 of this chapter, the plat shall clearly show the following features and information:
A. Boundary Lines: All plat boundary lines with lengths of courses to hundredths of a foot and bearings to half minutes. These boundaries shall be
determined by an accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure of not to exceed one to ten thousand
(1:10,000).
B. Recorded Streets: The exact location and the widths along the property line of all existing recorded streets and rights of way intersecting or paralleling
the boundaries of the street.
C. Bearings And Distances: True bearings and distances to nearest established street bounds, patent or other established survey lines, or other official
monuments, which monuments shall be located or accurately described on the plat. Any patent or other established survey or corporation lines shall be
accurately monument marked and located on the plat, and their names shall be lettered on them.
D. Monuments: The accurate location and material of all permanent reference monuments.
E. Layout: The exact layout, including:
1. Street and alley lines, their names, bearings, angles of intersection and widths (including widths along the line of any obliquely intersecting street).
2. The length of all arcs, radii, points of curvature and tangent bearings.
3. All easements and rights of way, when provided for or owned by public services (with the limitation of easement rights definitely stated on the plat).
4. All lot lines with dimensions in feet and hundredth, and with bearings and angles to minutes if other than right angles to the street and alley lines.
F. Lots And Block Numbers: Lots shall be numbered in numerical order. In tracts containing more than one block, the blocks shall likewise be numbered in
numerical order. In case of a resubdivision of lots in any block, such resubdivided lots shall be designated by their original number prefixed with the
term most accurately describing such division, such as: W 1/2 of 3, N 40' of 5, etc., or they shall be designated numerically beginning with the number
following the highest lot numbered in the block.
G. Property Offered For Dedication: The accurate outline of all property which is offered for dedication for public use, and of all property that may be
reserved by covenant in the deeds for the common use of the property owners in the subdivisions, with the purposes indicated thereon. All lands
dedicated to public use other than streets or roads shall be marked "Dedicated To The Public".
H. Watercourses: In case the subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, channel, stream or creek, the prior or present location of such watercourse,
channel, stream, or creek and the line of historical or periodic flooding shall be shown on the plat.
I. Setback Lines: Setback building lines as fixed by the zoning ordinance or the official street plan and any other setback lines or street lines established by
public authority, and those stipulated in the deed restrictions.
J. Deed Restrictions: Private restrictions, if any, including boundaries of each type of use restriction; and other private restrictions for each definitely
restricted section of the subdivision.
K. Name Of Subdivision: Name of the subdivision and the name or number of the larger subdivision or tract of which the tract now subdivided is a part.
L. Adjoining Subdivision; Lakes: Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property. Where
provisions are made for access to an adjoining lake or stream, a sketch illustrating such access shall be submitted and the easement or right of way
shall be included within the deed of declaration.
M. Names Of Owners And Developers: Names and addresses of the owner or owners of record, the developer, and of the engineer or surveyor; also the
certificate of notary.
N. North Point, Scale: North point, scale (graphic and written), date, title.
O. Certificates:
1. Engineer's Certificate: Affidavit and certificate by a qualified registered professional engineer to the effect that he has fully complied with the
requirements of this title and the subdivision laws of the state governing surveying, dividing and mapping of the land; that the plat is a correct
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 257/269
representation of all the exterior boundaries of the land surveyed and the subdivision of it; that the plat represents a survey made by him and that all
monuments indicated thereon actually exist and their location, size and material are correctly shown.
2. Owner's Certificate: A certificate by the owner of the land in substantially the following form:
As owner, I hereby certify that I have caused the land described on this plat to be surveyed, divided, mapped, dedicated and access rights
reserved as represented on the plat.
This certificate shall be executed as a conveyance is executed.
3. Planning Commission Certificate: The planning commission shall certify that the plat meets all applicable requirements, and said certificate shall be
affixed to the final plat. Prior to certifying that the plat meets all applicable requirements, the planning commission may request affidavits, certificates,
acknowledgments, agreements or endorsements from any public agency concerned, including the following: (1991 Code § 16-2-16-7)
a. City clerk: That the plat conforms to all applicable engineering requirements and specifications. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-7; amd. Ord. 2013-3, 2-12-
2013)
b. City-county health department: That the plat meets all applicable public health regulations.
c. Utility board: That the plat complies with all applicable regulations pertaining to public water and sanitary sewer facilities.
d. State highway department: If applicable, that the plat is properly coordinated with state and federal highways, existing and planned.
P. City Council Approval: The city council shall certify approval of the plat and such certification shall be affixed to all required copies of the final plat. Prior
to the city council certifying the plat, the planning commission and the other required certificates shall be noted. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-7)
Chapter 6
MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
12-6-1: MINOR SUBDIVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
In the case of a small subdivision of minor importance situated in a locality where conditions are well defined, the City Council, on written request of the
developer, may exempt the developer from complying with some of the requirements stipulated in this title pertaining to the preparation of the plats. (1991
Code § 16-2-16-8)
12-6-2: LOT SPLITS:
A. Submission To Planning Commission For Review: A proposed lot split application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review along with
an application fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) or such other fee as later established by ordinance or resolution; and upon such review by the
Planning Commission, it shall, within thirty (30) days after submission of the lot-split application, make a recommendation to the City Council to either
approve or deny such requested lot split. In so doing, the Planning Commission and/or its staff may require the submission of a sketch plat, survey, and
such other information as it may deem pertinent to its determination hereunder.
B. Approval By City Council: After the Planning Commission has reviewed a lot-split application and has made a recommendation to the City Council to
either approve or deny such requested lot split, it shall then be submitted to the City Council for its consideration and possible approval. Under no
circumstances will a lot-split application be considered by the City Council without prior consideration by the Planning Commission and its written
recommendation. After approval of a lot-split application and upon presentation of a conveyance of an approved parcel, said conveyance shall be
stamped "Approved by the City Council, No Plat Required", or similar language and signed by the Mayor or Vice-Mayor. (Ord. 2018-01, 4-24-2018, eff.
7-1-2018)
12-6-3: MODIFICATION; UNDUE HARDSHIP:
In any particular case where the developer can show by plan and written statement that, by reason of exceptional topographic or other physical conditions,
literal compliance with any requirement of this title would cause practical difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship, the Planning Commission may
modify such requirement to the extent just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided, that such relief may be granted without
detriment to the public interest and without impairing the intent and purpose of this title or the desirable general development of the neighborhood and the
community in accordance with the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance. Any modification thus granted shall be spread upon the minutes of the
Planning Commission setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, justified the modification which shall be transmitted to
the City Council for its action. (1991 Code § 16-2-16-8)
Chapter 7
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
12-7-1: VARIANCES DUE TO FEDERAL AND STATE FUNDING REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions set forth in this chapter establishing design criteria may be varied to the extent as may be required by any conditions imposed upon the city
by virtue of federal or state funding requirements. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 258/269
12-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. The word "shall" means
mandatory; the word "may" means permissive.
CITY: The city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Skiatook, Oklahoma.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer or his designee employed by the city of Skiatook to fulfill any of the duties of the city engineer.
CONSULTING ENGINEER: A registered, professional engineer in good standing in the state of Oklahoma.
CONTRACTOR: A person, firm or corporation engaged in any aspect of the construction of improvements, including, but not limited to, street paving.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short street having one end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by an open space designed to facilitate vehicular
turnaround.
DEQ: The Oklahoma department of environmental quality, or any state agency succeeding to the jurisdiction of DEQ on matters pertaining hereto.
DEVELOPER: The owner or agent of the owner of the land having the right to subdivide and order the construction of improvements.
IMPROVEMENTS: Grading, street surfacing, construction of curbs and gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, culverts, bridges, water lines, sanitary sewer lines,
force mains and lift stations, storm sewer lines, other utilities, and other required features.
LOT: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated by other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of
survey map or by metes and bounds, for the purpose of sale or lease to or separate use of another.
OWNER: Any individual, firm or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the land under this chapter.
PLANS: The general construction or engineering drawings of public improvements showing the layout and principal design features of a subdivision.
SPECIFICATIONS: The detailed working drawings and written technical instructions concerning public improvements as adopted by the city of Skiatook.
STREETS AND ALLEYS: A way for vehicular traffic regardless of how designated. Where curbs are laid, the word "street" shall refer to that portion of the
roadway between the curbs. Streets may be further designated as follows:
Alley: A passage or way affording generally a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
Arterial: A fast or heavy traffic street of considerable continuity and used basically as a traffic artery for travel among large areas of the city. Arterials
may be further designated as primary or secondary arterials.
Collector: A street that carries traffic from local streets to arterials, such as the principal entrance street of a subdivision, or the street for circulation
within a subdivision.
Highway: A fast or heavy traffic street having limited access and used basically as a traffic artery for travel between Skiatook and other
municipalities.
Local Street: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
12-7-3: PRELIMINARY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Procedure Outline:
1. Developer should coordinate the proposed development or project with the city engineer's office during his preliminary studies and before actual
design begins.
2. Developer shall execute and deliver to the city an agreement guaranteeing maintenance of improvements for a minimum of one year.
3. Consulting engineer shall submit three (3) sets of plans and an estimated cost of construction to the city engineer's office.
4. Plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city. The city shall return one marked set of plans and specifications to the consulting engineer within
ten (10) working days of submittal.
5. A prework conference shall be conducted prior to commencing construction with the contractor, consulting engineer and city engineering staff.
Construction of improvements shall not begin until plans have been approved by the city engineer's office and a prework conference conducted to
coordinate construction activities and scheduling.
6. If it is determined that any change orders are necessary during construction, the consulting engineer will submit three (3) sets of the change order
plans to the city engineer's office for approval.
7. Upon completion of construction, the consulting engineer will furnish the city engineer's office a complete set of mylar reproducible "record" drawings
including those changes made during the construction process.
8. The city engineer shall make recommendations regarding the acceptability of the improvements to the city council. The city council shall decide on
whether or not to accept the improvements as constructed. The date on which the city council accepts the improvements will be the effective date of
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 259/269
the contractor's maintenance obligation.
B. Standards And Specifications:
1. All plans shall be reviewed in view of how they will affect future site development and how future site development will affect city operated facilities.
2. Where, on a particular tract, the standards and specifications set forth herein are not necessary or applicable by reason of topography, soils, or other
conditions peculiar to such tract, other standards may be used with the prior approval of the city engineer.
3. For any item of work not covered by the adopted criteria and specifications of the city, the consulting engineer shall include two (2) copies of the
design specifications and/or special provisions with his first submittal for review and approval by the city engineer.
4. Approval of the plans by the city engineer does not release the consulting engineer from his responsibility to meet the planning and design of the
project as required by the city engineer's office and/or other departments of the city.
5. The cover sheet of the plans and the calculation report shall be signed, sealed, and dated by a professional engineer, registered in the state of
Oklahoma, prior to submitting the plans to the city engineer's office for review.
6. Construction pay items and engineer's cost estimate for each item of work covered by the standard specifications and/or special provisions shall be
rounded off to the nearest unit and listed in the proposal clearly indicating the basis for payment.
C. Drafting:
1. Construction plans shall be drawn on a transparent reproducible medium (vellum or mylar).
2. Standard sheets shall be either thirty four inches (34") wide by twenty two inches (22") high, or thirty six inches (36") wide by twenty four inches (24")
high, having a margin of one and one-half inches (11/2") along the left border and one-half inch (1/2") along the top, bottom, and right border.
3. Consulting engineers with the capability to generate computer aided drafting (CAD) system layout drawings (plats, water, sewer, street, drainage,
grading, etc.) shall provide the city engineer's office with working files of "record" drawings on floppy disks compatible with the city's computer
system.
4. All project-drawing packages shall include a cover sheet that shall serve to introduce the project. Information contained on the cover sheet shall
include the project title, project location with location map, project owner's name, address, telephone number and contact person if not the owner,
engineer's name, address, and telephone number, drawing index and legend. The cover sheet shall not be used for a plan sheet.
5. North shall be oriented to the top or right hand side of all plan sheets.
6. A title block shall be located in the lower right hand corner of each sheet and shall include the project title, owner's and engineer's names, drawing
description, page number, and date.
7. The scale shall not be less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') horizontal and one inch equals five feet (1" = 5') vertical on plan and profile
sheets. Minimum scale shall be one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') on plan sheets. Larger scales may be required where conditions
warrant.
8. All line work shall be of sufficient density to be reproducible by current reproduction processes. Any line work that does not reproduce satisfactorily
may be cause for rejection of the plans by the city.
9. Freehand lettering shall be no smaller than the no. 4 setting on the Ames lettering guide (0.12 inch minimum height). Mechanical lettering shall be at
least comparable to the 100 Leroy guide (0.10 inch minimum height) except mechanical lettering on plats or records reproduced in the plans may be
comparable to the 80 Leroy guide (0.08 inch minimum height). Typing shall be at least 0.10 inch minimum height. Adhesive or transfer lettering shall
have a minimum height of 0.10 inch. These lettering sizes are minimum. Sizes greater than these are desirable and suggested.
10. All base maps shall be referenced to existing land lines (section corners, etc.). Property lines, rights of way, easements, building lines, etc., shall be
located and dimensioned.
11. No public improvements shall be installed without dedication of right of way or appropriate easements. These easements shall be submitted for
review and acceptance prior to filing. Restricted easements will be filed by the city.
12. All structures (manholes, junction boxes, inlets, headwalls, etc.) shall be numbered and labeled both in plan and in profile and detailed on plans.
13. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, and storm drainage lines shall be identified on both plan and profile sheets by letter or number.
14. Drawings shall show all obstructions existing and proposed, above and below ground. These shall be located vertically and horizontally. The
consulting engineer shall be responsible for contacting all utilities to obtain locations of their facilities. This also applies to various affected pipeline
companies.
15. Drawings shall show existing and proposed elevations.
16. A list of construction pay items and estimate of quantities shall be shown on the plans.
17. The contractor shall be responsible for coordinating all street crossings with the city engineer's office and securing approval for crossing, and for
method of construction (bore, tunnel, or open cut).
18. The consulting engineer shall submit check prints of "record" drawings for review and approval of the city engineer. Upon approval, the consulting
engineer shall submit reproducibles of "record" drawings as outlined in subsection A of this section.
D. Bench Marks:
1. All elevations shown on the plans shall be based on USGS or USC and GS datum.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 260/269
2. The permanent bench mark location and description used to extend level datum to the projects shall be noted on the front sheet of the plans.
3. All temporary bench marks used for control of the project shall be designated on the plans stating elevation, location, and description. The nearest
such bench mark shall be shown on each sheet.
4. A permanent bench mark shall be established on the project. This permanent bench mark will be a brass cap set in concrete in locations approved
by the city engineer. The cap shall read "City of Skiatook Bench Mark" together with a letter and/or numerical designation assigned it by the city
engineer's office from the master file of bench marks and shall be shown on the front sheet of the plans.
5. Level notes shall be provided to the city engineer's office for all permanent and temporary bench marks. All level notes shall be of closed loop
survey. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
12-7-4: DESIGN CRITERIA FOR WATER MAINS:
As provided for by the state, 27A Oklahoma Statutes section 2-6-301 et seq., the minimum design criteria for all public water facilities shall be the latest
edition of the Oklahoma department of environmental quality (DEQ) engineering bulletin no. 0589, standards for public water supply facilities. These
standards are amended as provided for herein. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
A. All plans pertaining to distribution and treatment of public drinking water must be approved by DEQ. The developer shall submit two (2) additional sets
of plans, as approved by the city engineer, to be submitted to DEQ by the city for review and approval.
B. If a water main is within two feet (2.0') vertically or ten feet (10.0') horizontally of a sanitary sewer, Oklahoma department of environmental quality
requirements shall govern.
C. Water mains shall be on the south or east side of the right of way, eight feet (8') off property line, unless otherwise approved. Water mains not in the
street right of way shall be centered in a minimum fifteen foot (15') restricted water line easement.
D. The minimum size of the water main on all section lines or arterials shall be twelve inches (12") in diameter and eight inches (8") in diameter on half
section lines or collectors. The minimum size of all other mains shall be six inches (6") in diameter; except, on dead end streets less than five hundred
feet (500') in length and a fire hydrant located within five hundred feet (500') of all proposed or existing building sites, then a four inch (4") diameter
main may be allowed. No dead end water lines shall be allowed.
E. Maximum permissible depth of cover is eight feet (8'), and minimum cover is three feet (3'), except at air relief valves and four and one-half feet (4.5')
bury fire hydrants, where a minimum of four and one-half feet (4.5') is required.
F. Centerline grade above water mains and curb grade, or centerline of street grade, shall be shown on the profile.
G. All fire hydrants shall be located in the street right of way one and one-half feet (1.5') from the right of way line on extension of the lot line and the finish
grade elevation at the point shown. Normally, fire hydrants will have a four and one-half foot (4.5') bury, with extensions as needed. Three and one-half
foot (3.5') bury fire hydrants may be allowed where approved by the city engineer. A base elevation for each fire hydrant shall be shown on the profile.
The center of a hose outlet shall be not less than eighteen inches (18") (457 mm) above final grade, or when located in a hose house, twelve inches
(12") (305 mm) above the floor.
H. All fire hydrants shall be located such that all proposed or existing building sites are within three hundred feet (300') of a hydrant. Maximum spacing
between hydrants shall be six hundred feet (600').
I. Fire hydrant connections to the water main shall be in accordance to standard details provided by the city engineer's office. Fire hydrants shall not be
installed on lines under six inches (6") in diameter.
J. All water pipe shall conform to the current American Water Works Association (AWWA) specifications for ductile iron pipe, steel pipe, reinforced
concrete pipe, or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. PVC pipe, except when encased in steel conduit, shall be restricted from use under or adjacent to
arterial streets.
K. If PVC pipe is used, detectable mylar marking tape and copper locator wire shall be required for location of the water pipe.
L. The cover over water lines at creek crossings shall be four foot (4') minimum. Water lines shall be restrained joint pipe through the creek area.
M. If conduits are planned to be installed for future long services, the plan sheet should be revised to show the location of the conduits.
N. The city engineer's office shall furnish to the consulting engineer normal working pressures in the area of the proposed improvements for proper
selection of air release valves and the minimum pressure class for pipe that will be required.
O. Dead ends shall be minimized by looping of all mains whenever practical. Future plans eventually connecting them to other mains to provide circulation
of water is strongly recommended.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 261/269
P. Where a rural roadway section is allowed, as provided for in subsection 12-7-6C3 of this chapter, a separate easement a minimum of fifteen feet (15')
wide shall be granted adjacent to the street right of way in which the proposed water line shall be placed.
Q. All fill areas within the street right of way or restricted water line easement shall be crosshatched on the profile and notation made on the plans that the
fill area shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor density. When a water main is located in a fill area, the fill shall
be made and compacted to finished grade, then trenched for water main excavation. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
12-7-5: DESIGN CRITERIA FOR SANITARY SEWERS:
As provided for by the state of Oklahoma, title 252 Oklahoma administrative code section 655, the minimum design criteria for all sanitary sewer collection
and treatment facilities shall be the latest edition of the Oklahoma department of environmental quality (DEQ) engineering bulletin no. 0587, standards for
water pollution control facilities.
A. All plans pertaining to the collection and treatment of public wastewater plants must be approved by the DEQ. The developer shall submit two (2)
additional sets of plans, as approved by the city engineer, to be submitted to the DEQ by the city for review and approval. The developer will be
responsible for the plan review fee.
B. If a water main is within two feet (2.0') vertically or ten feet (10.0') horizontally of a sanitary sewer, the Oklahoma department of environmental quality
requirements shall govern.
C. Where possible, sewer lines shall be located in an easement adjacent to the street right of way. Other sewer lines shall be located in the south or west
half of back to back easements, seven feet (7.0') from the property line. Total back to back easement width is twenty two feet (22.0') minimum. The
sewer shall be located twelve and one-half feet (12.5') from the property line in perimeter easements that are a minimum of seventeen and one-half
feet (17.5'). Any location not standard must be approved by the city engineer. Side lot easement widths shall be based upon other utilities in the
easement and the location and depth of the sewer.
D. No public gravity sewer shall be less than eight inches (8") in diameter, except that the use of a six inch (6") diameter sewer may be permitted where it
cannot be extended and where not more than one hundred feet (100') will be installed in any one place.
E. Sewers terminating in a manhole shall project a minimum of fifteen feet (15.0') into the property served, or ten feet (10.0') where a lamphole is used. If
all utilities are to be underground, this may be reduced in certain situations. If property is unplatted, service shall be provided for the minimum lot size
permitted. Where a lamphole is used, a long radius ninety degree (90°) elbow shall be installed. A concrete base, a minimum of eighteen inches by
eighteen inches (18" x 18") shall be constructed around the opening of the lamphole.
F. Alignment, size, and grade of lines shall be subject to approval.
G. Manhole spacing shall be a maximum of four hundred feet (400'). Lampholes shall not be more than one hundred feet (100') from the nearest manhole,
except as approved by the city. In order to accommodate cleaning, using power equipment, five hundred feet (500') spacing will be allowed when
manholes are located in the street right of way or parking lots. Adjustments in manhole spacing may be made to allow locations adjacent to the streets.
H. Manholes shall be four feet (4.0') deep minimum, or a special structure will be required. Rim elevation shall be one foot (1.0') minimum, above 100-year
flood or high water level in these areas, or watertight manhole lids may be installed. Exact manhole rim elevations shall be shown on profile and staked
in field, unless matching existing grade. All manholes shall match inverts in and out (no splash), or a drop manhole shall be constructed (minimum
difference in inverts shall be 2.0 feet, or as required for construction).
I. In-line tees shall be installed for all platted lots and at any point where a sanitary sewer service connection is anticipated. Specify the tee size, and
station the tee from the downstream manhole on the plan and profile.
J. Maximum permissible depth for service connections to property is sixteen feet (16').
K. Design depth shall be based on service line stub out one and one-half feet (1.5') below the surface, two and eight-hundredths percent (2.08%) minimum
grade, and a one and one-half foot (1.5') drop into the sewer.
L. All sewer pipe shall conform to the current specifications. All cuts in excess of sixteen feet (16') shall require special approval. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
pipe shall be restricted from use under streets and adjacent to arterial streets, except AWWA C-900 PVC class 200 pipe will be allowed under local and
collector streets.
M. Concrete encasement or ductile iron pipe (C1.51) shall be required where the depth of cut from the ground elevation to the top of the pipe is four feet
(4.0') or less; concrete cradle where centerline cut exceeds sixteen feet (16'); water table cradle, where trench conditions require.
N. If PVC pipe is used, detectable mylar marking tape and copper locator wire shall be required for location of water pipe.
O. Cover over sewer at channel or creek crossings shall be four feet (4.0') minimum. Concrete encased ductile iron pipe shall be used at these crossings.
The ductile iron pipe shall extend a minimum of ten feet (10.0') into both banks.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 262/269
P. All sewerage systems shall be constructed with adequate capacity, as approved by the city engineer, by applications of current industry accepted
engineering standards applicable thereto, to serve the entire drainage area upstream from the point of consideration. The capacity shall include sewer
lines, lift stations, and force mains, where applicable.
Q. All fill areas within the utility easement shall be crosshatched on the profile and notation made on the plans that the fill area shall be compacted to a
minimum of ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor density. When sanitary sewer pipes are located in a fill area, the fill shall be made and
compacted to finished grade, then trenched for sanitary sewer excavation. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
12-7-6: DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STREETS:
A. General: Streets shall include earthwork, proper subgrade, base course(s), wearing surface, concrete curb and gutters, proper backfill, and proper
drainage structures, including storm sewers and inlets.
B. Plan Sheets And Profiles:
1. All intersections, cul-de-sacs, and other critical locations shall be shown in plan detail at a minimum scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'),
including direction of drainage, top of curb elevation at PCs, PTs, and high or low points. All curve information and drainage structures shall be
shown in detail.
2. All drainage areas shall be clearly marked on the drainage area plan sheet; showing acreage, runoff and off site pick up points.
3. A site plan showing proposed locations and elevations of all utilities shall accompany the street and storm sewer plans.
4. The profile may be either three (3) separate profiles or one single profile.
a. Separate Profiles: When using three (3) separate profiles, the top and bottom shall show existing property line and proposed top of curb. The
middle profile shall show only existing centerline profile. Stationing shall be along centerline.
b. Single Profile: When using one single profile, both property lines shall be shown along with the proposed top of curb. The centerline profile shall
not be shown. Stationing shall be along centerline.
5. All fill areas within the street right of way shall be crosshatched on the profile and notation shall be made that the fill area shall be compacted to a
minimum of ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor density. When storm sewer pipes are located in a fill area, the fill shall be made and
compacted to finish grade, then trenched for storm drain excavation.
6. Curb returns with elevations shall be clearly labeled on the profile.
7. Vertical curves in the profile shall give the top of curb elevation at the PC, PI, PT, and high or low point, at a minimum of fifty foot (50') intervals.
8. Storm sewers shall be located along centerline of streets.
C. Streets:
1. Minimum Street Widths:
a. Width of streets shall be according to the classifications as provided for in the major street and highway plan. Width shall be measured from curb
face to curb face or from edge of design strength pavement.
Residential (local) 26 feet
Residential collector 36 feet
Commercial and industrial (local) 32 feet
Commercial and industrial collector 40 feet
(Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
b. Dead end or cul-de-sac streets over six hundred feet (600') long shall be paved to the width of residential collector streets (36 feet). (Ord. 2002-10,
7-30-2002)
2. Secondary And Primary Arterial Designs: All secondary and primary arterial designs shall be furnished by the city engineer's office. (Ord. 99-01, 1-
26-1999)
3. Borrow Ditch: Where agriculture (AG) or residential estate (RE) zoning has been allowed, the typical pavement section may be a minimum width of
twenty six feet (26') with four foot (4') turf shoulders on each side. When allowed, additional right of way shall be dedicated such that the borrow
ditch, including the back slope, can be maintained from within the street right of way. Borrow ditches shall be constructed in accordance with
subsection 12-7-7A35 of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-10, 7-30-2002)
4. Concrete Curbs: All streets shall be constructed with concrete curbs, except as provided for in this subsection, in accordance with standard details.
5. Centerline: The centerline of paving shall be the centerline of the right of way where dedication has been made according to the major street plan.
The city engineer shall determine all other cases.
6. Grades: The minimum grade set along the curb shall be one-half percent (0.5%). The maximum desirable grade for nonarterial streets shall be
limited to eight percent (8%). For situations where the topography is unusually hilly, grades will be permitted up to a maximum of twelve percent
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 263/269
(12%), provided they do not exceed five hundred feet (500') in length from PT to PC.
7. Grade Of Curb Returns: The grade of the curb returns shall continue for the full arc on all intersections where a midway opposing break is not
provided.
8. Vertical Curves Designated: Sag vertical curves shall be designed according to the current AASHTO specifications using the criteria of headlights
site distance and drainage control. Crest vertical curves shall be designed according to the current AASHTO specifications using the criteria of safe
stopping sight distance.
9. Minimum Length Of Vertical Curves: Vertical curves shall be the minimum length available for the two (2) grades entering into a sump area as
defined by the AASHTO publication titled, "A Policy On Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets - 1984".
10. Design Speed: Design speed shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour on all residential streets and thirty (30) miles per hour on all collectors.
11. Street Alignment: The minimum centerline radius on street alignment shall be one hundred twenty five feet (125').
12. Minimum Radius On Returns: The minimum radius on returns at residential intersections shall be twenty five feet (25'). At intersections of a
residential and arterial street, the minimum radius on returns shall be thirty feet (30'). At intersections of arterial streets, the minimum radius on
returns shall be forty feet (40'). The minimum radius on the returns for industrial districts shall be forty feet (40').
13. Maximum Grade: The maximum grade of a residential street when intersecting an arterial shall be two percent (2%) for a minimum of one hundred
feet (100') from the curb line of the arterial. No vertical curve shall begin any closer than fifty feet (50') from the curb line of the arterial. The maximum
grade of residential streets at intersections shall be four percent (4%).
14. Profile: A proposed and existing profile shall be shown beyond the end of all dead end streets for a minimum of two hundred feet (200') to
determine a satisfactory grade for future development.
15. Cross Slope: Cross slope may be one-fourth inch (1/4") or three-eighths inch (3/8") per foot; however, crown will be flattened off so that the crown
never exceeds the curb height.
16. Intersection: Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right angles as topography and other limiting design factors permit.
D. Typical Sections:
1. Typical sections shall be drawn at the same horizontal and vertical scale.
2. Typical sections shall show dimensions, type of materials, layer details, reserve topsoil, temporary and permanent erosion control, compacted
thickness, etc.
3. All typical sections or notes that are necessary to clearly reflect the design shall be included.
4. The developer shall provide soil tests for all areas to be paved. Soil tests shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. If soil tests indicate that
the soil has a plasticity index of 10 or greater, a minimum of six inches (6") of subgrade shall be modified with a minimum of five percent (5%)
hydrated lime by weight or class III fly ash. If the soil tests indicate that the soil is granular and unstable, the city engineer shall approve the method
of stabilization. If desired, subgrade may be built of an approved borrow material.
5. Industrial and commercial pavement sections shall be a minimum of ten inch (10") asphaltic concrete or eight inch (8") portland cement concrete.
Residential pavement sections shall be a minimum of six and one-half inch (61/2") asphaltic concrete or six inch (6") portland cement concrete.
Concrete test cylinder shall be provided with testing breaks performed at seven (7), fourteen (14), and twenty eight (28) days.
6. Pavement sections for secondary and primary arterial streets shall be furnished by the city engineer's office.
7. Portland cement concrete streets shall have an integrally placed curb of the same mix design as for street paving. The curb shall be a minimum of
six inches (6") wide at the top and curb face shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in height exclusive of bottom fillet.
8. Joints in portland cement paving, curbs and gutters shall be placed in accordance with the city engineer's recommendation.
9. Asphaltic concrete streets shall have portland cement concrete curb and gutter. The curb shall not be less than six inches (6") wide at the top with a
six inch (6") face in height exclusive of bottom fillet, and the gutter shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in width. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
10. All curb sections shall be barrier type curbs except for local residential streets. Mountable type curbs are permitted for local residential streets as
long as they maintain the same six inch (6") height as the square type curb. (Ord. 2002-10, 7-30-2002)
11. Asphaltic concrete shall be types A, B, and C per Oklahoma department of transportation standard specifications for highway construction.
12. Concrete shall be class A paving concrete with five percent (5%) to seven percent (7%) entrained air, with cement content determined by AASHTO
T121 standard.
13. Where residential estate (RE) zoning has been allowed, the typical roadway section may be a minimum of six inches (6") of stabilized aggregate
base on compacted subgrade with three inches (3") of asphaltic concrete surface. The stabilized aggregate base on compacted subgrade shall
extend to the outside edge of the shoulder.
E. Cross Sections:
1. The city engineer, as a part of the construction plan, may require cross sections when necessary to reflect more clearly the intent of the design.
2. All cross sections for street rights of way shall be drawn to scale showing existing ground and proposed construction from building line to building
line.
3. Typical cross sections shall be shown for each street if the slope to the property line exceeds one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 264/269
4. Each section shall be stationed clearly.
5. The beginning and ending points of a project shall be stationed and cross sections for both the stations shall be drawn.
6. Maximum distance between cross section stations shall be one hundred feet (100').
7. Sufficient information shall be furnished to show that water is not ponded behind curbs or in ditches.
8. Scale for cross sections shall not be less than:
Channels, 1 inch = 10 feet horizontal 1 inch = 5 feet vertical
Streets, 1 inch = 5 feet horizontal 1 inch = 5 feet vertical
F. Structures And Specific Details:
1. All special structures will be detailed.
2. Special structures shall be drawn to scale unless noted otherwise.
3. Sufficient details, dimensions, and related notes shall be provided for all structures.
4. All structures subject to vehicular traffic shall be designed for H-20 loading.
5. All bridge design shall meet the requirements in the latest edition of standard specifications for highway bridges prepared by AASHTO.
G. Sidewalks:
1. All sidewalk layouts and designs for the central business district and other commercial and industrial areas shall be furnished by the city engineer's
office. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
2. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of local and collector streets serving a residential subdivision, except where agriculture (AG), and
residential estate (RE) zoning has been allowed. (Ord. 2003-14, 10-14-2003)
3. All sidewalks shall be of portland cement concrete. Sidewalks shall include pedestrian bridges across creeks and streams where applicable.
4. The finished thickness of portland cement concrete sidewalks shall not be less than four inches (4") and the width shall not be less than four feet (4').
5. Sidewalks shall be no less than six feet (6') from the outside curb line of the street pavements.
6. Sidewalks must provide personable access for the safe and convenient movement across curbs of physically handicapped persons, including those
persons in wheelchairs. Wheelchair ramps shall be constructed in accordance with standard details provided by the city engineer's office.
H. Easement And Right Of Way:
1. Easements and rights of way shall be clearly dimensioned on the plans.
2. All overland restricted drainage easements will be shown detailed on the "plans" and "final plat", as well as described in the conditions and
restrictions of the plat.
3. An unimproved drainageway left in a natural state shall be dedicated to the public, either by title or easement, and platted with a minimum width
equal to the floodplain width required to pass the regulatory flood. Dedicated drainageway shall be provided with adequate vehicular ingress and
egress for maintenance purposes. If said drainageway width is less than one hundred fifty feet (150'), the minimum width required will be the
floodplain, plus an additional width of fifteen feet (15') on each side of the floodplain. Said dedication may have an ownership reverter provision.
4. The city may accept dedication of the entire floodplain area for an unimproved channel.
5. Adequate restrictive easements for dedicated right of way must be provided for access and maintenance.
6. The minimum width for all storm sewer easements shall be the outside diameter of pipe, plus ten feet (10'), and the pipe shall be laid in the center of
the easement.
I. Lighting:
1. The city shall not assume maintenance and operation costs of streetlights installed as a part of the original subdivision for security purposes, should
status change occur (i.e., annexation).
2. The city shall plan the location of streetlights in all new subdivisions upon receiving an official "preliminary" plat of the subdivision for review. (Ord.
99-01, 1-26-1999)
12-7-7: STORMWATER DRAINAGE CRITERIA:
A. Runoff:
1. a. All stormwater runoff shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer with regard to analysis, design, and construction of drainageway
facilities. The appropriate public authority shall have the right to maintain or to cause to be maintained the drainageway system for its intended
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 265/269
purposes. If a stormwater master drainage plan is adopted for the area under consideration, then the provisions of the plan shall be adhered to.
b. The drainage system, both public and private, may consist of storm sewers (which are closed conduits); improved channels constructed in
conformity with adopted city standards; unimproved drainageways left in their natural condition; the areas covered by restricted drainageway
easements for the purpose of providing overland flow, and all appurtenances to the above including inlet, manholes, junction boxes, headwalls,
dissipaters, culverts, etc. All portions of the drainage system that exist on dedicated rights of way or restricted drainage easements shall be owned
and maintained by the city unless provided otherwise by agreement or covenant.
c. The drainage system plans shall show both plan and profile views of the proposed improvements. Any manhole or access point to the system that
is buried out of sight shall be dimensioned to permanent objects in the vicinity.
2. The stormwater drainage system shall be designed to receive and pass the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainstorm under full urbanization. "Full
urbanization" is defined as the total development in an area that is anticipated. The entire flow shall be confined within the said stormwater drainage
system.
3. The stormwater collection system shall be designed either:
a. To pass a minimum of the runoff from a 5-year frequency rainstorm in a pipe network with overland flow capacities so that the combination of any
two (2) will pass the runoff from a 100-year frequency rainstorm under fully urbanized conditions, or
b. To pass the entire runoff from a 100-year frequency rainstorm in the pipe network. Should the entire runoff from a 100-year frequency rainstorm be
conveyed in a pipe network, a nominal frequency rainstorm shall be designed to carry flow in the event of inlet blockage or bypass.
The overland flow portion of the collector system shall be confined to dedicated rights of way, or restricted drainage easements to assure that
stormwater can pass through the development without inundating the lowest level of any building, dwelling, or structure. Restricted drainage
easements shall be shown on the plat. The main channel of the drainage system shall not be bound to carrying the 5-year frequency rainstorm in a
pipe network.
4. The rational method of runoff analysis may be used for the design of the closed pipe networks of the storm sewer system up to drainage areas of
one hundred (100) acres. For drainage areas over one hundred (100) acres, a hydrographic method shall be used.
5. The rainfall intensity curves prepared from TP-40 and national weather service HYDRO-35 (June 1977 or latest edition) shall be used for design in
determining the rainfall.
6. a. The Oklahoma department of transportation technical manual (latest edition) shall be used for determining the basic C values.
b. A weighted C value shall be determined with minimum values of 0.45 for residential (RS and RD), 0.65 for multi-family (RM) and 0.90 for industrial
and commercial areas. Unplatted areas with three hundred feet (300') either side of an arterial shall be either considered commercial or shall be in
accordance with the comprehensive plan in estimating runoff coefficients.
c. The weighted C value shall be increased by twenty five percent (25%) for the 100-year frequency rainstorm.
7. The distance between inlets, as well as the distance to the first inlet, shall be determined by the following, whichever is less:
a. For the 5-year frequency rainstorm, two (2) driving lanes must remain open for streets on grade.
b. For the 100-year frequency rainstorm, one driving lane must remain open for streets on grade. Further, the depth of flow shall not exceed curb
deep.
c. A maximum time of concentration of ten (10) minutes to the first inlet shall be used for single or multi-family residential areas.
d. A maximum time of concentration of five (5) minutes to the first inlet shall be used for commercial and industrial areas.
e. Six hundred feet (600').
8. At sump locations, the water depth shall not exceed twelve inches (12") above the top of the curb, or eighteen inches (18") above the top of the
grate, whichever is less, for the 100-year frequency rainstorm.
9. Where sump collection systems are used, an overflow route shall be established in the event of complete blockage of the sump.
10. Runoff from areas greater than one-half (1/2) acre outside the roadway shall be collected before it reaches the roadway. Parking lots shall have
internal drainage systems so as to reduce concentrated flow into streets. This item does not apply to single-family residential lots.
11. Inlets shall be located at intersections to collect the flow from crossing the intersection. Inlets at intersections shall be located so they do not
encroach upon the curb return. No drainage structure shall be permitted at a wheelchair ramp.
12. a. Drainage areas, runoff from 5-year and 100-year frequency rainstorms, time of concentration, and inlet design for each inlet shall be summarized
and tabulated on the plans. This summary table shall also be a part of the drainage calculations.
b. The flows and velocities for each pipe and open channel shall be summarized and tabulated as above.
c. If a tract of land under development has a floodplain area within its boundary, then a hydraulic (backwater) analysis of the existing and proposed
drainage system shall be provided to show any impact the proposed development has on the floodplain area and elevation.
13. Trapezoidal channels shall be designed with a hard lined low flow channel, such as concrete. The low flow channel shall branch off to pick up any
storm sewers discharging into the channel. The top of the sides of the low flow channel shall be a minimum of six inches (6") lower than the adjacent
main channel bottom. This is to ensure that the drainage runs over and into the low flow channel and does not erode around it. The minimum cross
slope on the bottom of the trapezoidal channel shall be two percent (2%). The easement for the trapezoidal channel shall include ten feet (10')
additional width along the top of the bank for an access road.
14. Roughness coefficients for drainage design shall be as listed in tables 5-5 and 5-6, figure 5-5, pages 109 through 123, of "Open Channel
Hydraulics" by Ven Te Chow (published by McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1959, or latest edition).
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 266/269
15. The minimum velocity in any drainage system shall be two and one-half feet (2.5') per second, for all events of 5-year frequency and greater. The
maximum velocity in a pipe shall be thirty feet (30') per second and the maximum velocity in an unlined ditch shall be six feet (6') per second.
16. Culverts shall be sized using either Kutters or Mannings charts, and the federal highway administration inlet control charts, for the design flow. The
slope used for design shall be the slope of the invert of the culvert.
17. No pipe shall be installed downstream having a diameter smaller than the pipe from which it is receiving water.
18. Concrete pipe shall not be less than C-76 class III. Corrugated metal pipes shall meet Oklahoma department of transportation gauge requirements
for fill heights, and bituminous coated and lined.
19. Junctions between different pipe sizes shall be made with the top inside of the downstream pipe no higher than the top inside of the upstream pipe.
20. A manhole or junction box shall be required at all changes of grade, changes in alignment, and junctions between two (2) or more different size
pipes.
21. The horizontal distance between pipes being placed in the same trench shall be a minimum of two feet (2') or one-third (1/3) the diameter of the
larger pipe, whichever is greater. This would include multiple pipe crossings for culvert purposes.
22. The minimum storm sewer pipe size shall be fifteen inches (15"). Use of smaller pipes, such as for detention pond outlets, shall require prior
approval by the city engineer's office.
23. Radius pipes will not be used on storm sewers having a diameter of thirty six inches (36") or less. Radius pipes may be used on storm sewers
larger than thirty six inches (36"). The radius of the curve shall be no less than five (5) times the diameter of the pipe. The degree of deflection shall
be no more than seven and one-half degrees (7.5°) per joint of radius pipe, or the pipe manufacturer's recommendation, whichever is less. The city is
allowed to require radius pipe, should the energy loss be excessive and thereby detrimental to the system.
24. A minimum of six inch (6") cover shall be provided over pipes and box culverts to the bottom of the subgrade in paved areas except when the box
culverts are built with the top at grade.
25. All storm sewers shall be shown in profile, showing flow line, size, type, and grade. Profiles shall show the natural and proposed ground line at the
centerline of the storm sewer. Stationing shall be continuous through manholes, along the main (longest) line, to the top of the system. Branch lines
shall be stationed, starting from 0+00, from their connection with the main line. Lines shall be stationed on the profile drawing from left to right,
increasing upstream.
26. The radius of curve for a box structure shall be a minimum of three (3) times the maximum width of the box structure, but not less than fifty feet
(50').
27. New box culverts and bridges shall have adequate capacity to pass 100-year fully urbanized flows with one foot (1') of freeboard under the low
chord. A backwater analysis shall be provided to illustrate compliance with this requirement.
28. Pipes discharging at a steep gradient into drainageways and detention facilities shall be provided with a head wall and energy dissipaters. A "steep
gradient" is defined as an energy grade line whose outlet velocity is greater than six feet (6') per second.
29. The centerline radius of a curve on an improved open channel shall be a minimum of three (3) times the top width at the design flow or one
hundred feet (100'), whichever is greater.
30. All improved channels shall be provided with a minimum of one foot (1') of freeboard above normal depth of the runoff from a 100-year frequency
rainstorm.
At all bends in improved channels, the amount of freeboard shall be increased by the following equation:
H = V x b
64.4 x r
Where:
H is height of freeboard in feet
V is the average velocity in feet per second
b is the width of the channel at the design water surface in feet
r is the radius of curvature of the channel centerline in feet
The increased freeboard height shall be maintained a minimum of one channel width upstream and downstream of the bend.
31. When storm sewers are constructed in fill areas, all materials in fill areas shall be compacted to a ninety five percent (95%) standard proctor density
prior to the trenching and laying of the pipe.
32. Maximum spacing between manholes or junction boxes shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') for pipes of fifteen inches (15"), and five hundred
feet (500') for pipes greater than fifteen inches (15").
33. All junction boxes and manholes shall be built with the standard manhole ring and cover at grade.
34. A manhole or junction box shall be constructed at the PC or PT of all curves in sewers.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 267/269
35. Borrow ditches, when allowed, shall not exceed four feet (4') in depth. Culverts shall be sized to handle the 5-year or larger storm (minimum 15
inches diameter). The side slopes on the bank next to the road shall be four feet (4') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical, or flatter. The side slope on
the opposite bank shall be maintainable.
B. Storage:
1. a. The detention storage requirements shall be that excess runoff from a 100-year frequency storm. The excess runoff is that runoff generated due to
urbanization that is greater than the runoff historically generated under existing conditions, for a given frequency storm.
b. Peak release rates from developments shall not exceed the existing runoff that occurred before development for all storm frequencies up to and
including the 100-year frequency storm. As a minimum, the 5-year and 100-year storms shall be investigated.
c. If a stormwater master drainage plan is adopted in the area under consideration, then the provisions of the plan shall be adhered to.
2. For the design of stormwater storage facilities, the following methods are approved for the use:
Method Drainage Area
HEC-1 Snyder's method Greater than 10 acres
HEC-1 SCS method 2 to 2,000 acres
Modified rational approach with volume factors1 Less than 10 acres
Graphical method1 Less than 2 acres
Note:
1. These methods are available from the city.
3. U.S. weather bureau technical paper no. 40 and national weather service HYDRO-35 (June 1977) shall be used for rainfall information.
4. The rainfall pattern shall be used in accordance with the modeling technique selected.
5. For Snyder's synthetic unit hydrographic method, the loss rates in determining the runoff/hydrographic shall be an initial loss of five-tenths inch (0.5")
and a uniform loss of eight-hundredths inch (0.08") per hour for the subsequent hours once the initial losses are satisfied.
6. All calculations for detention facilities shall be submitted for review by the city. The submittal shall include hydrographs for both existing and
developed conditions, detention facility stage-area-volume relationships, outlet structure details, and a stage versus time analysis through the facility.
7. The intent of the stormwater detention requirements shall be identified at the preliminary plat stage of the project review. The 100-year frequency
rainstorm floodplain areas and stormwater detention site locations shall be shown on the preliminary plat to illustrate how these areas will be
managed during and after construction. The "100-year frequency rainstorm floodplain" is defined as the area of land that the runoff from the 100-year
frequency rainstorm inundates.
8. Detention facilities should be located in areas that require a minimum of maintenance.
9. Detention facilities may be located in the floodplain area or flood hazard area, provided the floodplain area and the flood hazard area are determined
with the facility in place and that no rise in the water surface off site of the development results from the installation of the facility, except that
permitted by city ordinance.
10. Additional detention storage, in excess of the required storage for a drainage area, can be provided to satisfy the detention requirements for a tract
of land downstream of the detention facility, provided the detention facility is constructed prior to the development of the downstream tract.
11. All detention facilities shall be designed "dry" unless a special maintenance agreement, in writing, has been approved by the city.
12. A minimum number of detention facilities is encouraged for each development.
13. If runoff has a natural tendency to drain in several directions for a given development tract of land where detention is required, then detention
storage shall be provided for the biggest drainage area. Additionally, detention storage may be provided at the same facility to satisfy detention
requirements for a separate drainage area on the same development; provided, that:
a. The whole developmental tract of land is in the same watershed.
b. The smaller drainage area that has been compensated for does not, either singly or in combination, adversely impact the health, welfare, and
safety of the general public downstream.
14. If a tract of land being developed is located in more than one drainage area, then grading work to divert flows from one drainage area to another
will not be permitted. Compensatory storage will not be permitted in one drainage area for that required in another.
A "drainage area" is defined as an area of land that funnels stormwater runoff to a common point at the downhill side of that tract being developed.
15. Detention facilities may be used for compensatory storage when encroaching into the floodplain area; provided, that the overall drainage system
does not:
a. Cause a rise in the water surface elevation beyond the extent of the developmental tract of land.
b. Adversely impact adjacent properties by an increase in velocity.
16. All dikes and spillways on detention facilities shall have typical cross sections shown on the plans.
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 268/269
17. Side slopes on detention facilities shall not be steeper than four to one (4:1) (horizontal:vertical). Steeper side slope may be allowed should the site
conditions necessitate; however, methods for proper erosion control must be established and illustrated, and the procedures for maintaining these
steeper side slopes must be established and shown on the plan.
18. Detention facilities shall be provided with a low flow channel from the inlet to the outlet structure to transmit low flows and the low flow channel shall
be approved by the city. The low flow channel shall be concrete lined and of sufficient width and geometry to allow for proper maintenance. The
maintenance procedure shall be shown on the plans.
19. The easements for the storm sewers and detention ponds shall appear on the plat.
20. An accessway at least twenty feet (20') wide shall be provided to any detention area. Access may be provided by frontage on a dedicated public
street to the detention area. The access road shall have a maximum grade of ten percent (10%). The access road shall be paved, twelve feet (12')
wide, from the top of the bank to the bottom of the detention pond and in the bottom of the detention pond to locations of high maintenance.
21. If the detention facility is approved by the city to serve areas outside the subdivision in which it is located, such additional areas shall be specifically
identified in the provision for detention in subsection C of this section.
22. An operations and maintenance guide shall be prepared to illustrate the proper use and care of the detention facility, and by whom, when, and how.
23. Any dam or berm constructed shall be designed and constructed by a registered professional engineer.
24. Spillways on detention facility dams shall be constructed to pass the 500-year flood event with a minimum of one foot (1') of freeboard on the earth
dam structure. All detention facilities shall meet the Oklahoma water resources board's requirements.
25. All earth slopes and areas subject to erosion, such as, adjacent to trickle channels, inlet structures, and outlet structures, shall be slab sodded with
Bermuda sod or protected with other erosion control measures. All other earth surfaces, with the area designated for detention pond site, shall have
an established growth of Bermuda grass or other approved species. All grass covered areas shall be fertilized, to current recommendations, watered
and in an established growing condition prior to completion and approval of the detention pond.
26. Detention facilities shall be environmentally sound and compatible with the area (neighborhood). Where feasible, multiple uses for the facilities
should be established. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
27. The maintenance responsibility for on site detention facilities shall belong to the private sector. (Ord. 2002-10, 7-30-2002)
C. Detention Facilities:
1. Definitions:
EXISTING PROBLEM: Stormwater runoff from the 100-year frequency rainfall event that flows out of the drainage easement. If there is no
drainage easement covering the watercourse, then a problem is when the runoff flows out of its channel banks in developed areas. In undeveloped
areas without a drainage easement, a problem is when the runoff flows out of its channel banks and overtops roads and/or impacts structures.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT: Any development that is planned to have greater than one-half (1/2) acre of impervious surfaces. For single-family
residential lot development, the impervious surface is assumed to include two thousand seven hundred (2,700) square feet per building lot, unless
better information is available. An impervious surface shall include all surfaces that do not allow an appreciable amount of infiltration. This
includes, but is not limited to, roads, driveways, roofs, and parking lots both paved and graveled.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT: A development that is less than a major development.
ON SITE DETENTION FACILITY: A stormwater detention facility built on the site of the development to provide detention storage for that
development.
REGIONAL DETENTION FACILITY: A stormwater detention facility and collection system that provides stormwater detention capacity for all new
development in a defined drainage area.
2. Regional Detention Facility In Place Or Planned: When there is a regional detention facility in place in the drainage area where development is
planned, or one is planned in the near future, then all new development may incorporate the regional detention facility into the design of the drainage
system for the development.
3. No Regional Detention Facility: When there is no regional detention facility constructed or planned in the near future for a particular drainage area
where development is planned, then the following shall apply:
a. When there is an existing drainage problem downstream of the development, then new major development is required to provide on site detention.
The method of maintenance shall be set forth in the deed restrictions.
The only exception to on site detention is new construction of a single-family home on an existing lot, tract, or parcel that has not complied with the
storm drainage detention requirements of this chapter.
b. When there is no drainage problem downstream of the development, then new development shall build on site detention facilities, unless the
developer can show that the development will not produce a problem downstream.
4. Maintenance Responsibility:
a. The property owners in the development shall be responsible for maintenance to its detention facility in a minor residential, commercial, or
industrial development. If the detention facility is privately maintained, then the maintenance requirements shall be set forth in the deed restriction
and the city shall be party to these deed restrictions. (Ord. 99-01, 1-26-1999)
b. The city shall not be responsible for the maintenance of detention facilities in major residential developments. (Ord. 2002-10, 7-30-2002)
12-7-8: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
7/9/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=987 269/269
Soil erosion and sedimentation is greatly accelerated during construction activities. In order to control these natural processes, the following practices shall
be adhered to:
A. A temporary barrier consisting of a straw bale dike shall be placed around all storm sewer inlets to prevent sediment from entering the storm sewer
system.
B. Straw bale dikes shall also be placed along streets adjacent to areas of land exposed or stripped of vegetation due to grading or construction activities.
C. A diversion or perimeter dike shall be constructed where concentrated flow of surface runoff is to be conveyed down slope onto adjacent properties.
D. A stabilized construction entrance shall be built to reduce or eliminate the tracking or flowing of sediment onto public rights of way.
E. Immediately upon completing construction, all exposed areas of land shall be properly seeded in accordance with adopted standards. (Ord. 99-01, 1-
26-1999)