CITY CODE
of
WARR ACRES, OKLAHOMA
Code current through Ord. 1196, passed 8-21-2019
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Warr Acres, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 1196, passed August 21, 2019, and resolution 509,
passed March 15, 2016.  Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this code to the extent that they are in conflict
or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain
whether any particular provision of the code has been amended, superseded or
repealed.
Sterling Codifiers began supplementation of this Code in 2002. Prior to 2002,
supplementation of the Code was done by Book Publishing Company.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 1197
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE RATES FOR SANITATION SERVICE IN TITLE 8, CHAPTER 08,
SECTION 8.08.150 OF THE WARR ACRES MUNICIPAL CODE; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF
CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, SEVERABILITY AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
EMERGENCY ORDINANCE
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WARR ACRES, OKLAHOMA:
   SECTION 1.      That Title 8, Chapter 08, Section 8.08.150 of the Warr Acres
Municipal Code be and the same is hereby added to read as follows:
8.08.150: FEES AND CHARGES:
The following fees and charges are hereby established for the removal and
disposition of garbage and rubbish to be paid to the city by the owner of any
premises located on an established garbage route within the city. Such fees and
charges shall be billed monthly in arrears and paid to the city on or before
the tenth day of the month following the date of billing.
A. For each single-family residence using a single service unit, duplex,
triplex, and fourplex, twenty-four dollars ($24.00) per month, per residence.
If more than four (4) 40-gallon cans and/or eight (8) 33-gallon bags per
residence are necessary, the rate will be an additional two dollars fifty cents
($2.50) per can or bag, per pick up.
B. Multiple-dwelling units in excess of four (4) units, ten dollars ($10.00)
per month, per unit. Each unit shall be permitted a maximum of 0.4 yards or
80.8 gallons of garbage or rubbish per month. Such garbage and debris service
shall be accomplished by the use of eight (8) yard dumpsters or a combination
of smaller dumpsters not to exceed the eight (8) yard total, necessary to
accommodate the maximum according to the number of units, and shall be picked
up not less than twice a week.
C. The monthly charge for commercial users shall be based upon the service unit
and frequency of pick-ups in accordance with the following schedule:
 
DUMPSTERS 
Size     1 x Week 2 x Week 3 x Week  4 x Week  5 x Week  6 x Week 
2 yards  $49.00   $98.00   $147.00   $196.00   $245.00   $294.00 
3 yards  $73.50   $147.00  $220.50   $294.00   $367.50   $441.00 
4 yards  $98.00   $196.00  $294.00   $392.00   $490.00   $588.00 
6 yards  $147.00  $294.00  $441.00   $588.00   $735.00   $882.00 
8 yards  $196.00  $392.00  $588.00   $784.00   $980.00   $1,176.00 
17 yards $416.50  $833.00  $1,249.50 $1,666.00 $2,082.50 $2,499.00 
 
1. Pick-ups requested in addition to the regular weekly pick-ups will be
charged in accordance with the following schedule:
ADDITIONAL DUMPSTER PICK UPS
 
Size     Per Occurrence 
2 yards  $8.75 
3 yards  13.13 
4 yards  17.50 
6 yards  26.25 
8 yards  35.00 
17 yards 195.63 
 
D. The city shall be responsible for maintaining all dumpsters provided for
commercial users for usual wear and tear. When it becomes necessary, as
determined by the sanitary supervisor or at the request of the user, to clean
the inside of the dumpster due to other than ordinary permitted use, there
shall be a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the user.
E. For commercial users not requiring a dumpster, a maximum of four (4) 40-
gallon cans will be picked up at the basic rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
per month. If more than four (4) 40- gallon cans are necessary, the rate will
increase six dollars ($6.00) per can, per month.
F. The city shall charge an additional monthly fee of fifty cents ($0.50) for
each residential unit to cover the costs of household hazardous waste
collection and disposal.
G. Limbs not bundled, trash and other solid waste not in a container, including
furniture and appliances, shall constitute an additional charge to be
established by the public works director or his designee according to volume to
be collected. The resident or owner of property may request such pick up
service and the cost shall be added to the utility bill of the resident or
owner for the next billing cycle. Further, any items of furniture, appliances,
trash or solid waste not in containers or bundled which are placed or remaining
at curbside on trash collection day shall be deemed abandoned for pick up by
the city and may be removed by the city with the charge therefor added to the
utility bill of the resident or owner for the next billing cycle.
1. A base flat fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) shall be made for the
removal of material up to and including the first cubic yard. Additional
material may be included and removed at a charge of seventeen dollars ($17.00)
per cubic yard up to a maximum of forty (40) cubic yards.
H. Residential customers may rent a four (4) yard dumpster for a thirty (30)
day time period. The customer shall complete an application and pay a fifteen
dollar ($15.00) delivery fee for said dumpster. Customers with outstanding
balances will not be allowed to rent a dumpster until their bill is paid in
full. The customer shall call the utility billing clerk when the dumpster needs
to be dumped and a fee of seventeen dollars and fifty cents ($17.50) will be
charged for each dump and reflected on their monthly utility bill.
   SECTION II.      REPEAL.  That Title 8, Chapter 08, Section 8.08.150 of the
Warr Acres Municipal Code, and any other ordinance which may be contrary or
inconsistent to the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed upon the
effective date of this Ordinance, provided, that such repeal shall only be
effective to the extent of such inconsistencies and in all other respects this
Ordinance shall be cumulative of other ordinances governing the subject matter
of this Ordinance.
   SECTION III.      SEVERABILITY.  The provisions of this ordinance are
severable and if any part or provision thereof shall be adjudged invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not effect or impair
any of the remaining parts or provisions hereof
   SECTION IV.   EMERGENCY.  Whereas, it being immediately necessary for the
preservation of the peace, health, welfare and safety of the City of Warr
Acres, Oklahoma and the inhabitants thereof that the provisions of this
ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to
exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force
and effect from and after its passage as provided by law.
   ADOPTED AND PASSED by the Council of the City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma after
a public hearing thereon and in compliance with the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act
on this 7th day of November, 2019.
                                       
                     MAYOR
ATTEST:
                  
CITY CLERK
   APPROVED as to form this 7th day of November, 2019.
                     _____________________________
                     CITY ATTORNEY
ORDINANCE NO. 1199
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A NEW SECTION 8.08.150 IN TITLE 8, CHAPTER 08 OF THE WARR
ACRES MUNICIPAL CODE REQUIRING THE COUNCIL TO REVIEW AND ADJUST SANITATION
RATES ANNUALLY; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, SEVERABILITY
AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
EMERGENCY ORDINANCE
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WARR ACRES, OKLAHOMA:
   SECTION 1.      That Title 8, Chapter 08 of the Warr Acres Municipal Code be
amended to adopt a new Section 8.08.155 to read as follows:
8.08.155: ANNUAL REVIEW AND ADJUSTMENT OF FEES AND CHARGES:
It is the stated goal of the City to ensure that the services provided in this
Chapter are self- sustaining. In furtherance of that goal, the City Council
shall, at least once per fiscal year:
Review the actual costs associated with the provision of such services;
Review the actual revenue generated through the fees and charges outlined in
Section 8.08.150;
Review any factors which may impact the revenue generated or the costs
associated with the services (to include a review of changes to the consumer
price index for all urban customers, or CPI-U);
Review any recommendation from the City staff regarding possible changes to the
services provided herein and/or to the fees and charges associated with such
services; and
Make such amendments to this Chapter as the Council may deem appropriate to
adjust the costs and/or revenue associated with the services provided herein to
ensure that the revenue generated is adequate to cover the costs of the
program. If no such amendments are deemed to be necessary, the Council shall
make such finding affirmatively by majority vote of the members present at any
regular or special meeting held during the year.
 
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to establish any form of condition
precedent on the City’s ability to charge the rates outlined in this Chapter
from year to year. The fees and charges outlined in this Chapter shall remain
in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the City Council.
 
   SECTION II.   REPEAL. All ordinances conflicting with Section I of this
ordinance are hereby repealed upon the effective date of this ordinance.
   SECTION III.   SEVERABILITY.  The provisions of this ordinance are severable
and if any part or provision thereof shall be adjudged invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not effect or impair any of the
remaining parts or provisions hereof.
   SECTION IV.   EMERGENCY.  Whereas, it being immediately necessary for the
preservation of the peace, health, welfare and safety of the City of Warr
Acres, Oklahoma and the inhabitants thereof that the provisions of this
ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to
exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force
and effect from and after its passage as provided by law.
   ADOPTED AND PASSED by the Council of the City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma after
a public hearing thereon and in compliance with the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act
on this 19th day of November, 2019.
                                       
                     MAYOR
ATTEST:
                  
CITY CLERK
   APPROVED as to form this 19th day of November, 2019.
                     _____________________________
                     CITY ATTORNEY
ORDINANCE NO. 1200
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A NEW SECTION 19.41.140 IN TITLE 19, CHAPTER 19.41 OF THE
WARR ACRES MUNICIPAL CODE ESTABLISHING A GENERAL PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF
PROPERTY FOR COMMERCIAL MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS USES AND ESTABLISHING
EXCEPTIONS; PROVIDING FOR REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES, SEVERABILITY AND
DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
EMERGENCY ORDINANCE
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WARR ACRES, OKLAHOMA:
   SECTION 1.   That a new Section 19.41.140 be adopted in Title 19, Chapter
19.41 of the Warr Acres Municipal Code to read as follows:
19.41.140:    Commercial Medical Marijuana Business Uses Prohibited;
EXCEPTIONS:
The City of Warr Acres has followed its standard planning and zoning procedures
to determine if certain zones or districts would be appropriate for locating
marijuana-licensed premises, medical marijuana businesses or any other premises
where marijuana or its by-products are cultivated, grown, processed, stored or
manufactured. With the exception of retail medical marijuana establishments
(those licensed as a dispensary), the City has determined that there are no
zones or districts where other, non-retail medical marijuana business
activities would be appropriate. As such, it is hereby declared unlawful to
engage in any non-retail, commercial medical marijuana business activities
including, but not limited to, the commercial growth and/or processing of
medical marijuana.
Use of property for a retail medical marijuana establishment (dispensary) shall
only be allowed under the following conditions:
The use is explicitly authorized in the zoning district ordinances;
All City ordinances related to businesses licensing have been complied with;
and
No medical marijuana business related activities except those authorized by
State law pursuant to the issuance of a dispensary license are allowed.
Commercial growth and/or processing by a dispensary is prohibited.
   SECTION II.      REPEAL. All ordinances conflicting with Section I of this
ordinance are hereby repealed upon the effective date of this ordinance.
   SECTION III.   SEVERABILITY.  The provisions of this ordinance are severable
and if any part or provision thereof shall be adjudged invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not effect or impair any of the
remaining parts or provisions hereof.
   SECTION IV.   EMERGENCY.  Whereas, it being immediately necessary for the
preservation of the peace, health, welfare and safety of the City of Warr
Acres, Oklahoma and the inhabitants thereof that the provisions of this
ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to
exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force
and effect from and after its passage as provided by law.
   ADOPTED AND PASSED by the Council of the City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma after
a public hearing thereon and in compliance with the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act
on this 16th day of June, 2020.
                                       
                     MAYOR
ATTEST:
                  
CITY CLERK
   APPROVED as to form this 17th day of June, 2020.
                     _____________________________
                     CITY ATTORNEY
ORDINANCE NO. 1202
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A NEW CHAPTER 8.19 IN TITLE 8 OF THE WARR ACRES MUNICIPAL
CODE TO ENACT A SET OF TEMPORARY ORDINANCES TO BE KNOWN AS THE “WARR ACRES
COVID-19 SAFETY CODE TO BE CODIFIED AS SECTIONS 8.19.001 THROUGH 8.19.010;
PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
EMERGENCY ORDINANCE
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WARR ACRES, OKLAHOMA:
SECTION 1.   That a new Chapter 8.19 be adopted in Title 8 of the Warr Acres
Municipal Code to read as follows:
CHAPTER 8.19
COVID-19 SAFETY CODE
8.19.001:    TITLE:
8.19.002:    FINDINGS:
8.19.003:    DEFINITIONS:
8.19.004:    FACE COVERINGS REQUIRED:
8.19.005:    GUIDELINES FOR FACE COVERINGS:
8.19.006:    EXCEPTIONS:
8.19.007:    DURATION OF TEMPORARY REQUIREMENTS:
8.19.008:    ENFORCEMENT:
8.19.009:    VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
8.19.010:    AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
8.19.001:    TITLE:
This Chapter is entitled and shall be known as the Warr Acres COVID-19 Safety
Code.
8.19.002:    FINDINGS:
The United States is experiencing an outbreak of Novel Coronavirus-2019 also
known as COVID-19; and
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the COVID-19
outbreak as a pandemic; and
On March 13, 2020, the President of the United States declared a National
Emergency because of the COVID-19 pandemic and which declaration is still in
effect today; and
On March 15, 2020, the Governor of the State of Oklahoma declared a State of
Emergency because of the COVID-19 pandemic and which declaration is still in
effect today; and
The Center for Disease Control ("CDC") has emphasized the COVID-19 risk to
individuals is dependent on exposure, and transmission is through respiratory
droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes; and
As of July 19, 2020, There have been 451 reported COVID-19 related deaths
statewide with 77 deaths in the Oklahoma County area; and
The City Council of The City of Warr Acres (City) finds that the Center for
Disease Control (CDC) has identified a virus, COVID-19, which is causing a
pandemic throughout the world and the United States remains present, extremely
contagious, and potentially deadly within the City and the metropolitan area;
and
After reaching a low point for positive tests and hospitalizations, in June
Oklahoma City experienced a significant increase in the number of COVID-19
positive tests and hospitalizations; and
After a period where the rise in new cases subsided, the increase in new cases
and positive testing percentages has resumed this past week and remains at an
elevated level relative to previous phases of the pandemic; and
Since mid-June, hospitalizations have consistently remained at an elevated
level that causes concern to public health officials; and
Based upon information provided by local healthcare providers and public health
experts during consideration of a similar ordinance by the City of Oklahoma
City, the current surge occurred, in part, due to public gatherings associated
with the Fourth of July holiday where social distancing and mask wearing
protocols were not observed; and
One strong recommendation by the CDC is the adoption of the safety measure for
the mandatory wearing of face coverings over the nose and mouth to help prevent
air-born virus particles from causing new infections and, depending on the
design of the mask, can also help prevent the persons wearing the face covering
to not become infected with COVID-19; and
With the transmission of COVID-19 and COVID-related hospitalizations continuing
at an elevated level, provisions for the safety of the life, health, and
property of Warr Acres residents are still necessary; and
The City Council declares that the continuing occurrence and threat of
widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property from COVID-19,
including severe economic damage to the City and the State of Oklahoma, which
can result from COVID-19 justifies emergency action by the City to help avert
such danger or damage and to protect the public health; and
The City Council further declares an emergency need for an ordinance containing
the COVID-19 safety measure for the mandatory wearing of face coverings over
the nose and mouth whenever persons are in any place or setting open to the
general public; and
The City Council notes that on Friday, July 10, 2020, Dallas Federal Reserve
Bank President Robert Kaplan publicly stated that:
The "key to ensuring a faster U.S. economic recovery is wearing masks to slow
the spread of the coronavirus;" and
"How the [COVID-19] virus proceeds, and what the incidence is, is going to be
directly related to how fast we grow [economically]"; and
"While monetary and fiscal policy have a key role to play, the primary economic
policy from here is broad mask wearing and good execution of. . .health care
protocols; if we do that well, we'll grow faster"; and
"The message I'd have today about the economy (is that) while monetary policy
and fiscal policy are very important, they are not as important right now in us
doing a good job of flattening this curve on the virus, and if we do that,
we'll grow faster."; and
The City Council further notes that the recent surge in COVID-19 cases in
several U.S. states is raising concern that the economic recovery that likely
began in May could falter if authorities re-impose lockdowns or consumers
reduce spending out of fear that getting out and about could mean they get the
sometimes fatal disease; and
The City Council further notes that Goldman Sachs Group Inc. economists have
argued that a national mask mandate would boost the chances of a faster
recovery; and that Mr. Kaplan, a former Goldman Sachs bank officer, reiterated
that the U.S. economy will likely shrink by 4.5% to 5% in 2020, even after what
he expects to be growth during the 3 rd and 4 th quarters; and
The City Council finds that it is appropriate and in the interests of the
public health, safety, and welfare and would further protect property and civil
order, for the City Council to adopt this COVID-19 Safety Code with a
regulation mandating the wearing of masks over the nose and mouth whenever
persons are entering and while inside any indoor place open to the public; and
The City Council states that this COVID-19 Safety Code measure is being enacted
to help limit the health impacts and slow the spread of COVID-19 by mandating
the wearing of face coverings over the nose and mouth whenever persons are
entering and while inside any indoor place open to the public; and
The City Council finds that adoption of the temporary restrictions contained in
this Chapter from now until the period until immediately after Labor Day on
September 7, 2020 will allow local healthcare providers and public health
experts to gather empirical evidence regarding the effects of this mask policy
and may help to prevent the potential for an additional surge associated with
the Labor Day holiday weekend; and
The City Council finds that the City of Oklahoma City, which shares the
majority of the City’s jurisdictional border, adopted a substantially similar
ordinance on July 17, 2020; and
The City Council finds that it is in the interests of both those who reside
and/or visit the City to have as consistent and uniform set of temporary
restrictions so as to avoid any confusion as to the expectations that are in
place for those visiting indoor places open to the public within the Oklahoma
County metropolitan area; and
Accordingly, The City Council also finds that it is appropriate and in the
interests of public health, safety, and welfare and would further protect
property and civil order, for the City Council to adopt this ordinance while
limiting the duration of this ordinance to and until the day after Labor Day.
Provided, for the ages this requirement applies to, the City Council has
determined that ages 11 and up is appropriate, but the public should keep in
mind that the CDC recommends that persons 3 and up should wear masks.
8.19.003:    DEFINITIONS:
The term "face covering" as used in this article shall mean a uniform piece of
material that securely covers a person's nose and mouth and remains affixed in
place without the use of one's hands and/or a face shield.
8.19.004:    FACE COVERINGS REQUIRED:
All persons shall wear face coverings when entering and while inside any indoor
place open to the public.
8.19.005:    GUIDELINES FOR FACE COVERINGS:
The public is encouraged to wear face coverings that;
a.   Fit snugly but comfortably against the side of the face; and
b.   Are secured; and
c.   Allow for breathing without restrictions; and
Face coverings may be of the disposable or non-disposable.
8.19.006:    EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing herein shall require the wearing of face coverings by:
a.   Persons under 11 years of age unless required by a school or day care to
wear a face covering;
b.   Persons working in a professional office who do not have any face-to-face
interactions with the public;
c.   Restaurant patrons while eating or drinking;
d.   Persons in a setting where it is not practical or feasible to wear a face
covering, such as when receiving dental services, medical treatments, or while
swimming or at a splash park;
e.   Persons engaged in any competitive sporting activities, whether
professional or amateur or merely for recreational purposes;
f.   Persons engaged in performing cardio exercise, but they should make a
reasonable effort to practice social distancing from persons not from their
household;
g.   Persons inside any Federal, State, or county government building or other
facility;
h.   Persons inside any public or private school building or other facility
unless required by the school to wear a face covering;
i.   Persons with a development disability, including persons who are deaf and
hard of hearing.
8.19.007:    DURATION OF TEMPORARY REQUIREMENTS:
This Chapter will become enforceable upon its effective date as provided in
Sections 2-12 and 2-13 of the City Charter. The requirements of this Chapter
will expire and become unenforceable at 12:00 a.m. on September 8, 2020, unless
this Section is amended by future Council action.
8.19.008:    ENFORCEMENT:
This Chapter may be enforced by any Warr Acres Police Officer.
8.19.009:    VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
a.   Those officials authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter
shall, at the initial contact with a person not in compliance with this
Chapter, offer the person the option of either complying with the requirements
of this Chapter or leaving the indoor place. No citation shall be issued to a
person who complies with one of the options.
b.   Each violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Upon
conviction for a first or second violation of this Chapter, the penalty shall
be limited to the assessment of Court Costs and any State mandated fees.
A person convicted of violating this Chapter shall, upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars
($50.00), excluding court costs and State mandated fees, as may be determined
by the Municipal Court.
8.19.010:    AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be a defense to any violation of this Chapter if an individual
produces documentation demonstrating that his/her/their physician has verified
that wearing a face covering could cause impairment or would constitute a
hazard to the individual.
SECTION II. SEVERABILITY.  The provisions of this ordinance are severable and
if any part or provision thereof shall be adjudged invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not effect or impair any of the
remaining parts or provisions hereof.
SECTION III. EMERGENCY.  Whereas, it being immediately necessary for the
preservation of the peace, health, welfare and safety of the City of Warr
Acres, Oklahoma and the inhabitants thereof that the provisions of this
ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to
exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force
and effect from and after its passage as provided by law.
ADOPTED AND PASSED by the Council of the City of Warr Acres in compliance with
the Oklahoma Open Meeting Act on this 21 st day of July, 2020.
                                       
                     MAYOR
ATTEST:
                  
CITY CLERK
   APPROVED as to form this 21 st day of July, 2020.
                     _____________________________
                     CITY ATTORNEY
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF WARR ACRES, OKLAHOMA 1
 
Notes
1 1. For statutory provisions authorizing a city to adopt a charter government,
  see 11 OS § 13-101 (West 1994).
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, exercising the powers of
home rule granted to us by the constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma,
in order to provide for more efficient, adequate and economical government, do
hereby ordain, ratify and establish this Charter of the City of Warr Acres,
Oklahoma.
ARTICLE 1.
INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS
Incorporation; Annexation; Merging:
Section 1-1. The City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, within the corporate limits as
now established or as hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a
municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City
of Warr Acres, Oklahoma". It shall succeed to and possess all the property,
rights, privileges, franchises, powers and immunities now belonging to the
corporation known as the City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma; and shall be liable for
all debts and other obligations for which the corporation is legally bound at
the time this charter goes into effect.
The City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, may not be annexed by any other city or be
merged into a combined county-city government or other governmental unit unless
a majority of the qualified electors of the City of Warr Acres voting on the
question at an election approve such annexation or merging.
Form Of Government:
Section 1-2. The municipal government provided by this chapter shall be known
as a "mayor-council government". All powers of the city shall be exercised in
the manner prescribed by this charter, or, if the manner is not thus
prescribed, then in such manner as the council may prescribe by ordinance.
Powers Of The City:
Section 1-3. The city shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges,
franchises and immunities granted to cities by the state constitution and law,
and all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers
granted. Except as prohibited by the state constitution or law, the city shall
have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and
immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.
The city shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at
pleasure, to sue and to be sued, and to make contracts. It shall have power to
acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose,
including public utilities, works and ways, in fee simple or any lesser
interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise lease, condemnation or other legal
means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate,
lease, sell, convey or otherwise dispose of, such property as its interests may
require, including public utilities, works and ways. It shall have power to
incur indebtedness and to issue bonds within the limitations prescribed by the
state constitution. It shall have power to accept and administer federal and
state grants-in-aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the purpose,
or purposes for which such grants maybe made. It shall have the power to ordain
and to enforce local legislation for the proper organization and functioning of
the city government, for the preservation and enforcement of good government
and order, for the protection of health, life, morals and property, for the
prevention, summary abatement and removal of nuisances, and otherwise for the
promotion of the common welfare. It shall have power to grant, extend and renew
franchises in accordance with the state constitution.
The enumeration or mention of particular powers by this charter shall not be
deemed to be exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers enumerated or
mentioned herein or implied hereby, the city shall have all powers which, under
the state constitution and law, it would be competent for this charter
specifically to enumerate or mention.
Provisions of state law relating to matters which may be regulated by cities
operating under charters, shall be in effect only insofar as they are
applicable and are not superseded by this charter or by ordinance.
ARTICLE 2.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
Mayor And Councilmen; Number, Qualifications:
Section 2-1. There shall be a council of nine members, which shall consist of
the mayor as ex officio councilman at large and two councilmen from each of the
four wards of the city as the wards are now constituted or as they may
hereafter be constituted by ordinance. Only qualified electors of the city who
have resided in the city for at least one year shall be qualified for the
office of mayor. Only qualified electors of the city who have resided in the
city for at least one year and who reside in the respective wards from which
they are elected or appointed to fill vacancies, shall be qualified for the
offices of councilmen from the wards. Removal of the mayor from the city or of
a councilman from the ward from which he was elected or appointed to fill a
vacancy shall terminate his tenure of office, but a change in ward boundaries
shall not prohibit a councilman from completing his term. A councilman from a
ward may not hold any administrative office or position in the city government;
provided that nothing in this charter shall prohibit councilmen who are already
volunteer firemen when elected or appointed from continuing to serve as
volunteer firemen and being paid as such at the same rate at which they were
paid prior to their election or appointment to fill vacancies.
Mayor And Vice Mayor:
Section 2-2. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council and shall
certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by
it. As councilman at large, he shall have all powers, rights, privileges,
duties and responsibilities of councilmen, including the right to vote on
questions.
At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of the terms
of newly elected councilmen or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council
shall elect one of its members vice mayor, who shall serve as such until the
next such first meeting. The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence
or disability of the mayor, or, if a vacancy occur in the office of mayor,
until the vacancy is filled. If the office of vice mayor becomes vacant, the
council shall elect from its membership another vice mayor for completion of
the unexpired term.
Mayor And Councilmen; Compensation:
Section 2-3. The mayor shall be paid such compensation as the council may
determine by ordinance. Councilmen from the wards shall be paid no compensation
as councilmen nor for any other service rendered the city, but they and the
mayor may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the discharge of their
official duties.
Council; Powers:
Section 2-4. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the
city, including the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in
the council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council shall have power,
subject to the state constitution and law and this charter:
(1) By ordinance to enact municipal legislation;
(2) To raise revenue and make appropriations, and to regulate bond elections,
the issuance of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, salaries
and wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the city;
(3) To inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the
city, and investigate municipal affairs; provided that, when making such an
inquiry or investigation, the council may elect one of its members temporary
president to preside during such time, and may elect a temporary clerk of the
council to keep the journal and otherwise serve as clerical officer of the
council during such time;
(4) To subpoena officers and employees of the city and other persons to testify
and to produce documents and other effects as evidence in matters under
consideration by the council;
(5) To appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, the members of the
personnel board, the members of the planning commission, the members of the
board of adjustment, and other quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial or advisory
officers and authorities, now or when and if established, or to prescribe the
method of appointing or electing and removing them;
(6) To regulate elections, the initiative and referendum, and recall;
(7) To regulate the organization, powers, duties and functions of the municipal
court and of the minor violations bureau, when and if established;
(8) To create, change and abolish all offices, departments and agencies of the
city government other than the offices, departments and agencies created by
this charter; and to assign additional powers, duties and functions to offices,
departments and agencies created by this charter;
(9) With a recommendation from the mayor and a majority vote of all members of
the council, to appoint, suspend without pay, demote, or remove from office,
all directors or heads of administrative departments;
(10) Without a recommendation from the mayor and with a three-fourths vote of
all members of the council, to remove from office all directors or heads of
administrative departments.
City Clerk To Be Clerical Officer Of Council:
Section 2-5. The city clerk, hereinafter provided for, shall also serve as
clerical officer of the council. He shall keep the journal of its proceedings,
and shall enroll in a book or books kept for the purpose all ordinances and
resolutions passed by it; shall be custodian of such documents, records and
archives as may be provided by applicable law or ordinance; shall be custodian
of the seal of the city; and shall attest, and affix the seal to, documents
when required in accordance with applicable law or ordinance.
Council; Meetings:
Section 2-6. The council shall hold at least one regular meeting every month,
at such time as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The mayor or any
five councilmen may call special meetings. All meetings of the council shall be
open to the public, and the journal of its proceedings shall be open to public
inspection. However, the council shall be permitted to enter into executive
session during regular, special, or emergency meetings, provided the proposed
executive session is held in accordance with the provisions set forth in the
Oklahoma Open Meeting Act, 25 O.S. Supp. 1994, subsection 307.
Mayor And Councilmen; Absences To Terminate Membership:
Section 2-7. If the mayor or any councilman shall be absent from more than one-
half of all the meetings of the council, regular and special, held within any
period of four consecutive calendar months, he shall thereupon cease to hold
office.
Mayor And Councilmen; Removal:
Section 2-8. The mayor or any councilman may be removed from office for any
cause specified by applicable state law for the removal of officers, and by the
method or methods prescribed thereby, and by recall as provided in this
charter.
Mayor And Council; Vacancies:
Section 2-9. The council, by vote of a majority of all its members, shall fill
a vacancy in the office of mayor and other vacancies in its own membership for
the unexpired terms or until successors are elected and take office as provided
in this section. If a vacancy occurs before the beginning of a regular filing
period for candidates for councilmen, then a mayor or councilman for that place
shall be elected at the elections of that year to serve the rest of the
unexpired term.
(Res. 509, (Exh. 1), 2016)
Council; Quorum, Rules, Yeas And Nays:
Section 2-10. A majority of all of the members of the council shall constitute
a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day or from time to
time. The council may determine its own rules. On the demand of any member, the
vote on any question shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the
journal.
Ordinances; Enacting Clause:
Section 2-11. The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall
be, "Be it ordained by Council of the City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma", and of all
ordinances proposed by the voters under their power of initiative, "Be it
ordained by the people of the City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma".
Ordinances; Passage, When In Effect:
Section 2-12. Every proposed ordinance shall be in writing, and a vote of a
majority of all the councilmen shall be required for its passage. The vote on
final passage of every ordinance shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be
entered in the journal. The mayor shall have no power of veto. Within ten days
after its passage, every ordinance except an emergency ordinance, shall be
published in full or by number and title in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city. Every ordinance except an emergency ordinance, so published,
shall become effective thirty days after its final passage unless it specifies
a later time; provided that a franchise for a public utility shall not go into
effect until the ordinance granting it has been published in full in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city and has been approved at an
election by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting on the
question.
Ordinances; Emergency:
Section 2-13. An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which in the judgment of
the council is necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health or
safety, and which should become effective prior to the time when an ordinary
ordinance would become effective. Every such ordinance shall contain, as a part
of its title, the words, "and declaring an emergency"; and in a separate
section, herein called the emergency section, shall declare the emergency. An
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of all the councilmen shall be required
for the passage of an emergency ordinance; which vote shall be by yeas and
nays, and shall be entered in the journal. An emergency ordinance shall take
effect upon passage unless it specifies a later time.
Ordinances; Adoption By Reference:
Section 2-14. The council by ordinance may adopt by reference codes,
ordinances, standards and regulations relating to building, plumbing,
electrical installations, milk and milk products, and other matters which it
has power to regulate otherwise. Such code, ordinance, standard or regulation
so adopted need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances; but a copy shall be
filed and kept in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep
copies of all such codes, ordinances, standards and regulations in force for
distribution or sale at their approximate cost.
Ordinances; Codification:
Section 2-15. The ordinances of the city shall be codified and published in
book or pamphlet form at least every ten years unless the council, by use of a
loose-leaf system, provides for keeping the code up-to-date. Titles, enacting
clauses and emergency sections may be omitted from the code; and temporary and
special ordinances and parts of ordinances may be omitted. Permanent general
ordinances and parts of ordinances which are to be repealed by the code, shall
be omitted from the code. The ordinances and parts of ordinances included in
the code may be revised, rearranged and reorganized; and the code may contain
new matter, provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to the city
and this charter. A copy of the published code shall be filed in the office of
the city clerk after the council adopts the code by ordinance, but the code
need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances.
Initiative And Referendum:
Section 2-16. The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the
people of the city. In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the
state constitution and law shall be observed.
ARTICLE 3.
MAYOR AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Mayor To Be Chief Executive Officer; Powers And Duties:
Section 3-1. The mayor shall be chief executive officer and head of the
administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and
ordinances, and administer the government of the city. He shall be recognized
as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the
governor for purposes of military law. He shall:
(1) With the approval of a majority of the council, appoint, suspend without
pay, demote, or remove from office, all directors or heads of administrative
departments;
(2) Without the approval of the council and when deemed necessary for the good
of the city, appoint, layoff, suspend, demote, or remove from office all other
administrative officers and employees of the city, except as the mayor or the
council, by ordinance or by charter, may authorize the director or head of an
administrative department to appoint, layoff, suspend, demote, or remove
subordinates in such department. The council, by ordinance or personnel rules,
may authorize the mayor to make designated appointments without council
approval;
(3) Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all administrative
departments, agencies, officers and employees;
(4) Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible for
the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and recommend to
the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable;
(5) Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the
finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year;
(6) Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the
city, and make such recommendations to the council on matters of policy and
other matters as may seem to him desirable;
(7) Grant pardons for violations of the charter and ordinances, including the
remission of fines and costs, upon recommendation of the council;
(8) Have such other powers, duties and functions as this charter may prescribe,
and such powers, duties and functions consistent with this charter as the
council may prescribe.
Administrative Department, Offices And Agencies:
Section 3-2. There shall be a department of finance, a department of law headed
by a city attorney, and such other administrative departments, offices and
agencies as this charter establishes and as the council may establish.
ARTICLE 4.
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE, FISCAL AFFAIRS
City Clerk; Office Created, Duties:
Section 4-1. There shall be a city clerk, who shall be an officer of the city
appointed by the mayor with approval of the council for an indefinite term, and
who shall be head of the department of finance. Except as the council provides
otherwise by ordinance, the city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and
other money for the city, shall deposit the same with the city treasurer or for
the city treasurer in an account or accounts maintained by the city treasurer
in a depository or depositories, and shall maintain a general accounting system
for the city government. He shall have such other powers, duties and functions
as may be prescribed by the charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance.
City Treasurer; Office Created, Duties:
Section 4-2. Within the department of finance, there shall be a city treasurer,
who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the mayor with approval of the
council for an indefinite term; provided also that the same person may be
appointed both city clerk and city treasurer, and that the council by ordinance
may provide that the city clerk shall be ex officio city treasurer and that an
acting city clerk shall be ex officio acting city treasurer. Subject to such
regulations as the council may prescribe, the city treasurer shall deposit
funds received for the city in such depositories as the council may designate.
He shall have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by
the charter, by applicable law, or by ordinance.
Purchases And Sales:
Section 4-3. The mayor, subject to any regulations which the council may
prescribe, shall contract for and purchase, or issue purchase authorizations
for, all supplies, materials and equipment for the offices, departments and
agencies of the city government. Every such contract or purchase exceeding an
amount to be established by ordinance, shall require the prior approval of the
council. The mayor also may transfer to or between offices, departments and
agencies, or sell, surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment,
subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe.
Before the purchase of, or contract for, any supplies, materials or equipment,
or the sale of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, ample
opportunity for competitive bidding, under such regulations, and with such
exceptions, as the council may prescribe, shall be given; but the council shall
not except a particular contract, purchase or sale from the requirement of
competitive bidding.
The council by ordinance may transfer some or all of the power granted to the
mayor by this section to an administrative officer subordinate to the mayor.
Sale Of Property Valued At More Than $350,000.00:
Section 4-4. The sale of any city property, real or personal, including public
utilities, the value of which is more than $350,000.00, shall be made only (1)
by authority of an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of
the city who vote on the question of approving or authorizing the sale at an
election, or (2) by authority of a special nonemergency ordinance. Such
ordinance shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city within ten days after its passage, and shall include a section
reading substantially as follows: "Section --. This ordinance shall be referred
to a vote of the electors of the city if a legal and sufficient referendum
petition is properly filed within thirty days after its passage; otherwise it
shall go into effect thirty days after its passage." (Res. 412, (Exh. 1), 2005)
Public Improvements:
Section 4-5. Public improvements may be made by the city government itself or
by contract. The council shall award all contracts for such improvements;
provided that the council may authorize the mayor to award such contracts not
exceeding an amount to be determined by the council and subject to such
regulations as the council may prescribe. Every contract for public
improvements of more than $7,500 shall be awarded to the lowest and best
responsible bidder after such notice and opportunity for competitive bidding as
the council may prescribe. All bids may be rejected, and further notice and
opportunity for competitive bidding may be given.
Conflict Of Interests:
Section 4-6. Neither the mayor nor any councilman shall sell or barter anything
to the city or to a contractor supplying the city; or make any contract with
the city; or purchase anything from the city other than those things which the
city offers generally to the public (as for example, utility services), and
then only on the same terms as are offered to the public. Any such officer
violating this section, upon conviction thereof, shall thereby forfeit his
office. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, expressed or
implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city, shall render
the contract voidable by the mayor or the council.
The council by ordinance or personnel rules may further regulate conflict of
interests and ethics of officers and employees of the city.
Fiscal Year:
Section 4-7. The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on January 1
and shall end on December 31 of every calendar year. (amd. 2009)
Independent Annual Audit:
Section 4-8. The council shall designate a certified public accountant or
accountants who shall make an independent audit of the accounts and evidences
of financial transactions of the department of finance and of all other
departments, offices and agencies keeping separate or subordinate accounts or
making financial transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year at least, and
who shall report to the council and to the mayor. The mayor shall neither
suggest or recommend the accountant or accountants, nor shall he have any
supervision or control thereof.
ARTICLE 5.
MUNICIPAL COURT
Municipal Court:
Section 5-1. There shall be a municipal judge, who shall be an officer of the
city appointed by the mayor with approval of the council for an indefinite
term. Only the council, by a vote of a majority of all its members, shall have
power to suspend or remove the municipal judge or an acting municipal judge.
The municipal judge shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all
cases involving offenses against the charter and ordinances of the city;
provided that the council by ordinance may create a minor violations bureau
with authority to dispose of cases arising out of designated minor violations,
such as minor traffic and parking violations, when the accused waives his right
to be heard in court, pleads guilty, and pays fines and costs. The municipal
judge shall keep a record of all proceedings of the municipal court, of the
disposition of all cases, and of all fines and other money collected. The
municipal judge may issue warrants and subpoenas, administer oaths and
affirmations, make and enforce all proper orders, rules and judgments, and
punish for contempt.
ARTICLE 6.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Merit System Appointments, Removals, Etc.:
Section 6-1. A merit system is hereby established for personnel in the city
service. Appointments and promotions in the service of the city shall be made
solely on the basis of merit and fitness; and removals, demotions, suspensions
and layoffs shall be made solely for the good of the service. The council,
consistently with this charter, by ordinance or personnel rules, may regulate
personnel matters and provide for proper personnel administration.
Classified And Unclassified Services:
Section 6-2. All officers and employees of the city shall be divided into the
classified and the unclassified service.
(1) The following shall constitute the unclassified service:
(a) The mayor and councilmen, the municipal judge, one administrative assistant
to the mayor if any, and one secretary of the mayor if any;
(b) Members and secretaries of boards, commissions and other plural
authorities;
(c) All personnel who serve without compensation;
(d) All temporary personnel except such as may be placed in the classified
service by ordinance or personnel rules.
(2) All other officers and employees shall be in the classified service.
(3) Nothing herein shall prohibit including unclassified personnel in the
classification system.
Personnel Board Created:
Section 6-3. There shall be a personnel board consisting of three members
elected by the council, without nomination or recommendation by the mayor, for
overlapping six year terms, the term of one member beginning July 1 in every
odd-numbered year. The council shall elect the three original members so that
the term of one will expire at that time in each of the first three succeeding
odd-numbered years. A member may not hold any other office or position in the
city government. The council, by a vote of a majority of all its members, after
adequate opportunity for a public hearing, may remove a member for the good of
the service; and the vote shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in
the journal. The council shall fill vacancies for unexpired terms. Members
shall serve without compensation unless the council provides otherwise.
At the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a newly elected member
or as soon thereafter as practicable, the board shall elect a chairman, a vice
chairman and a secretary; and the secretary need not be a member of the board.
The board shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings, and the
chairman or two members may call special meetings.
The personnel board shall have power to subpoena officers and employees of the
city and other persons to testify and to produce documents and other effects as
evidence.
Removal, Etc., Of Officers And Employees:
Section 6-4. The mayor may:
(1) With the approval of a majority of the council, suspend without pay,
demote, or remove from office, all directors or heads of administrative
departments;
(2) Without the approval of the council and when deemed necessary for the good
of the city, layoff, suspend, demote, or remove from office all other
administrative officers and employees of the city, except as the mayor or the
council, by ordinance or by charter, may authorize the director or head of an
administrative department to layoff, suspend, demote, or remove subordinates in
such department.
The council may, with a three-fourths vote of all members of the council,
remove from office all directors or heads of administrative departments.
Provided, that the municipal judge, or an acting municipal judge may be
suspended or removed only as provided for in Section 5-1 of this charter.
Removal, Etc.; Hearing Before The Personnel Board:
Section 6-5. The mayor or any other authority who lays off, suspends without
pay for more than ten days, demotes or removes any regular (that is,
nontemporary) officer or employee in the classified service after a
probationary period of six months, shall, at that time or within two days
thereafter, deliver, or have delivered, or mail by registered, certified or
similar special mail, to the officer or employee a written statement of the
cause or causes for the layoff, suspension, demotion or removal.
Such officer or employee may appeal in writing to the personnel board. The
appeal must be filed with the secretary of the board, or with the city clerk
for transmittal to the board, within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of
the layoff, suspension, demotion or removal (which appeal may thus be filed
either before or after the time of effectiveness of the layoff, suspension,
demotion or removal). As soon as practicable thereafter, the board shall hold a
public hearing on the appeal, or give an adequate opportunity therefor, and
shall report in writing its findings and recommendations, in cases of
subordinates of the mayor, to the mayor, and in other cases to the respective
authorities having power of removal; and the mayor or other authority having
power of removal shall then make a final decision in writing regarding the
appellant's layoff, suspension, demotion or removal, as the case may be;
provided that, if the board finds that the layoff, suspension, demotion or
removal was made for a political reason or reasons or for any other reason or
reasons than the good of the service, it shall veto the layoff, suspension,
demotion or removal, and the action by the mayor or other authority shall be
nullified thereby.
Feminine Gender:
Section 6-6. When the masculine gender is used in the charter, it shall also
mean the feminine unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated.
Qualifications Of Officers And Employees:
Section 6-7. Officers and employees of the city shall have the qualifications
prescribed by this charter and such additional qualifications as the council
may prescribe; but the council shall not prescribe additional qualifications
for mayor and councilmen.
Nepotism:
Section 6-8. Neither the mayor, the council nor any other authority of the city
government, may appoint or elect any person related to the mayor, any
councilman, or to himself, or, in the case of a plural authority, to one of its
members, by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to any office or
position of profit in the city government; but this shall not prohibit an
officer or employee from continuing in the service of the city.
Holding More Than One Office:
Section 6-9. Except as may be otherwise provided by this charter or by
ordinance, the same person may hold more than one office in the city
government. The mayor may hold more than one such office, through appointment
by himself, by the council or by other city authority having power to fill the
particular office, subject to any regulations which the council may make by
ordinance; but he may not receive compensation for service in such other
offices. Also the council by ordinance may provide that the mayor shall hold ex
officio designated administrative offices subordinate to the mayor as well as
other designated compatible city offices, notwithstanding any other provision
of this charter.
Official Bonds:
Section 6-10. The mayor, the city clerk, the city treasurer and such other
officers and employees as the council may designate, before entering upon their
duties, shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their respective
duties, payable to the city, in such form and in such amounts as the council
may prescribe, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state.
The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds.
Oath Or Affirmation Of Office:
Section 6-11. Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his
office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office
prescribed by the state constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed
and kept in the city clerk's office.
Who May Administer Oath And Affirmations:
Section 6-12. All officers authorized by federal or state law, the mayor, the
city clerk, the municipal judge, the chairman of the personnel board, and such
other officers as the council may authorize, may administer oaths and
affirmations in any matter pertaining to the affairs and government of the
city.
Acting Officers And Employees; Temporary Appointments Made By The Mayor:
Section 6-13. The mayor or other appointing or electing authority who may
appoint or elect the successor of an officer or employee, may appoint or elect
a person to act during the temporary absence, disability, leave, or suspension
of such officer or employee, or, in case of a vacancy, until a successor is
appointed or elected and qualifies, unless the council provides by ordinance
that a particular superior or subordinate of such officer or employee shall
act. The council by ordinance may provide for a deputy to act in such cases.
No such temporary appointments or other temporary appointments made by the
mayor shall require the approval of the council, but the council by ordinance
or personnel rules may limit the time which temporary appointees may serve, and
the council may remove any temporary officer or employee appointed by the
mayor, at any time, when a regular appointment to the particular office or
position by the mayor requires approval of the council.
Regular Appointive Officers And Employees; Term:
Section 6-14. All regular (that is, nontemporary) appointive officers and
employees of the city except members and secretaries of boards, commissions and
other plural authorities, shall serve for indefinite terms.
Officers To Continue Until Successors Are Elected Or Appointed And Qualify:
Section 6-15. Every officer who is elected or appointed for a term ending at a
definite time, shall continue to serve thereafter until his successor is
elected or appointed and qualifies unless his services are sooner terminated by
resignation, removal, disqualification, death, abolition of the office or other
legal manner.
Political Activity Of Officers And Employees:
Section 6-16. Officers and employees of the city may attend or express their
views at council meetings or any other public meetings of city boards,
commissions, or committees.
Any officer or employee of the city may actively participate in partisan or
nonpartisan political activities, including recall petitions, provided the
political activity in which the employee participates shall be exercised only
during off-duty hours and while not in uniform.
No officer or employee of the city may work for or against or attempt to
influence the recall of the mayor or any councilman, provided that this shall
not prohibit the ordinary exercise of one's right to express their opinions and
to vote.
Any officer or employee who violates these provisions shall be removed from
office or position either by the authority normally having that power, or,
after adequate opportunity for a public hearing, by the personnel board, and
shall not be entitled to hold any office or position in the city for a period
of two years thereafter. Any registered qualified elector of the city may bring
an alleged violation of these provisions before the personnel board for
consideration and determination by filing a sworn complaint charging the
officer or employee with such violation, and depositing $10 with the city clerk
to apply against costs, in case the accused is not found guilty. If found
guilty, the money deposited shall be returned to the complainant.
City employees may not file as a candidate for political office while employed
by the city.
Federal statutes restricting the political activities of certain city employees
shall supersede the provisions contained herein.
ARTICLE 7.
ELECTIONS
Mayor And Councilmen Elected For Two-Year Terms; When Terms Begin:
Section 7-1. At the elections in every odd-numbered year, a mayor shall be
elected at large, and a councilman shall be elected from and by each ward of
the city. At the elections in every even-numbered year, a councilman shall be
elected from and by each ward of the city. The mayor and all councilmen shall
serve for terms of two years.
The terms of office of the mayor and councilmen to begin at 6:00 o'clock p.m.
on the first Tuesday following certification of their election. If the mayor-
elect or a councilman-elect fails to qualify within one month thereafter, his
office shall become vacant; and the council shall fill the vacancy.
(Res. 509, (Exh. 1), 2016)
Nonpartisan Elections; Secret Ballot; Voting Machines:
Section 7-2. Both the primary and the general election shall be nonpartisan;
and no party designation or emblem shall be placed on the ballots. Elections,
including special elections, shall be by secret ballot. Nothing in this charter
shall prohibit the use of mechanical or other devices for voting or counting
the votes.
Primary Election; Filing:
Section 7-3. Any qualified person may have his name placed on the ballot for
the primary election as a candidate for mayor or councilman from the ward in
which he resides by filing, with the county election board, during a three (3)
day candidate filing period beginning not more than twenty (20) days from the
date the resolution calling the election is required by law to be filed with
the county election board. The filing dates shall be established by the council
and set forth in the resolution calling for the election. A sworn statement of
his candidacy shall also be filed with the city clerk.
(Res. 509, (Exh. 1), 2016)
Primary Election; Time, Etc.:
Section 7-4. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, a primary election shall
be held on the second Tuesday in February of every odd-numbered year to
nominate candidates for mayor and councilmen to succeed those whose terms are
expiring. A primary election shall be held on the second Tuesday in February of
every even-numbered year to nominate candidates for councilmen to succeed those
whose terms are expiring. If only one person is a candidate for an office to be
filled, he shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso facto; and his
name shall not appear on the primary or general election ballot. Every
qualified elector of the city shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for
mayor, and every qualified elector of a ward shall be entitled to vote for one
candidate for councilman from his ward.
(Res. 509, (Exh. 1), 2016)
Primary Election; Who Nominated Or Elected:
Section 7-5. In a primary election, the two candidates for each office to be
filled receiving the greatest number of votes for that office, shall be
nominated. If one of the candidates for an office receives a majority of all
votes cast for all candidates for that office, he alone shall be not only
nominated, but also elected ipso facto; and his name shall not appear on the
ballot for the general election. In case of a tie, the nominee or nominees (as
the case may be) shall be determined from among those tying, fairly by lot, by
the canvassing authority in a public meeting. If one of the two candidates for
an office nominated in a primary election dies or withdraws before the general
election, the remaining candidate shall be elected ipso facto; and his name
need not appear on the ballot for the general election.
General Election; Time, When Not Held, Who Elected:
Section 7-6. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, a general election shall
be held in the city on the first Tuesday in April of every odd-numbered year to
elect the mayor and councilmen to succeed those whose terms are expiring. A
general election shall be held in the city on the first Tuesday in April of
every even-numbered year to elect councilmen to succeed those whose terms are
expiring. If no candidates remain to be voted on and there are no questions to
be voted on, then there shall be no general election. Every qualified elector
of the city shall be entitled to vote for one of the two candidates for mayor,
and every qualified elector of a ward shall be entitled to vote for one of the
two candidates for councilman from his ward. The candidate for each office
receiving the greater number of votes, shall be elected. In case of a tie, the
election shall be determined, fairly by lot, by the canvassing authority in a
public meeting.
(Res. 408, (Exh. 1), 2005)
Registered Qualified Electors:
Section 7-7. Only electors residing in this city who have the qualifications
prescribed for electors by the state constitution and law, and who are
registered as required by law, may vote in city elections.
City To Conduct Its Own Elections; Exception; At Least One Voting Precinct, Or
District, In Each Ward:
Section 7-8. The city shall conduct its own elections, regular and special.
Except as the council provides otherwise by ordinance, the city clerk shall
make preparations for city elections, shall appoint personnel to conduct the
elections, and shall have charge of and administer elections. In case a state,
county, or other public elections falls or is called on the same day as a city
election, or vice versa, nothing in this charter shall prohibit the election
authorities who hold such an election from holding the city election also.
There shall be at least one voting precinct, or district, in each ward.
Canvassing Returns; Certificates:
Section 7-9. The council shall promptly canvass the returns of all city
elections, including special elections, and ascertain the results thereof;
provided that the council may delegate this function to a board created by
ordinance. The city clerk shall promptly prepare, sign and issue certificates
of election, sealed with the seal of the city, to all persons elected to
office.
Council May Regulate Elections; State Law:
Section 7-10. The council by ordinance may further regulate elections. The
provisions of state law applicable to city elections shall govern city
elections insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this charter
or by ordinance.
ARTICLE 8.
RECALL
Recall Authorized:
Section 8-1. The incumbent of any elective city office, including a person
appointed to fill a vacancy in any such office, may be recalled from office by
the electors qualified to vote for the election of a successor to the
incumbent, in the manner provided herein.
Recall Petition:
Section 8-2.
(1) To initiate recall proceedings, a written statement in duplicate proposing
the recall of the incumbent of an elective office, shall be made by at least
twenty registered qualified electors of the city or ward concerned, as the case
may be, and shall be filed with the city clerk after the incumbent has held the
office at least four months. The statement shall also contain the reason or
reasons for which the recall is sought, in not more than two hundred words. The
city clerk shall within five (5) working days after submission of recall
petition examine it and ascertain it as to whether it has been prepared as
required. For purpose of counting words, all words below "Statement of Recall"
shall be counted. Within five days, the city clerk shall mail a copy of such
statement by registered, certified or similar special mail to the officer at
his residential address. Within ten days after the statement is mailed to the
officer, the officer may make and file with the city clerk a written statement
in duplicate justifying his conduct in office, in not more than two hundred
words; and the city clerk on request shall deliver one copy to one of the
persons filing the statement proposing the recall. (amd. Res. 370, 1-8-2002)
(2) The petition for recall shall include a demand that a successor to the
incumbent sought to be recalled be elected, and shall also include before the
space where the signatures are to be written the statement giving the reason or
reasons for recall under the heading "STATEMENT FOR RECALL", and if the officer
has filed a statement as authorized, the statement justifying his conduct in
office under the heading "STATEMENT AGAINST RECALL". The two statements shall
be in letters of the same size. A copy of the petition shall be filed with the
city clerk within one month after recall proceedings are initiated by the
filing of the first statement, and before the petition is circulated.
(3) A number of registered qualified electors of the city or ward concerned
equal at least to twenty percent (20%) of the total number of votes cast for
governor in the city or ward at the last general state election at which a
governor was elected, must sign the petition. Each signer shall write after his
name his address within the city, giving street or avenue and number, if any.
Not more than one hundred signatures may appear on a single copy of the
petition. Only registered qualified electors of the city or ward concerned may
circulate the petition. The person circulating a copy of the petition shall
sign an affidavit on the copy stating that each signer signed the petition in
his presence, that each signature on the petition is genuine, and that he
believes each signer to be a registered qualified elector of the city or ward
concerned.
(4) The circulated petition shall be filed with the city clerk not later than
one month after the filing of a copy as provided above. Within one month after
date of filing of the circulated petition, the city clerk shall examine it and
ascertain whether it has been prepared and circulated as required, and whether
the required number of registered qualified electors of the city or ward
concerned have signed it. He shall then attach his certificate to the petition.
If his certificate states that the petition has not been prepared and
circulated as required and/or lacks a sufficient number of signatures, the
petition shall have no effect. But, if the city clerk's certificate states that
the petition has been prepared and circulated as required and has a sufficient
number of signatures, he shall submit the petition and certificate to the
council at its next meeting. The decision of the city clerk shall be subject to
judicial review.
Recall Election; Council To Order:
Section 8-3. The Council, by resolution or ordinance passed within ten days
after receiving the petition and certificate of the city clerk, shall order and
fix the date for recall election, which shall be held not less than sixty days,
nor more than ninety days, after passage of a resolution or ordinance; and
A. When signed copies of a petition are timely filed with the clerk, the clerk
shall make a physical count of the number signatures appearing on the
petitions. The Clerk shall then publish, in at least one (1) newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality, a notice of the filing and the
apparent sufficiency or insufficiency of the petition. The notice shall also
state that any qualified elector of the municipality may file a protest to the
petition or an objection to the count made by the clerk.
B. A protest to the petition or the count of signatures shall be filed in the
district court of the county in which the situs of the municipality is located
within ten (10) days after publication. Written notice of the protest shall be
served on the clerk and the parties who filed the petition. In the case of the
filing of an objection to the count, notice shall be served on any party filing
a protest. The district court shall fix a day, not less than ten (10) days
after the filing of a protest, to hear testimony and arguments for and against
the sufficiency of the petition. A protest filed by anyone, if abandoned by the
party filing it, may be revived within five (5) days by any other qualified
elector. After the hearing, the district court shall decide whether such
petition is in form required by law. (amd. Res. 370, 1-8-2002)
If the officer sought to be recalled resigns before the council passes the
resolution or ordinance, recall proceedings shall terminate, and no election
shall be held. The qualified electors may vote in a recall election on the
election of successors to more than one incumbent of an elective office on the
same day.
Recall Election; How Held:
Section 8-4. The recall election shall be an election to fill the office held
by the incumbent sought to be recalled. Any qualified person, including the
incumbent, may file as a candidate for the office. There shall be no primary
before the recall election, and the candidate receiving the greatest number of
votes in the recall election shall be elected. If a candidate other than the
incumbent is elected, the incumbent shall be recalled from office effective as
of the time when the result of the election is certified. The said successful
candidate must qualify within one month thereafter; and if he fails to do so,
the office shall be vacant, and the council shall fill the vacancy. A candidate
thus elected and qualifying shall serve for the unexpired term. If the
incumbent is a candidate and receives the greatest number of votes, he shall
continue in office without interruption; and recall proceedings may not again
be initiated against him within one year after the election.
The provision of this charter relating to elections shall also govern recall
elections insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by the
provisions of this article.
Person Recalled Or Resigning:
Section 8-5. No person who has been recalled from an office, or who has
resigned from such office while recall proceedings were pending against him,
may hold any office or position of employment in the city government within two
years after his recall or resignation.
ARTICLE 9.
CHARTER; AMENDMENT AND SEPARABILITY
Amendment; Proposal Ratification, Approval:
Section 9-1. This charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted by the
council, or by the mayor upon initiative petition of the people as provided by
the state constitution, at a general or special election, ratified by a
majority of the qualified electors voting thereon, and approved by the governor
as provided by the state constitution. If more than one amendment are proposed,
all of them except those which are so interrelated that they should be ratified
or rejected together, shall be submitted in such manner that the electors may
vote on them separately. A proposition to amend this charter may be either in
the form of a proposed amendment to a part or parts of the charter or of a
proposed new charter.
Separability Clause:
Section 9-2. If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold any section or
part of this charter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of
this charter nor the context in which such section or part so held invalid may
appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part may be inseparably
connected in meaning and effect with that section or part.
If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a part of this charter invalid, or
if a change in the state constitution or law renders a part of this charter
invalid or inapplicable, the council by ordinance may take such appropriate
action as will enable the city government to function properly.
ARTICLE 10.
SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT
When Charter Goes Into Effect:
Section 10-1. If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the
question vote to ratify this charter, this charter shall go into effect upon
approval by the governor as provided by the state constitution; and the
government provided by this charter at that time shall replace the government
heretofore existing in this city under state law.
Officers And Employees To Continue; Compensation Of Mayor And Councilmen:
Section 10-2. When this charter goes into effect, the mayor, the councilmen,
the city clerk, the city treasurer, the chief of police, the fire chief, and
all other officers and employees under the statutory government (including
members of boards and commissions), shall continue in their respective offices
and positions of employment under this charter until their respective terms
expire or until their services are terminated in accordance with the provisions
of this charter and ordinances relating to the creation, change and abolition
of offices and removal of officers and employees, as the case may be.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this charter, the mayor and councilmen
shall continue to receive compensation at the same rate after this charter goes
into effect and until the first Monday in May 1963.
Ordinances Continued:
Section 10-3. All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this
charter, shall continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire
by their own limitations.
Pending Actions And Proceedings:
Section 10-4. The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect
any action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes of feet,
brought by or against the municipality or any office, department, agency or
officer thereof.
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Code Adoption   1.01
General Provisions   1.04
Annexation   1.08
City Plat   1.12
Wards   1.16
Elections   1.20
General Penalty   1.24
CHAPTER 1.01
CODE ADOPTION 1
SECTION:
1.01.010: Adoption
1.01.020: Title; Citation; Reference
1.01.030: Codification Authority
1.01.040: Ordinances Passed Prior To Adoption Of The Code
1.01.050: Reference Applies To All Amendments
1.01.060: Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1.01.070: Charter Of The City Included
1.01.080: Permanent And General Ordinances
1.01.090: Temporary And/Or Special Ordinances
1.01.100: Certified Copies Of The Code
1.01.110: Sale Of Copies Of The Code
1.01.120: Reference To Specific Ordinances
1.01.130: Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
1.01.140: Effective Date
1.01.150: Constitutionality
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 961.14, 961.13.
1.01.010: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to the provisions of chapter 11, section 672.1 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, there is adopted the "Warr Acres municipal code," as published by
Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, consisting of 19 titles, as
adopted by the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma. (Ord. 454 §1, 1977)
1.01.020: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This code shall be known as the WARR ACRES MUNICIPAL CODE 1977 in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at
law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Warr Acres municipal
code 1977". Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the "Warr Acres municipal code 1977", and such references shall
apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in
the code. (Ord. 454 §2, 1977)
1.01.030: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of
the administrative ordinances of the city codified pursuant to the provisions
of chapter 11, section 672.1 of the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 454 §3, 1977)
1.01.040: ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE:
The last ordinance included in this code was ordinance 444, passed July 6,
1976. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to ordinance 444, but prior
to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: ordinance
445, passed September 7, 1976; ordinance 446, passed September 7, 1976;
ordinance 447, passed November 2, 1976; ordinance 448, passed November 6, 1976;
ordinance 449, passed January 4, 1977; ordinance 450, passed January 4, 1977;
ordinance 451, passed January 4, 1977; ordinance 452, passed April 5, 1977;
ordinance 453, passed April 5, 1977. (Ord. 454 §4, 1977)
1.01.050: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Warr Acres municipal code
1977" or to any portion thereof, to any ordinance of the city, reference shall
apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter
made. (Ord. 454 §5, 1977)
1.01.060: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 454 §6,
1977)
1.01.070: CHARTER OF THE CITY INCLUDED:
The charter of the city is included in the code book for convenience. (Ord. 454
§7, 1977)
1.01.080: PERMANENT AND GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature passed
prior to 1977, and in effect at the time the code is adopted, but not included
in the code, are repealed as of the time when the code goes into effect.
Ordinances passed on or after April 29, 1977, shall not be repealed or amended
by the adoption of the code or the passage of the ordinance codified in this
chapter. (Ord. 454 §8, 1977)
1.01.090: TEMPORARY AND/OR SPECIAL ORDINANCES:
The continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances, although
omitted from the code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom; and
the adoption of the code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or part
of any such ordinance. Among the temporary and/or special ordinances not
repealed or amended by the adoption of the code, are the following: ordinances
creating, opening, dedicating, vacating, or closing specific streets, alleys
and other public ways; naming or changing the names of specific streets and
other public ways; defining corporate limits or boundaries; establishing the
grades of specific streets and other public ways; authorizing or relating to
specific issues of bonds; creating or relating to specific sewer and paving
districts and other specific local improvement districts; making special
assessments for local improvements; annexing territory to, or excluding
territory from, the city; calling or providing for a special election;
approving or authorizing specific contracts with the state or with others;
authorizing a specific lease, sale, or purchase of property; granting rights of
way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies or other
public carriers; granting a specific public utility or any other person, firm,
or corporation the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets and
alleys or of otherwise using the streets and alleys; granting a franchise to a
specific public utility, or regulating a specific public utility; affecting the
city budget or relating to salaries of city officers or employees and any other
contracts or obligations of the city. (Ord. 454 §9, 1977)
1.01.100: CERTIFIED COPIES OF THE CODE:
A. The city clerk shall carefully examine at least one copy of the code adopted
by the ordinance codified in this chapter to see that it is a true copy of the
code. Similarly, after each change, or supplement, has been prepared, printed,
and inserted in the code, the city clerk shall carefully examine at least one
copy of the code as amended to see that it is a true and correct copy of the
code as amended. The city clerk shall then insert a certificate in the front of
the true and correct copy or copies of the code certifying substantially that
the code is a true and correct copy of the code of ordinances of the city
including all permanent and general ordinances passed or adopted prior to the
date to which the code has been brought up to date and still in effect as of
that date.
B. One copy of the code so bound shall be kept in the office of the city clerk
at all times, and may be inspected by any interested person at any time during
regular office hours.
C. The city clerk shall deposit one copy of the code adopted by this ordinance
with the Oklahoma County law library and two (2) copies of such code with the
clerk of the supreme court of the state. In addition, the city clerk shall
cause certified copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter to be filed
with the Oklahoma county clerk and with the clerk of the supreme court of the
state. (Ord. 454 §10, 1977)
1.01.110: SALE OF COPIES OF THE CODE:
The city clerk is authorized and directed to sell copies of the code of
ordinances to the public at a price to be determined from time to time by
motion or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 454 §11, 1977)
1.01.120: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within
the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 454 §12, 1977)
1.01.130: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments of any ordinance
or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the
prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior
to the effective date hereof; nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee,
or penalty at such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances; nor be
construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the
collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions
applicable to any violation thereof; nor to affect the validity of any bond or
cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant
to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall
continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 454 §13, 1977)
1.01.140: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code
as the "Warr Acres municipal code 1977" becomes effective. (Ord. 454 §14, 1977)
1.01.150: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that
it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause
and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or
unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or
unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full
force and effect. (Ord. 454 §15, 1977)
CHAPTER 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1.04.010: Definitions
1.04.020: Grammatical Interpretation
1.04.030: Prohibited Acts
1.04.040: Construction
1.04.050: Repeal
1.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
A.   The following words and phrases whenever used in the ordinances of the
city shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a
different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically
defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
   CITY, TOWN OR MUNICIPALITY: The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, or the area
within the territorial limits of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, and such
territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control
by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which an act is to be done. It shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; and if the last
day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
   COUNCIL: The city council of the city. "All its members" or "all councilmen"
means the total number of councilmen provided by the general laws of the state
of Oklahoma.
   COUNTY: The county of Oklahoma, state of Oklahoma.
   LAW: Denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the
state of Oklahoma, the ordinances of the city and, when appropriate, any and
all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
   MAY: Is permissive.
   MONTH: A calendar month.
   MUST AND SHALL: Each is mandatory.
   OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all
cases in which by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed".
   ORDINANCE: A law of the city; provided that a temporary or special law,
administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution.
   OWNER: Applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a
part of such building or land.
   PERSON: Natural person, joint venture, estates, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and
evidences of debt.
   PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE: The state of Oklahoma.
   STATUTE: In reference to the statutes of the state, means the statutes as
they are now or as they may be amended.
   STREET: Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or
may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public
property so designated in any law of this state.
   TENANT AND OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, include any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
   TITLE OF OFFICE: Use of the title of any officer, employee, department,
board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or
commission of the city.
   WRITTEN: Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed.
   YEAR: A calendar year.
B.   All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the
common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and
such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law
shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate
meaning.
C.   When an act is required by an ordinance the same being such that it may be
done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed as to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord.
389 §1, 1976)
1.04.020: GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION:
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city:
A.   Gender: Designation in the form of any gender includes the masculine,
feminine and neuter genders.
B.   Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
C.   Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
D.   Use Of Words And Phrases: Words and phrases not specifically defined shall
be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (Ord.
389 §2, 1976)
1.04.030: PROHIBITED ACTS:
Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it
includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or
concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 389 §3, 1976)
1.04.040: CONSTRUCTION:
The provisions of the ordinances of the city and all proceedings under them are
to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice.
(Ord. 389 §4, 1976)
1.04.050: REPEAL:
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 389
§5, 1976)
CHAPTER 1.08
ANNEXATION
SECTION:
1.08.010: Procedure
1.08.010: PROCEDURE:
The city may not be annexed by, or to, or consolidated with, any other city or
other political subdivision, or merged into a combined county-city government,
unless a majority of the qualified electors of the city, voting on the
question, approve such annexation, consolidation or merging, and such question
may be submitted to the qualified electors of the city only by the city council
or by the mayor on proper initiative petition, at special election; provided,
that nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from annexing additional
territory to the city as provided by law. (Prior code §11-6)
CHAPTER 1.12
CITY PLAT
SECTION:
1.12.010: Designated
1.12.020: Copies
1.12.010: DESIGNATED:
The plat of the city, prepared by Phillips & Stong Engineering Company, under
date of November 22, 1967, with the platted additions shown thereon is
designated as the official plat of the city, showing the property included
within the city limits and the boundaries of the city. (Prior code §11-7)
1.12.020: COPIES:
An official copy of the plat shall be kept in the office of the city clerk, and
one copy shall be filed by the city clerk in the office of the county clerk.
(Prior code §11-7)
CHAPTER 1.16
WARDS 1
SECTION:
1.16.010: Boundaries Designated Generally
1.16.020: Ward 1
1.16.030: Ward 2
1.16.040: Ward 3
1.16.050: Ward 4
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 642.
1.16.010: BOUNDARIES DESIGNATED GENERALLY:
The boundaries of ward 1, ward 2, ward 3 and ward 4 are changed, amended and
modified to reflect the boundaries for each ward as set out in sections
1.16.020 through
1.16.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 391 §§1, 2, 1976: Ord. 342 §1, 1972)
1.16.020: WARD 1:
Ward 1 is all of the area within the boundaries of the city to the north of a
line commencing at the east boundary of said city and the centerline of N.W.
63rd, thence west to the west boundary of said city.
(Ord. 391 §§1, 2, 1976: Ord. 342 §1, 1972)
1.16.030: WARD 2:
Ward 2 is all of the area within the boundaries of the city bound on the north
by a line commencing at the east boundary of said city and the centerline of
N.W. 63rd, thence west to the west boundary of said city and bound on the south
by a line commencing at the east boundary of said city at the centerline of
N.W. 56th, thence west to the centerline of Harmon Drive, thence north to the
centerline of N.W. 57th, thence west to the centerline of North MacArthur,
thence north to the centerline of N.W. 58th, thence west to the centerline of
Central Avenue, thence south to the boundary of said city.
(Ord. 391 §§1, 2, 1976: Ord. 342 §1, 1972)
1.16.040: WARD 3:
Ward 3 is all of the area within the boundaries of the city bound on the north
by a line commencing at the east boundary of said city at the centerline of
N.W. 56th, thence west to the centerline of Harmon Drive, thence north to the
centerline of N.W. 57th, thence west to the centerline of North MacArthur,
thence north to the centerline of N.W. 58th, thence west to the centerline of
Central Avenue, thence south to the boundary of said city, bound on the south
by a line commencing at the east boundary of said city and the centerline of
N.W. 50th, thence west to the centerline of Ann Arbor Avenue, thence south to
the centerline of N.W. 46th, thence west to the centerline of Grove Avenue,
thence south to the centerline of N.W. 42nd, thence west to the centerline of
North MacArthur, thence north to the centerline of N.W. 43rd Street, thence
west to the west boundary of said city.
(Ord. 391 §§1, 2, 1976: Ord. 342 §1, 1972)
1.16.050: WARD 4:
Ward 4 is all of the area within the boundaries of the city to the south of a
line commencing at the east boundary of said city and the centerline of N.W.
50th Street, thence west to the centerline of Ann Arbor Avenue, thence south to
the centerline of N.W. 46th Street, thence west to the centerline of Grove
Avenue, thence south to the centerline of N.W. 42nd, thence west to the
centerline of North MacArthur, thence north to the centerline of N.W. 43rd,
thence west to the west boundary of said city.
(Ord. 391 §§1, 2, 1976: Ord. 342 §1, 1972)
CHAPTER 1.20
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1.20.010: Conducted By
1.20.020: Absentee Voting
1.20.010: CONDUCTED BY:
The county election board shall conduct regular and special elections of the
city in accordance with the charter thereof as provided in article 7 of the
charter, performing the functions delegated to the city clerk and council by
the charter, except that the primary filing of candidates for mayor and
councilmen shall be made with the county election board. Further, the city
clerk shall notify the county election board of elections as provided by
charter in advance of the election, and shall furnish the county election board
all information it requires for the conduct of the election. (Prior code §11-9)
1.20.020: ABSENTEE VOTING:
A.   Any currently registered voter who is a legal resident in the city who is
eligible and who desires to vote at any of the duly designated polling places
within the city on the day of the election may apply for an absentee voting
ballot, either in person or by United States mail, to the Oklahoma county
election board and swear and affirm that he or she is requesting an absentee
voting ballot for one of the following reasons:
   1.   The voter intends to be absent from the city on the day of the
election;
   2.   The voter is unable to vote in person at any designated polling place
on the day of the election because he or she is charged with the care of
another person who is physically incapacitated and who cannot be left
unattended;
   3.   The voter will have to travel more than ten (10) miles from the address
at which he or she is registered to any designated polling place on the date of
the election;
   4.   The voter will be unable to vote in person at any designated polling
place on the day of the election due to performance of duties in the armed
forces.
B.   Applications for absentee ballots to the county election board must be
made no later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last Wednesday preceding the
date of the election.
C.   Absentee ballots must be returned to the secretary of the county election
board by no later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on the day of the election.
(Ord. 621 §1, 1985)
CHAPTER 1.24
GENERAL PENALTY 1
SECTION:
1.24.010: Penalty
1.24.020: Separate Offense
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 672(b), 672(c).
1.24.010: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city is guilty, upon
conviction, of a misdemeanor. The penalty, upon conviction, for a violation of
any provision of any title, chapter or section not otherwise specified in the
municipal code, shall be a fine, to be determined by the municipal court, not
to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), excluding court cost. Additionally,
the penalty, upon conviction, for a violation of any provision of the municipal
code, whether specified or not, shall be a fine, to be determined by the
municipal court, not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) excluding court
cost. (Ord. 830 §1, 1997: Ord. 736 §1, 1992)
1.24.020: SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each such person as described in section
1.24.010 of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the
ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person,
and he shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 390 §2, 1976)
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Continuity Of Government; Emergency Interim Successors   2.04
City Council Meetings; Procedures   2.05
City Officials Generally   2.06
Records; Security And Maintenance   2.07
City Building Officials   2.08
Code Enforcement   2.09
Fire Department   2.12
Police Department   2.16
City Hall Operations (Rep. by Ord. 1038 §1, 2007)   2.20
Municipal Criminal Court   2.24
Juvenile Offenders   2.25
Truancy   2.26
Police Pension And Retirement Fund   2.28
Firefighters' Relief And Pension Fund   2.32
Employees; Compensation And Benefits   2.36
Mayor   2.37
Social Security   2.40
Lost Or Unclaimed Property   2.44
Civil Defense   2.48
Emergency Medical Services Code   2.50
Minor Violations Bureau   2.56
Public Works Director   2.60
CHAPTER 2.04
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT; EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS
SECTION:
2.04.010: Definitions
2.04.020: Elective Officers
2.04.030: Appointive Officers
2.04.040: Review Of Designations
2.04.050: Qualifications
2.04.060: Status Of Successor
2.04.070: Emergency Interim Successor
2.04.080: Data Regarding Deputies And Emergency Interim Successors
2.04.090: Qualifying Acts For Taking Office
2.04.100: Attack
2.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ATTACK: Any attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States
causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to the civilian
property or persons in the United States in any manner, by sabotage or by the
use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, or atomic, radiological, chemical,
bacteriological, or biological means or other weapons or processes.
DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY: A person who is presently authorized to perform all of
the functions, exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of an
office in the event the office is vacant or at such times as it lacks
administration due to the death, absence or disability of the incumbent
officer.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR: A person designated pursuant to this chapter for
possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the office, of
a city officer in the event that such officer or any duly authorized deputy is
unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office.
UNAVAILABLE: Either that a vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy
authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the
office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy
exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a
vacancy) and his duly authorized deputy are absent or unable, for physical,
mental or legal reasons, to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the
office. (Prior code §1-69)
2.04.020: ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
Within thirty (30) days following the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter, and thereafter within thirty (30) days after first entering
upon the duties of his office, the mayor and each member of the city council
shall, in addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate such number of
emergency interim successors to his office and specify their rank in order of
succession after any duly authorized deputy so that there will be not less than
three (3) duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors or a
combination thereof for the office. (Prior code §1-70 (a))
2.04.030: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
The city council shall, within the time specified in section
2.04.020 of this chapter, in addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate
appointive officers, including the administrative assistant, the city clerk-
treasurer, the city attorney, and each municipal judge of the city, the chief
of police, fire chief, and service superintendent such number of emergency
interim successors to these officers and specify their rank in order of
succession after any duly authorized deputy so that there will not be less than
three (3) duly authorized deputies or emergency interim successors or
combination thereof for each officer. (Prior code §1-70(b))
2.04.040: REVIEW OF DESIGNATIONS:
The incumbent in the case of those elective officers specified in section
2.04.020 of this chapter, and the city council in the case of those appointive
officers specified in section
2.04.030 of this chapter, shall review and, as necessary, promptly revise the
designations of emergency interim successors or duly authorized deputies or any
combination thereof for each officer specified. (Prior code §1-70(c))
2.04.050: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency interim successor unless
he may under the constitution and statutes of this state and the charter or
ordinances of this city hold the office of the person to whose powers and
duties he is designated to succeed, but no provision of any ordinance
prohibiting an officer or employee of this city from holding another office
shall be applicable to an emergency interim successor. (Prior code §1-70(d))
2.04.060: STATUS OF SUCCESSOR:
A person designated as an emergency interim successor holds that designation at
the pleasure of the designator, provided that he must be replaced if removed.
He retains this designation as emergency interim successor until replaced by
another appointed by the authorized designator. (Prior code §1-70(e))
2.04.070: EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR:
If, in the event of an attack, any officer named in sections
2.04.020 and
2.04.030 of this chapter and any duly authorized deputy is unavailable, the
officer's emergency interim successor highest in rank in order of succession
who is not unavailable shall, except for the power and duty to appoint
emergency interim successors, exercise the powers and discharge the duties of
such officer. An emergency interim successor shall exercise these powers and
discharge these duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or
any duly authorized deputy or an emergency interim successor higher in rank in
order of succession exercises, or resumes the exercise of, the powers and
discharge of the duties of the office, or until, where an actual vacancy
exists, a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy or elected and qualified
as provided by law. (Prior code §1-71)
2.04.080: DATA REGARDING DEPUTIES AND EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS:
The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy shall be filed with the city clerk and each designation, replacement, or
change in order of succession of an emergency interim successor shall become
effective when the designator files with the city clerk the successor's name,
address, and rank in order of succession. The city clerk shall keep on file all
such data regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors
and it shall be open to the public inspection. (Prior code §1-72)
2.04.090: QUALIFYING ACTS FOR TAKING OFFICE:
At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take such
oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to
exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may
succeed. (Prior code §1-73)
2.04.100: ATTACK:
In the event of an attack:
A.   Quorum requirements for the city council shall be suspended;
B.   Where the affirmative vote of a specified proportion of members for
approval of an ordinance, resolution or other action would otherwise be
required, the same proportion of those voting thereon shall be sufficient.
(Prior code §1-74)
CHAPTER 2.05
CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS; PROCEDURES
SECTION:
2.05.010: Item Submittal
2.05.020: Addition To Agenda; Mayor
2.05.030: Procedural Authority
2.05.040: False Statements To The City Council
2.05.010: ITEM SUBMITTAL:
Matters to appear on the city council agenda shall be submitted by staff to the
city clerk in writing with supporting documentation prior to five o'clock (5:
00) P.M. on the Monday of the week prior to any regularly scheduled council
meeting. Any council member will have the right to put any item on the agenda;
provided, however, that they must submit their proposed item to the city clerk
in writing with any supporting documentation at least one week prior to the
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. deadline outlined herein. Upon receipt of a requested
topic from the council member, the city clerk will forward the item to the
appropriate staff for review so that the staff can submit any further
supporting documentation that may be necessary. The city attorney shall review
the proposed agenda item and may amend the proposed language of the agenda item
so as to ensure its compliance with state law, the city charter or this code.
(Ord. 1122, 2012)
2.05.020: ADDITION TO AGENDA; MAYOR:
If he considers it an emergency, the mayor may add to the agenda so long as he
complies with the open meeting act. (Ord. 741 §1, 1993)
2.05.030: PROCEDURAL AUTHORITY:
In all questions as to the rules of procedures of this body, where not
inconsistent with previously adopted ordinances or the charter of the city of
Warr Acres or "Robert's Rules Of Order", a recognized authority on
parliamentary procedure, shall govern. (Ord. 741 §1, 1993)
2.05.040: FALSE STATEMENTS TO THE CITY COUNCIL:
It shall be an offense for any person, including officers of the city, in any
manner within any hearing in which an appeal to the city council is made or an
application is presented for action by the city council to knowingly and
wilfully falsify, conceal or cover up by any trick, scheme or device a material
fact; make any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or representation; or
make or use any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any
false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00),
excluding costs and assessments, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a
period of not more than ten (10) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 800 §1, 1996)
CHAPTER 2.06
CITY OFFICIALS GENERALLY
SECTION:
2.06.010: Meeting Schedules
2.06.020: Contracts For Professional Services
2.06.040: Employment Of Former City Officials Or Employees
2.06.050: Holding Of Certain Municipal Offices Or Positions Prohibited
2.06.060: Publication Of Periodic, Nonpolitical Newsletter
2.06.070: Internet Website
2.06.010: MEETING SCHEDULES:
The city clerk shall prepare and provide to all council members, by or before
the last day of each month, a list of all proposed council, board or commission
meetings for the following month. No meetings of the council or any board or
commission, whether regular, special or emergency, shall be scheduled for the
same time on the same date. (Ord. 794 §1, 1996)
2.06.020: CONTRACTS FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
All contracts for professional services, except in an emergency, shall be
submitted to the council for preapproval. (Ord. 795 §1, 1996)
2.06.040: EMPLOYMENT OF FORMER CITY OFFICIALS OR EMPLOYEES:
For the purposes of maintaining the confidence of the public, which is
essential to a properly functioning city government, and to avoid the
appearance of impropriety, duplicity or favoritism, no person who has been a
member of the Warr Acres city council, the mayor of Warr Acres, or a retiree
from the city shall be hired by the city as an employee, independent contractor
or consultant, unless approved by the city council, for a period of two (2)
years after such service. (Ord. 818 §1, 1997)
2.06.050: HOLDING OF CERTAIN MUNICIPAL OFFICES OR POSITIONS PROHIBITED:
The following offices and positions within the city government are hereby
determined to be subordinate or incompatible with each other in the exercise of
the duties of such offices. Except as otherwise provided by the charter or
ordinance, no person may simultaneously hold any of the following offices or
positions. Assumption of duties of the second office shall operate to forfeit
tenure and duties of the first office or position.
A.   Member of the city council, and
B.   Member of the planning commission, and
C.   Member of the board of adjustment. (Ord. 1051 §1, 2008)
2.06.060: PUBLICATION OF PERIODIC, NONPOLITICAL NEWSLETTER:
The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, shall periodically publish a nonpolitical
newsletter containing city news and announcements of upcoming events in the
city. (Ord. 1051, 2008: Ord. 998 §1, 2004: Ord. 961 §1, 2002)
2.06.070: INTERNET WEBSITE:
The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, shall maintain an internet website and all
agenda and minutes of regular and special meetings of the city shall be posted
on the website. (Ord. 1051, 2008: Ord. 961 §1, 2002)
CHAPTER 2.07
RECORDS; SECURITY AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
2.07.010: Personnel Files
2.07.010: PERSONNEL FILES:
The personnel files of the city employees shall be under the control and
security of the city clerk. In the absence of the city clerk, the personnel
files of city employees shall be under the control and security of the
assistant city clerk. The city clerk's personnel file shall be under the
control and security of the assistant city clerk. (Ord. 815 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 2.08
CITY BUILDING OFFICIALS 1
SECTION:
2.08.010: Building Inspector; Office Created
2.08.020: Appointment
2.08.030: Acting Building Inspector
2.08.040: Qualifications
2.08.050: Duties Generally
2.08.060: Inspection Duties
2.08.070: Record Keeping
2.08.080: Records Open To Public Inspection
2.08.090: Cooperation Of Other Officials
2.08.100: Right Of Entry
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 22-113, 29-101.
2.08.010: BUILDING INSPECTOR; OFFICE CREATED:
The office of city building inspector is created and the executive official in
charge shall be known as the building inspector. (Prior code §4-67(a))
2.08.020: APPOINTMENT:
The building inspector shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the
council. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory
service. He shall be employed at will and subject to rules set forth in the
employee handbook of personnel policies. (Ord. 985 §1, 2003: prior code §4-67
(b))
2.08.030: ACTING BUILDING INSPECTOR:
During temporary absence or disability of the building inspector, the
appointing authority shall designate an acting building inspector. (Prior code
§4-67(c))
2.08.040: QUALIFICATIONS:
To be eligible to appointment, the candidate for the position of building
inspector shall have had experience as an architect, structural engineer,
building inspector or superintendent of building construction. He shall be in
good health, physically capable of making the necessary examinations and
inspections. He shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly,
in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or
used in or in connection with building construction, alterations, removal, and
demolition. (Prior code §4-68)
2.08.050: DUTIES GENERALLY:
The city building inspector shall examine premises for which permits have been
issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law
are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce
all provisions of the building code. He shall, when requested by proper
authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in
connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written
reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or
unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or
to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue
such notices or orders as may be necessary. (Prior code §4-69(a))
2.08.060: INSPECTION DUTIES:
Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by
the building inspector or his duly appointed assistant. The building inspector
may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services after
investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called
for by any provision of the building code shall be issued on such reports
unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of
such service. (Prior code §4-69(b))
2.08.070: RECORD KEEPING:
The building inspector shall keep records of inspections made, of reports
rendered, and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of
required plans and all documents relating to building work so long as any part
of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. (Prior
code §4-69(c))
2.08.080: RECORDS OPEN TO PUBLIC INSPECTION:
All records provided for in section
2.08.070 of this chapter shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from
the office of the building inspector without his written consent. (Prior code
§4-69(d))
2.08.090: COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS:
The building official may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary
in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other
officials of the municipality. (Prior code §4-70)
2.08.100: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The building official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper
identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour. (Prior code §4-71)
CHAPTER 2.09
CODE ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
2.09.010: Office Created
2.09.015: Appointment
2.09.020: Qualifications
2.09.025: Duties
2.09.030: Right Of Entry
2.09.035: Citation Authority
2.09.040: Failure To Appear
2.09.010: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of code enforcement which shall have one
director and such assistants as may be necessary to fulfill the duties assigned
to such office and to assure compliance with the designated provisions of this
code. (Ord. 721 §1, 1992)
2.09.015: APPOINTMENT:
The code enforcement director shall be appointed by the mayor. The director
shall be directly responsible to and under the supervision of the mayor. In the
temporary absence or disability of the director, the mayor may designate an
acting director. (Ord. 721 §1, 1992)
2.09.020: QUALIFICATIONS:
The qualifications for the director of code enforcement shall be as established
from time to time by a written job description adopted by the city council.
(Ord. 721 §1, 1992)
2.09.025: DUTIES:
The director of code enforcement, or code official, shall be responsible for
the enforcement of the charter and ordinance provisions of this code except in
those instances where primary enforcement duties have been assigned to another
department. In particular, the director shall be responsible for compliance
with the code by members of the general public. The director shall also assist,
at the request of a proper authority or when the public interest requires, in
the enforcement of all provisions of this code. Specific duties may also be as
established by written job description approved by the city council.
The code official, under the supervision of the public works director, is
accountable for the enforcement of all nuisance codes and ordinances, and
building codes and related permits. The duties and responsibilities of the code
official include, but are not limited to, the creation or maintenance of files
on all affected addresses in the city to include:
A.   Approved or denied permits, including special use permits;
B.   Planning commission activity related to the affected property;
C.   Board of adjustment activity related to the affected property;
D.   Special conditions unique to the affected property (grandfathered) and
what conditions would remove such protection;
E.   Record of any and all instances of noncompliance and the resolution
thereof; and
F.   Certificate of occupancy issued or denied and the requirements of
resolution.
The code official will conduct monthly drive-by inspections of all property in
the city to check for and log all violations of property codes listed in
section
16.30.020 of this code and any zoning violations not approved by the board of
adjustment. After a six (6) month period of time, the code official will
commence quarterly drive-by inspections. The code official shall ensure that
all applicable permits for contractors doing business within the city are
valid. If a contractor does not have a valid permit and work is underway, the
work shall be stopped until a permit is obtained from the city at double the
fee. (Ord. 1043 §2, 2007: Ord. 721 §1, 1992)
2.09.030: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The director of code enforcement, his assistants or designees shall have the
right, upon identification, to enter upon the premises of any person, firm or
corporation, or any building, or structure at any reasonable hour for the
purpose of fulfilling his official duties, including inspection for possible
violations of this code. (Ord. 721 §1, 1992)
2.09.035: CITATION AUTHORITY:
The director of the code enforcement and his assistants shall have the power
and authority to issue and serve citations in the name of the city of Warr
Acres to persons alleged to be in violation of this code in the same manner as
authorized for police officers; provided, however, they shall not have the
power of arrest other than as authorized by law to a private citizen of this
state. (Ord. 721 §1, 1992)
2.09.040: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
Any person who fails to appear before the municipal court in response to a
citation issued by the director of code enforcement or his assistants shall be
subject to arrest warrant being issued by the municipal judge. Warrants for
arrest so authorized shall be served by the police department. Additionally,
such persons who wilfully fail to appear as provided in the citation shall be
guilty of an offense of failure to appear which shall be a separate offense
from the original charge. (Ord. 721 §1, 1992)
CHAPTER 2.12
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2.12.010: Created; Purpose
2.12.020: Membership
2.12.030: Chief Appointment; Qualifications
2.12.040: Accountability Of Chief And Officers
2.12.050: Department Appointments
2.12.060: Rules And Regulations; Responsibility For Personnel
2.12.070: Department Composition
2.12.080: Drills And Instruction
2.12.090: Investigation Of Fires
2.12.100: Right Of Entry; Notice To Abate
2.12.110: Recordkeeping
2.12.120: Monthly Reports
2.12.130: Annual Report
2.12.140: Command And Control At Fires
2.12.150: Membership And Qualification
2.12.160: Suspension, Discharge Or Removal From Department
2.12.170: Required Apparatus And Equipment
2.12.180: Purchase Of Apparatus And Equipment
2.12.190: Storage Of Apparatus And Equipment
2.12.200: Alarm System
2.12.210: Use Of Apparatus And Equipment
2.12.220: Permission To Handle Apparatus And Equipment
2.12.230: Contracts With Other Communities
2.12.240: Consent For Apparatus And Equipment To Leave City Limits
2.12.250: Badge
2.12.255: Custody And Possession Of Protective Clothing And Badges
2.12.260: Insignia
2.12.270: Obstructing Fire Station, Storage Area, Hydrant
2.12.280: Modernization Of Department Operation
2.12.290: Police Powers
2.12.300: Police Department; Duty To Respond
2.12.310: Social Officers
2.12.320: Social Officers; Interference With Department Officers
2.12.330: State Statutes Adopted
2.12.350: Authority At Fires And Other Emergencies
2.12.360: Interference With Fire Department Operations
2.12.370: Compliance With Orders
2.12.380: Vehicles Crossing Fire Hose
2.12.390: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
2.12.400: Operation Of Other Vehicles On Approach Of Emergency Vehicles
2.12.410: Vehicles Following Fire Apparatus
2.12.420: Boarding Or Tampering With Fire Department Emergency Equipment
2.12.430: Damage, Injury To Fire Department Equipment Or Personnel
2.12.440: Emergency Vehicle Operation
2.12.450: Blocking Fire Hydrants Or Department Connections
2.12.460: Permit For Hydrant Use
2.12.470: Fire Hydrant And Water Main Locations
2.12.480: Occupancies And Uses Involving High Fire Or Life Hazards
2.12.490: Fire Suppression Equipment
2.12.500: Fire Extinguishers
2.12.510: Street Obstructions; Fire Lanes; Exceptions And Emergency Rapid
Access Devices
2.12.515: Inspections, Entry Powers, Citation Powers, Investigations, Access
For Fire Apparatus, Etc.
2.12.520: Penalty For Violation
2.12.010: CREATED; PURPOSE:
A department to be hereafter known as the city fire department, the object of
which shall be the preservation of fire and the protection of life and property
within the limits of the city, is created as set out in this chapter. (Prior
code §9-1)
2.12.020: MEMBERSHIP:
The department shall consist of a chief, a deputy chief, an assistant chief and
other officers as the chief may deem necessary for the effective operation of
the department. (Prior code §9-2)
2.12.030: CHIEF APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS:
The chief shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council for an
indefinite period of time; his tenure of office shall be at will and subject to
rules set forth in the employee handbook of personnel policies. The chief shall
be technically qualified by training and experience and shall have the ability
to command men and hold their respect and confidence. (Ord. 985 §2, 2003: prior
code §9-3)
2.12.040: ACCOUNTABILITY OF CHIEF AND OFFICERS:
The chief shall be held accountable to the mayor only and shall make written
and verbal reports thereto as the mayor may require. All other department and
company officers shall be accountable to the chief only. (Prior code §9-4)
2.12.050: DEPARTMENT APPOINTMENTS:
The deputy chief and assistant chief and all department and company officers
shall be appointed by the chief. Such officers shall be accountable to the
chief and subject to removal by him as provided in the employee handbook of
personnel policies if nonunion or union contract if so covered. (Ord. 985 §2,
2003: prior code §9-5)
2.12.060: RULES AND REGULATIONS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERSONNEL:
The chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern the
department, and the chief shall be responsible to the mayor for the personnel,
morale, and general efficiency of the department. (Prior code §9-6)
2.12.070: DEPARTMENT COMPOSITION:
The chief shall determine the number and kind of companies of which the
department is to be composed and shall determine the response of such companies
to alarms. (Prior code §9-7)
2.12.080: DRILLS AND INSTRUCTION:
The chief shall, at least twice a month, conduct suitable drills or instruction
in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage,
a study of buildings in the city, fire prevention, water supplies and all other
matters generally considered essential to good firemanship and safety of life
and property from fire. (Prior code §9-8)
2.12.090: INVESTIGATION OF FIRES:
The chief is required to assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime
of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and
circumstances of all fires. (Prior code §9-9)
2.12.100: RIGHT OF ENTRY; NOTICE TO ABATE:
The chief, his deputy or assistant chief are empowered to enter any and all
buildings and premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making
inspections and to serve written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate,
within a specified time, any and all fire or life hazards that may be found.
Any person so served with a notice to abate any fire or life hazard shall
comply therewith and promptly notify the chief. (Prior code §9-10)
2.12.110: RECORD KEEPING:
The chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections,
apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and other information about the work
of the department. The chief, and such officers of the department as the chief
may designate, are authorized to prepare and deliver upon request a certified
copy of any record of the fire department, not deemed confidential, to any
person, charging fee of four dollars ($4.00) for the first page (front and
back) and fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional page (front and back)
thereafter on any one particular report, so authenticated and every such fee
shall be deposited in the city's general fund. (Ord. 569 §1, 1983)
2.12.120: MONTHLY REPORTS:
The chief shall report monthly to the mayor the condition of the apparatus and
equipment; the number of fires during the month, their location, cause, date of
same and loss occasioned thereby; the number and purpose of all other runs
made; the number of members responding to each fire or other run; and any
changes in membership. (Prior code §9-12)
2.12.130: ANNUAL REPORT:
The chief shall make a complete written annual report to the mayor within one
month after the close of the calendar year such report to include the
information specified in sections
2.12.250 through
2.12.320 of this chapter, together with comparative data for previous years and
recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the department. A copy of
this report shall be sent to the state inspection bureau. (Prior code §9-13)
2.12.140: COMMAND AND CONTROL AT FIRES:
The chief shall have full power, control and command over all persons present
at fires, and he shall direct the use of all fire apparatus and equipment, and
command all firemen in the discharge of their duties. He shall take such
measures as he may deem necessary in the preservation and protection of life,
property and extinguishing of fires. (Prior code §9-14)
2.12.150: MEMBERSHIP AND QUALIFICATION:
Membership for the department shall consist of persons employed by the chief or
volunteer firemen appointed by the chief, the latter being able bodied
preferably residents of the city, and/or people whose business activities are
normally within the confines of the city and all of whom have telephones in
their homes. Also, preferable to have cell phones and pagers. Determination of
whether candidates for employment are able bodied shall be made by the chief
after a medical and physical examination has been made in the manner prescribed
by the chief and approved by the mayor. (Ord. 955 §1, 2002: Ord. 392 §1, 1976:
prior code §9-15)
2.12.160: SUSPENSION, DISCHARGE OR REMOVAL FROM DEPARTMENT:
Any member of the department may be suspended, discharged or removed from the
department by the chief or mayor at any time it is deemed such action is
necessary for the good of the department. On written request of such member to
the city council, he shall be given a public hearing before the city council on
the charges brought by the chief or mayor. (Prior code §9-16)
2.12.170: REQUIRED APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT:
The department shall be equipped with such apparatus and equipment as may be
required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life
and property from fire. (Prior code §9-17)
2.12.180: PURCHASE OF APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT:
Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the chief,
and after approval by the mayor or the city council, in compliance with the
charter and ordinances of the city, shall be purchased in such manner as may be
designated by the city council. (Prior code §9-18)
2.12.190: STORAGE OF APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT:
All equipment of the department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such
places as may be designated by the city council. Such places shall be heated
during the winter season if any equipment is subject to damage by freezing.
(Prior code §9-19)
2.12.200: ALARM SYSTEM:
Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to turn in an
alarm, and for notifying all members of the department so that they may
promptly respond. (Prior code §9-20)
2.12.210: USE OF APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT:
No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose,
nor shall any person, wilfully and without proper authority from the chief,
take away or conceal any article used in any way by the department. (Prior code
§9-21)
2.12.220: PERMISSION TO HANDLE APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT:
No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any
apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless accompanied by, or
having the special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the
department. (Prior code §9-22)
2.12.230: CONTRACTS WITH OTHER COMMUNITIES:
The city council is authorized to enter into agreements or contracts with
nearby incorporated communities or governing bodies of other communities to
provide the members of such communities with fire protection or to establish a
mutual aid system. (Prior code §9-23)
2.12.240: CONSENT FOR APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT TO LEAVE CITY LIMITS:
No apparatus shall be hired out or permitted to leave the limits of the city
except in response to a call for aid at a fire in a neighboring community
without the consent of the city council. The officer in charge of the
department shall have power to assign equipment for response to calls for
outside aid in accordance with sections
2.12.310 and
2.12.320 of this chapter, and in other cases only when the absence of such
equipment will not jeopardize protection in the city. (Prior code §9-24)
2.12.250: BADGE:
Each member of the department is authorized to wear a badge designating his
rank. (Prior code §9-25)
2.12.255: CUSTODY AND POSSESSION OF PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND BADGES:
A.   An employee of the fire department shall be entitled to receive, upon
retirement by reason of length of service, the continued custody and possession
of the helmet, protective clothing, badge and collar brass worn by such
employee immediately prior to retirement.
B.   An employee of the fire department may be entitled to receive, upon
retirement by reason of disability, the continued custody and possession of the
helmet, protective clothing, badge and collar brass worn by such employee
immediately prior to retirement upon written approval of the chief of the fire
department.
C.   Custody and possession of the helmet, protective clothing, badge and
collar brass of an employee of the fire department killed in the line of duty
may be awarded to the spouse or next of kin by the chief of the fire
department.
D.   In the event that the fire department issues new badges, the chief of the
fire department may allow employees of the fire department and officials or
employees of the city to possess old badges, for display purposes only, in
accordance with title 11, section 11-116 of the Oklahoma state statutes. (Ord.
772 §§1–4, 1995)
2.12.260: INSIGNIA:
Each member of the department shall be issued a suitable insignia to be
attached to his personal car. All motor equipment and all personal cars of
department members bearing suitable city fire department insignia shall have
right of way over all other traffic when responding to an alarm. (Prior code
§9-26)
2.12.270: OBSTRUCTING FIRE STATION, STORAGE AREA, HYDRANT:
No person shall park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be
placed within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the entrance to any fire station
or other place where fire apparatus is stored or within ten feet (10') of any
fire hydrant. (Prior code §9-28)
2.12.280: MODERNIZATION OF DEPARTMENT OPERATION:
The fire department shall adopt new methods of operation from time to time to
conform with generally recognized modern practices. (Prior code §9-31)
2.12.290: POLICE POWERS:
All regularly appointed members of the department are given the necessary
special police powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code §9-33)
2.12.300: POLICE DEPARTMENT; DUTY TO RESPOND:
It is made the special duty of the chief of police and/or other peace officers
who may be on duty and available for fire duty to respond to all fire alarms
and assist the department in the protection of life and property, in regulating
traffic, maintaining order; and in enforcing observance of this chapter. (Prior
code §9-34)
2.12.310: SOCIAL OFFICERS:
The department may elect a president, vice president, secretary and treasurer
to be known as social officers. Such officers may be elected in any manner and
for any term the membership may decide, and their duties shall be to arrange
for and manage any or all social functions sponsored by the department. (Prior
code §9-35)
2.12.320: SOCIAL OFFICERS; INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT OFFICERS:
The functions and duties of the social officers shall in no manner interfere
with those of the regular department officers who are charged with
responsibility for all fire service activities of the department. (Prior code
§9-36)
2.12.330: STATE STATUTES ADOPTED:
The city adopts, by reference, all provisions of articles 4 and 5 of section 5,
and all provisions of section 6, of the Oklahoma volunteer firemen's act, the
same being sections 350 through 352, both inclusive, of title 11 of Oklahoma
Statutes which sections of the Oklahoma volunteer firemen's act provide for
minimum rules and regulations governing volunteer members of the fire
departments, and the provisions of the volunteer firemen's act are adopted as
fully as if set out at length in this section. (Prior code §9-37)
2.12.350: AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND OTHER EMERGENCIES:
The fire prevention code official or duly authorized representatives, as may be
in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of
life and property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary
to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other
hazardous conditions or situations or to take any other action necessary in the
reasonable performance of their duty. The fire prevention code official may
prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may
remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object that
may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The fire
prevention code official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle
or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area
shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do
so by the fire prevention code official. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.360: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS:
It is unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of
travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere
with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper
any fire department operation. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.370: COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS:
A person shall not wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the fire prevention code official or to interfere with the
compliance attempts of another individual. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.380: VEHICLES CROSSING FIRE HOSE:
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or
any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire prevention code
official in command of said operation. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.390: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those that are defined and
authorized under the laws of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.400: OPERATION OF OTHER VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and
visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the
same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right hand edge or
curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles have
passed, unless otherwise directed by the fire prevention code official or a
police officer. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.410: VEHICLES FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow closer than three hundred feet (300') from any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm or to drive any vehicle within
the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a
fire alarm. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.420: BOARDING OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT:
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire prevention code
official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to,
attach oneself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department
emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest; or sound the
siren, horn, bell or other sound producing device thereon; or manipulate or
tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves,
switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. (Ord. 886 §1,
1999)
2.12.430: DAMAGE, INJURY TO FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT OR PERSONNEL:
It is unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to
damage or deface, any fire department emergency vehicle at any time or to
injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, fire department personnel while
performing departmental duties. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.440: EMERGENCY VEHICLE OPERATION:
The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in section
2.12.390 of this chapter, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front
red lights on or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when said
vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon
returning from, a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to,
"move ups" do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency
vehicle may:
A.   Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations;
B.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation;
C.   Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not endanger
life or property;
D.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions; or
E.   The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply only
when the driver of any such vehicle in motion sounds an audible signal by bell,
siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle
is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to
the front of such vehicle. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.450: BLOCKING FIRE HYDRANTS OR DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS:
It is unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the
access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the
pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire
department connections located on public or private streets and access lanes or
on private property. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice
of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire
prevention code official shall proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the
performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on
certificate of the fire prevention code official and with the approval of the
chief administrative official; and the legal authority of the municipality
shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. (Ord. 886
§1, 1999)
2.12.460: PERMIT FOR HYDRANT USE:
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire
department for fire suppression purposes, unless such person first secures a
permit for such use from the fire prevention code official and the water
company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such
hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water
company having jurisdiction. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.470: FIRE HYDRANT AND WATER MAIN LOCATIONS:
The fire prevention code official shall recommend to the chief administrative
official of the municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire
hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located
upon public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the fire prevention code official. (Ord. 886 §1,
1999)
2.12.480: OCCUPANCIES AND USES INVOLVING HIGH FIRE OR LIFE HAZARDS:
All new and existing oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement or exhibition
parks, and educational or institutional complexes and similar occupancies and
uses involving high fire or life hazards, and that are located more than one
hundred fifty feet (150') from a public street or that require quantities of
water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system, shall be
provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be
capable of supplying fire flows as required by the fire prevention code
official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The fire prevention code official shall designate and
approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The fire prevention code
official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment
housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the establishment
of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures.
Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until
approved by the fire prevention code official. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.490: FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT:
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire
hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the
provisions of the fire prevention code, except for the purposes of
extinguishing a fire, training or testing, recharging or making necessary
repairs or when permitted by the fire prevention code official. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or
repaired as directed by the fire prevention code official. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.500: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS:
A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of
fire extinguisher that is not approved by the fire prevention code official, or
that is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the
requirements of the fire prevention code official. The requirements of this
section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged
equipment for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or marked with a
permanent sign identifying the unit as junk. (Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
2.12.510: STREET OBSTRUCTIONS; FIRE LANES; EXCEPTIONS AND EMERGENCY RAPID
ACCESS DEVICES:
A.   Street Obstructions: No person or persons shall erect, construct, place or
maintain any pumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or
any other type of obstruction in or on any street, within the boundaries of the
municipality except as provided below. The word "street", as used in this
chapter, means any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic,
including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all
public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality.
Designated fire lanes shall be maintained free of obstructions and vehicles.
B.   Emergency Rapid Access Device: The following structures shall be equipped
with an emergency rapid access device at or near the main entrance and/or such
other location required by the fire chief:
   1.   Gated communities or gated commercial premises. For purposes of this
section, gated communities shall include all commercial properties; housing
developments; apartment, condominium and townhouse complexes; and all other
residential communities which have limited access electronic or mechanical
gates for ingress into and egress from the community, complex, residential and/
or commercial premises.
   2.   Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm
system or automatic suppression system, or other such structures that are
secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency.
   3.   Multi-family residential structures that have restricted access through
locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units.
   4.   Governmental structures and nursing care facilities.
C.   Permit: All proposed or newly constructed structures subject to this
section shall have an emergency rapid access device installed and operational
prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. All structures subject to this
section in existence on the effective date hereof and subject to this section
shall have one year from the effective date of this section to have an
emergency rapid access device installed and operational. Additionally, all
proposed, newly constructed and/or existing structures subject to this section
shall also provide a turn lane and/or sufficient space to allow vehicles to
exit without backing up if they are unable, for any reason, to gain access
through the emergency rapid access device. All proposed structures subject to
the provisions of this section shall have a minimum distance of fifty feet
(50') from the curb to the emergency rapid access device. The fire chief shall
designate the type of emergency rapid access device to be implemented within
the city and shall have the authority to require all structures subject to this
section to use the designated emergency rapid access device. The fire chief
shall also be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of
emergency rapid access devices including appeals to the city council for
applicants who are unable to comply to the strict terms of this section. An
annual permit for all emergency rapid access devices shall be obtained from the
building inspector. The cost shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00). For
purposes of this section, emergency rapid access devices shall include rapid
access key boxes, switch control devices, security padlocks, and the locks and
keys used in such devices, which shall be UL certified and approved by the fire
chief. All applicants for a permit for emergency rapid access device shall
agree to hold harmless and remise, release and forever discharge the city of
Warr Acres, Oklahoma, its heirs, executors, administrators, mayor, building
code officials, fire chief, firefighters, chief of police and any police
department officers or equipment, council and planning commission members,
elected or appointed officials, officers, employees, agents, representatives
and assigns from any and all manner of action, suits, controversies, damages,
judgments, and demands whatsoever, in law or equity which against them, the
applicant, property owner, heirs, executors, administrators, tenants, visitors,
guests, or lessees have or may have arising out of the installation of an
emergency rapid access device, including, but not limited to, any damage caused
to the emergency rapid access device, or other points of entrance, by members
of the fire department, police department, or any emergency services or any
employees of the city, due to the malfunction of or the inability to open the
emergency rapid access device, and any damages to any property within the
premises where the emergency rapid access device is located and/or any injury,
harm or death to any person(s) or animal(s), caused by any delay of the fire
department, police department, or any emergency service or any employee of the
city to respond to an emergency as a result, directly or indirectly, of the
installation of, malfunction of or the inability to open an emergency rapid
access device.
D.   Fire Lanes: The following provisions shall apply to fire lanes located
within the Warr Acres city limits:
   1.   Fire Lane Markings: Fire lanes shall be designated on all sides by
painted curbs, signs, or stripes, or by a combination of these as approved by
the fire chief or his designee.
   2.   Parking: Parking of motor vehicles in fire lanes or otherwise
obstructing fire lanes shall be prohibited at all times. Exception: Emergency
vehicles during emergency situations or operations.
   3.   Location: Fire lanes and driveways shall be located so that all
buildings served by them are accessible to fire equipment.
   4.   Access During Construction: The contractor or person in charge of any
construction site for commercial, industrial, mercantile, educational,
institutional, assembly, hotel, motel, multi-family dwelling, mobile home park,
or any other commercial occupancy whose structures total more than four
thousand (4,000) square feet shall provide and maintain fire lanes as shown on
approved site plans. Fire lanes shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete or
other alternative preapproved by the fire chief or his designee and sufficient
to support fire apparatus.
Concrete: Thirty (30) ton weight limit required.
Asphalt: Thirty (30) ton weight limit required.
Gravel: Thirty (30) ton weight limit required (minimum 11/4 inch rock, 6 inch
deep with underlay approved by the Warr Acres fire chief's office on a
compacted subgrade).
Fire lanes shall be not less than twenty feet (20') unobstructed width and a
minimum vertical clearance of fourteen feet (14'). Fire lanes shall be in place
prior to any above slab construction or storage of combustible materials on
site.
   5.   Enforcement: The fire department and the police department shall have
the authority to enter property as designated in subsection D2 of this section
to enforce the provisions of this section.
E.   Fine: Any person or persons violating or failing to comply with any of the
requirements of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, if convicted in
municipal court, be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
but not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), to be determined by the
municipal court, plus court costs. Each day such violation is permitted to
exist may constitute a separate offense. The number of days of said separate
offenses shall be determined by the municipal court. It shall not be necessary
for a citation to be issued on each day of the continuing offense after the
initial citation is issued. The owner, or owners, of any structure subject to
the provisions of this section where a violation exists, and any architect,
builder, contractor, individual person, firm or corporation employee in
connection therewith who may assist in the commission of any such violation, is
guilty of a separate offense, and if convicted in municipal court shall be
fined as provided for in this section. (Ord. 1117, 2011)
2.12.515: INSPECTIONS, ENTRY POWERS, CITATION POWERS, INVESTIGATIONS, ACCESS
FOR FIRE APPARATUS, ETC.:
A.   To the full extent permitted by law, any fire official engaged in fire
prevention and inspection work is authorized at all reasonable times to enter
and examine any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle or premises for the
purpose of making fire safety inspections. Before entering a private building
or dwelling, the fire official shall obtain the consent of the owner or
occupant thereof or obtain a warrant authorizing entry for the purpose of
inspection except in those instances where an emergency exists. As used in this
chapter “emergency” means circumstances which the fire official knows, or has
reason to believe, exist and which reasonably may constitute immediate danger
to life and property.
B.   Persons authorized to enter and inspect buildings, structures, marine
vessels, vehicles, and premises as herein set forth shall be identified by
proper credentials issued by the city.
C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a fire official
carrying out any duties or functions authorized by this chapter.
D.   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use an official badge,
uniform or other credentials so as to impersonate a fire official for the
purpose of gaining access to any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle,
or premises in the city.
E.   Any application for, or acceptance of, any permit requested or issued
pursuant to this chapter, constitutes agreement and consent by the person(s)
making the application or accepting the permit to allow the fire chief or his
designee to enter the premises at any reasonable time to conduct such
inspections as required by this chapter.
F.   The fire chief or his designee shall have the authority to investigate the
cause, origin, and circumstances of any fire or explosion involving a loss of
life, injuries to persons or animals, or destruction or damage to property.
When, in the opinion of the fire chief or his designee, reasonable cause exists
that the fire or explosion may have been of incendiary origin, the fire chief
or his designee shall have the authority to take custody of all physical
evidence relating to the cause of the fire or explosion and to continue the
investigation to conclusion. Proprietary information which may relate to trade
secrets or processes shall not be made a part of the public record except as
may be directed by a court of law.
G.   The fire chief or his designee shall have the power and authority to issue
and serve citations in the name of the city of Warr Acres to persons alleged to
be in violation of title 16,
chapter 16.12 of this code in the same manner as authorized for police
officers; provided, however, they shall not have the power of arrest other than
as authorized by law to a private citizen of this state. Any person who fails
to appear before the municipal court in response to a citation issued by the
fire chief or his designee shall be subject to arrest warrant being issued by
the municipal judge. Warrants for arrest so authorized shall be served by the
police department. Additionally, such persons who wilfully fail to appear as
provided in the citation shall be guilty of an offense of failure to appear
which shall be a separate offense from the original charge.
H.   The following provisions shall apply to provide the required access to
fire apparatus:
   1.   All premises which the fire department may be called upon to protect in
case of fire and which are not readily accessible from public roads shall be
provided with suitable gates, access roads, and fire lanes so that all
buildings on the premises are accessible to fire apparatus, in accordance with
all requirements of this chapter.
   2.   Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings which are set back more
than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a public road or exceed thirty feet
(30') in height and are set back over fifty feet (50') from a public road.
   3.   Fire lanes shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width with the road
edge closest to the building at least ten feet (10') from the building. All
dead end roads shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed end at least
ninety feet (90') in diameter.
   4.   A written document, submitted to the fire chief or his designee, shall
be required for emergency access over all fire lanes.
   5.   The designation and maintenance of fire lanes on private property shall
be accomplished as specified by the fire chief or his designee.
   6.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park motor vehicles on, or
otherwise obstruct, any fire lane.
   7.   Exception: When any combination of private fire protection facilities,
including, but not limited to, fire resistant roofs, fire separation walls,
space separation and automatic fire extinguishing systems, are provided, the
fire chief or his designee may approve such private facilities as an acceptable
alternative to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1137, 2014)
2.12.520: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), to be determined by the
municipal court, plus court costs. (Ord. 1000 §1, 2004: Ord. 886 §1, 1999)
CHAPTER 2.16
POLICE DEPARTMENT 1
SECTION:
2.16.010: Created; Control And Supervision
2.16.020: Department Property; General Powers And Authority Of Chief Of Police
2.16.030: Chief Officer
2.16.040: Control Of Department
2.16.050: Police Chief Qualifications
2.16.060: Bond; Police Chief And Certain Employees
2.16.070: Organization Of Department
2.16.080: Appointment Of Officers, Investigators And Employees
2.16.090: Selection Of Command Officers
2.16.100: Probationary Period
2.16.110: Qualifications For Officers
2.16.120: Training For Department Members
2.16.130: Traveling Expenses; Furnish Motor Vehicles And Equipment
2.16.135: Custody And Possession Of Certain Duty Equipment At Retirement
2.16.140: Administration And Enforcement Authority
2.16.150: Rules And Regulations
2.16.160: Police Chief Representative
2.16.180: Police Officer Powers
2.16.190: Duties Of The Police Department; Mutual Aid Assistance
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 9-114, 34-101 et seq.
2.16.010: CREATED; CONTROL AND SUPERVISION:
There is created within the government of the city a department to be known as
the police department, and offices shall be furnished by the city. The
department shall be under the control and supervision of the chief of police,
which office and position is created. (Ord. 368, 1974)
2.16.020: DEPARTMENT PROPERTY; GENERAL POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
The department shall have possession and control of all records, books, papers,
offices, equipment, automobiles, and all other property now or hereafter held
for or by the police department. The chief of police shall have and possess
such other, further and additional power and authority as may be granted in
this chapter or as may otherwise be provided by law. (Ord. 368(1), 1974)
2.16.030: CHIEF OFFICER:
The mayor shall be the chief officer of the department and the chief of police
shall execute the lawful orders of the mayor and shall be responsible to him
for the operation and administration of the department. (Ord. 368(2), 1974)
2.16.040: CONTROL OF DEPARTMENT:
The police department shall be under the control of an executive officer to be
known as the chief of police, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 368 §1(a), 1974)
2.16.050: POLICE CHIEF QUALIFICATIONS:
The appointment to the position of chief of police shall be based on
qualifications of at least five (5) years of command experience; and, further,
on the previous record as a member of a police department or law enforcement
body or agency, length of service and efficiency of the services performed.
(Ord. 455 §1, 1977)
2.16.060: BOND; POLICE CHIEF AND CERTAIN EMPLOYEES:
The chief of police, after his appointment and before entering upon the
discharge of his duties, shall execute a bond to the city, which bond shall be
furnished by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. Such bond
shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of duty as is now required by
other public officials and shall be the sum of not less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00). He shall take and subscribe to the oath of office
required by the constitution. The chief of police may require any assistant or
other employee of the police department to furnish bond in like manner in the
amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), where such assistant or
employee has charge of any public funds or property belonging to the city. The
premium on bonds required by this chapter shall be paid from the funds
hereinafter appropriated for the support and maintenance of the police
department. (Ord. 368 §1(c), 1974)
2.16.070: ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT:
The chief of police shall organize the department in such a manner as may deem
necessarily proper to conduct the work of the department, including the
modifying of the basic code of conduct as the need does arise. (Ord. 384 §1,
1975: Ord. 368 §2, 1974)
2.16.080: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS, INVESTIGATORS AND EMPLOYEES:
The chief of police, subject to the merit system rules and conditions set forth
in this chapter, shall appoint such subordinates, officers, investigators, and
other employees as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter, not exceeding the number established by the council. (Ord. 368 §3,
1974)
2.16.090: SELECTION OF COMMAND OFFICERS:
The chief of police shall appoint subordinate command officers, such as
assistant chief, majors, captains, lieutenants and sergeants. (Ord. 1005 §1,
2005: Ord. 603 §1, 1985: Ord. 368 §4(a), 1974)
2.16.100: PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
Probationary officers, when first appointed, shall be required to serve a
probationary period of one year. During such probationary period, their
services may be terminated at any time and for any reason in the discretion of
the chief of police. Retention in the service after the expiration of the
probationary period of one year shall entitle such officer to be classified as
a permanent employee and he shall be so except as set out in charter or
ordinance. (Ord. 516 §1, 1981)
2.16.110: QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICERS:
No person shall be appointed as policeman in the city unless at the time of his
or her appointment he or she is in good physical condition and of good moral
character, not less than twenty one (21) years of age and possesses a high
school education or the equivalent evidenced by a GED test. (Ord. 384 §2, 1975:
Ord. 368 §4(c), 1974)
2.16.120: TRAINING FOR DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
The chief of police is authorized to send members of the police department to
such schools as Oklahoma University, Oklahoma State University, the National
Police Academy conducted by the federal bureau of investigation and to other
schools of similar training which would be conducive to improving the
efficiency of the police department. (Ord. 368 §4(d), 1974)
2.16.130: TRAVELING EXPENSES; FURNISH MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT:
In addition to the salaries or wages of the chief of police or other employees
of the police department when deemed necessary in connection with the discharge
of their duties respectively assigned or delegated to them, the chief of police
or other employees shall be allowed and paid their actual necessary traveling
expenses incurred in the discharge of their respective duties while outside the
city. Such shall be paid from the same fund and in the same manner as other
salaries after the filing of proper claims as approved by the city council. The
chief of police shall be and he is authorized and empowered to furnish motor
vehicles and other equipment for use while on such assigned or delegated
duties. (Ord. 368 §5, 1974)
2.16.135: CUSTODY AND POSSESSION OF CERTAIN DUTY EQUIPMENT AT RETIREMENT:
A.   An officer or employee of the police department shall be entitled to
receive, upon retirement by reason of length of service, the continued custody
and possession of the collar brass and badge carried by such officer or
employee immediately prior to retirement with said items being declared surplus
and nonusable by the city council.
B.   An officer or employee of the police department may be entitled to
receive, upon retirement by reason of disability, the continued custody and
possession of the collar brass and badge carried by such officer or employee
immediately prior to retirement upon written approval of the chief of police
with said items being declared surplus and nonusable by the city council.
C.   Custody and possession of the collar brass and badge of an officer or
employee of the police department killed in the line of duty may be awarded to
the spouse or next of kin by the chief of police with said items being declared
surplus and nonusable by the city council.
D.   In the event that the police department issues new badges, the chief of
police may allow officers or employees of the police department and officials
or employees of the city to possess old badges, for display purposes only, in
accordance with title 11, section 11-116 of the Oklahoma state statutes with
said items being declared surplus and nonusable by the city council. Such
officers, officials or employees shall pay the costs of having said badges
mounted for display.
E.   An officer or employee of the police department shall be entitled to
receive, upon retirement in good standing after twenty (20) or more years of
full time service to the city of Warr Acres police department as a certified
law enforcement officer the continued custody and possession of his/her duty
weapon carried by such officer or employee immediately prior to retirement upon
written approval of the chief of police with said items being declared surplus
and nonusable by the city council. (Ord. 1106, 2011)
2.16.140: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The chief of police is vested with the power and is charged with the duty of
observing, administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all
other ordinances or laws of the city, the enforcement and administration of
which is now or hereafter vested in the police department. (Ord. 368 §6(a),
1974)
2.16.150: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police is authorized to adopt and enforce such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and
any other laws the enforcement of and administration of which are vested in the
police department. (Ord. 368 §6(b), 1974)
2.16.160: POLICE CHIEF REPRESENTATIVE:
The chief of police may in his discretion appoint any employee of the police
department as his representative to affix his signature to administrative
letters, notices and orders to enforce the provisions of the law, and authorize
such employee to affix the facsimile signature of the chief of police adopted
by him as a facsimile signature, provided however, it is unlawful and shall
constitute the crime of forgery to affix or endorse the facsimile signature of
the chief of police, as provided in this section, to any instrument, voucher,
check, claim or draft for the payment of money due and owing to the city. (Ord.
368 §6(c), 1974)
2.16.180: POLICE OFFICER POWERS:
A.   The chief of police and all other salaried, commissioned officers or
reserve officers of the police department shall have the power:
   1.   Of peace officers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter and all others the enforcement of which is vested in the police
department;
   2.   The salaried officers of the police department shall have the powers
now or hereafter vested by law in peace officers except the serving of civil
process. The salaried, commissioned officers shall have the authority to arrest
without writ, rule, order or process any person in the city detected by them in
the act of violating any law of the city or the state;
   3.   To assist in the location of stolen property, including livestock and
poultry or the carcasses thereof, and to make necessary inspection of any
vehicle or contents thereof in connection therewith notwithstanding the
provisions of law. The powers and duties conferred in this section shall in no
way be a limitation on the powers and duties of sheriffs or other peace
officers of the state;
   4.   At all times to direct all traffic in conformance with law and, in the
event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to ensure
safety, to direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of law. Any policeman shall have authority, and it shall be his
duty, to require satisfactory proof of identification of any person suspected
of violation of any law or to require satisfactory proof of ownership of any
motor vehicle suspected of being used in any crime in the city or the state;
   5.   When on duty, upon reasonable belief that any vehicle is being operated
in violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city or the state, to
require the driver to stop and exhibit his driver's license, and to take such
action as is required by the ordinances and the policies of the police
department;
   6.   To inspect any vehicle of a type required to be registered in the state
in any public garage or repair shop in the city or any used or new car lot in
this city, for the purpose of locating stolen vehicles or hit and run vehicles
or those vehicles used in the commission of crime;
   7.   To serve all warrants relating to the enforcement of the laws and
ordinances of the city relating to the operation of vehicles or the use of
streets, and the compliance of the ordinances of the city or warrants given to
the police by state, county, or federal authority;
   8.   To investigate all accidents occurring upon the public streets and
property in the city, and upon private property when requested to do so, and to
secure the testimony of witnesses or of persons involved;
   9.   To investigate all thefts, burglaries, suicides and attempted suicides
or any crime committed within the city limits.
B.   The chief of police shall require that the officers of the police
department patrol the streets of the city and cooperate with sheriffs and
police officers of other departments in enforcing the laws of the state and the
United States.
C.   All members of the police department enforcement division when on duty
shall be dressed in distinctive uniform and display a badge of office, except
those assigned to special duty by the chief of police.
D.   The chief of police shall issue to each officer mentioned in subsection C
of this section a badge of authority with the seal of the state in the center
thereof with the words "Warr Acres Police" on the face thereof. Neither the
chief of police or any other person shall issue any such badge to any person
who is not a duly appointed and acting member of the police department or
reserve police.
E.   The chief of police shall require that the contents of this chapter are
available to each member of such police department and shall require that such
policemen follow such guide and such orders or code of conduct that is now or
hereafter may be adopted.
F.   No city official or any other person shall have the power, right, or
authority to command, order, or direct any policeman to perform any duty or
service contrary to the provisions of this chapter or the basic code of conduct
of the police department. (Ord. 368 §6(e), 1974)
2.16.190: DUTIES OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT; MUTUAL AID ASSISTANCE:
It shall be the duty of the police chief and all police officers to enforce all
ordinances and applicable laws throughout the city, under the direction of the
mayor or his designee. The mayor or his designee and chief of police or his
designee are hereby authorized to respond to mutual aid calls under emergency
conditions on behalf of other law enforcement agencies including
municipalities, counties, the state of Oklahoma, or a federal law enforcement
agency, upon request of said agency and under such regulations and conditions
as may be established by the mayor or his designee. (Ord. 790 §1, 1996)
CHAPTER 2.20
CITY HALL OPERATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 1038 §1, 2007)
CHAPTER 2.24
MUNICIPAL CRIMINAL COURT 1
SECTION:
2.24.010: Organization And Operation
2.24.020: Definitions
2.24.030: Original Jurisdiction
2.24.040: Judge; Alternate Judges
2.24.050: Terms Of Judges; Acting Judges
2.24.060: Appointment Of Judges
2.24.070: Salary Of Judge
2.24.080: Removal Procedure Of Judges
2.24.090: Vacancy; Successor Judges
2.24.100: Change Of Venue Prohibited
2.24.110: Principal Officer Of The Court
2.24.120: Clerk Of The Court
2.24.130: Prosecuting Officer
2.24.140: Bond; Clerk Of The Court
2.24.150: Conduct Of The Business Of The Court
2.24.160: Enforcement Of Court Orders, Rules And Judgments
2.24.170: Written Complaint
2.24.180: Citations, Arrests, Bail
2.24.181: Failure To Appear
2.24.190: Traffic Citations
2.24.200: Release On Bail
2.24.210: Arraignment
2.24.220: Misdemeanor Trial Procedure
2.24.230: Defendant To Be Present
2.24.240: Failure To Appear According To Terms Of Bond
2.24.250: Jury Trials
2.24.260: Waiver Of Jury Trial
2.24.270: Selection And Request For Jurors
2.24.280: Summons Of Jurors
2.24.290: Duties Of Jurors
2.24.300: Duties Of The Judge
2.24.310: Verdict Of Jury
2.24.320: Verdict Requirements
2.24.330: Discharge Of Jury
2.24.340: Compensation Of Jurors
2.24.350: Witness Fees And Mileage
2.24.360: Court Costs
2.24.370: Acquittal
2.24.380: Judgment
2.24.390: Suspension Of Judgment
2.24.400: Supervision Of Juveniles
2.24.410: Deferral Of Sentence
2.24.420: Appeals
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS ch. 15, § 958.1 et seq.
2.24.010: ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION:
This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal
criminal court of the city, as put into operation by a resolution duly passed
on January 7, 1969, and filed in accordance with law, as authorized by title
11, Oklahoma Statutes, section 958.1 and 958.2. To the extent of conflict
between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other
ordinance of this city, the provisions of this chapter shall control. The court
shall be operative on and after January 13, 1969. (Ord. 285 §1, 1969)
2.24.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words are defined as follows:
ATTORNEY FOR THIS MUNICIPALITY: The city attorney.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The peace officer in charge of the police force of the
municipality.
CLERK: The clerk of this municipality, including any deputy or member of the
office staff of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office.
COURT: The municipal criminal court of the city.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council.
JUDGE: The judge of the municipal criminal court aforesaid, including any
acting judge or alternate judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this
state and this chapter.
THIS JUDICIAL DISTRICT: The district court judicial district of the state
wherein the government of this municipality is situated. (Ord. 285 §2, 1969)
2.24.030: ORIGINAL JURISDICTION:
The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear, and determine all
prosecutions wherein a violation of any ordinance of this municipality is
charged, including any such prosecutions transferred to the court in accordance
with applicable law. (Ord. 285 §3, 1969)
2.24.040: JUDGE; ALTERNATE JUDGES:
A.   There shall be a judge of the court. The judge must be duly licensed to
practice law in the state. He may engage in the practice of law in other
courts, but he shall not accept employment inconsistent with his duties as
judge, or arising out of facts which give rise to or are connected with cases
within the jurisdiction of the court, pending therein or which might become the
subject of proceedings therein. He need not reside within the municipality.
B.   There shall be appointed for the judge a first alternate judge and a
second alternate judge, possessed of the same term and made in the same manner
as the judge. Either a first alternate or a second alternate judge shall sit as
acting judge of the court in any case if the judge is absent from court, unable
to act as judge, or disqualified from acting as judge in the case. (Ord. 285
§4, 1969)
2.24.050: TERMS OF JUDGES; ACTING JUDGES:
The official term of the judge shall be two (2) years, expiring on June 30 in
each even numbered year. The first alternate judge and the second alternate
judge shall serve a like term. The judge and alternate judge, unless sooner
removed for proper cause, shall serve until his successor is appointed and
qualified. If, at any time, there is no judge or alternate judge, duly
appointed and qualified, available to sit as judge, the mayor shall appoint
some person possessing the qualifications required by this chapter as judge,
who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending
matters until such time as a judge or alternate judge is available. (Ord. 285
§1, 1970: Ord. 285 §5, 1969)
2.24.060: APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES:
The judge and alternate judges shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
consent of the governing body, provided that the judge of the municipal court
existing in this municipality at the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter shall act as judge of the court provided in this chapter until
a judge is appointed and qualified under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 285
§6, 1969)
2.24.070: SALARY OF JUDGE:
The judge of the municipal court shall receive a salary in an amount to be
fixed by the city council monthly, paid in the same manner as the salaries of
other officials of this municipality. (Ord. 285 §7, 1969)
2.24.080: REMOVAL PROCEDURE OF JUDGES:
The judge or alternate judges of the municipal criminal court shall be subject
to removal from office, by the governing body, for the causes prescribed by the
constitution and laws of this state for the removal of public officers.
Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a verified written
petition, setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or more legal
grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by the mayor or twenty
five (25) or more qualified electors of this municipality; in the latter event,
verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners. The governing
body shall set a date for hearing the matter, and shall cause notice thereof,
together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally upon the judge at
least ten (10) days before the hearing. At the hearing, the judge shall be
entitled to representation by counsel, to present testimony and to cross
examine the witnesses against him, and to have all evidence against him
presented in open hearing. So far as they can be made applicable, the
provisions of the Oklahoma administrative procedure act governing individual
proceedings 1  shall govern removal proceedings hereunder. Judgment of removal
shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of
the governing body, in favor or such removal. (Ord. 285 §8, 1969)
 
Notes
1 1. OS title 75, §§ 309–317.
2.24.090: VACANCY; SUCCESSOR JUDGES:
A.   A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent:
   1.   Dies;
   2.   Resigns;
   3.   Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or
   4.   Is removed, and the removal proceedings have been affirmed finally in
judicial proceedings or are no longer subject to judicial review.
B.   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor shall
appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term, upon the same procedure as
an original appointment is made. (Ord. 285 §9, 1969)
2.24.100: CHANGE OF VENUE PROHIBITED:
In prosecutions before the court, no change of venue shall be allowed; but the
judge may certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting
under the terms, conditions and procedure provided by law for courts of record.
If a judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an alternate or acting
judge. (Ord. 285 §10, 1969)
2.24.110: PRINCIPAL OFFICER OF THE COURT:
All writs or processes, which may be issued by the judge or the clerk of the
court, shall be directed, in his official title, to the chief of police of this
municipality, who shall be the principal officer of the court. He shall execute
all such writs or processes, provided, that such duties of service may also be
performed by any member of the police force of the city. (Ord. 526 §1, 1982)
2.24.120: CLERK OF THE COURT:
The clerk, or a deputy designated by him, shall be the clerk of the court. He
shall assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in
preparing writs, processes and other papers. He shall administer oaths required
in proceedings before the court. He shall enter all pleadings, processes, and
proceedings in the dockets of the court. He shall perform such other clerical
duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct. He
shall receive and receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of money
payable to the court. He shall pay to the treasurer of this municipality, on
the first and fifteenth day of each month, all money so received by him, except
such special deposits or fees as shall be received to be disbursed by him for
special purposes. All money paid to the treasurer shall be placed in the
general fund of the municipality or in such other fund as the governing body
may direct, and it shall be used in the operation of the municipal government
in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which it is
placed. (Ord. 285 §12, 1969)
2.24.130: PROSECUTING OFFICER:
The attorney for this municipality shall be the prosecuting officer of the
court. He shall prosecute all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city.
He shall be authorized, in his discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals,
proceedings in error and to review from this court to any other courts of the
state, and to represent this municipality in all proceedings arising out of
matters in this court. (Ord. 285 §13, 1969)
2.24.140: BOND; CLERK OF THE COURT:
The clerk of the court shall give bond, in the form provided by title 11 of the
Oklahoma Statutes, 1968 supplement, section 958.18, in a sum to be set by the
governing body and the bond shall be submitted to the governing body for
approval. (Ord. 285 §14, 1969)
2.24.150: CONDUCT OF THE BUSINESS OF THE COURT:
The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with
the ordinances of this municipality, for the proper conduct of the business of
the court. (Ord. 285 §15, 1969)
2.24.160: ENFORCEMENT OF COURT ORDERS, RULES AND JUDGMENTS:
Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the court
may be enforced by the judge, who may fine or imprison for contempt committed
as to him while holding court, or committed against process issued by him, in
the same manner and to the same extent as the district courts of this state.
(Ord. 285 §16, 1969)
2.24.170: WRITTEN COMPLAINT:
A.   All prosecution for violations of the ordinances of the municipality shall
be styled "The City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma vs. (naming defendant or
defendants)". Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, prosecutions shall
be initiated by the filing of a written complaint which shall be subscribed by
the person making the complaint and verified before a judge, court clerk, a
deputy court clerk or a police officer.
B.   No arrest warrant for a defendant or defendants charged in the complaint
filed shall be issued until the complaint has been approved by the city
attorney or the judge of the municipal court; or in the alternative, until a
hearing shall be had before the judge who shall issue the warrant for arrest
upon the finding of probable cause that an offense has been committed and that
the person or persons charged committed the offense. (Ord. 526 §2, 1982)
2.24.180: CITATIONS, ARRESTS, BAIL:
A.   If a police officer, or other person charged with the enforcement of the
ordinances of the city, including the building inspector, observes facts which
he believes constitute violation of an ordinance of this municipality, traffic
or nontraffic, committed by a resident thereof, in lieu of arresting such
person and requiring bail as provided in subsection B of this section, he may
take his name and address and other pertinent and necessary information and may
issue to him, in writing and in the form prescribed by the police department or
other department of the city, a citation embracing the required information,
and further stating the offense alleged to have occurred and notifying him to
answer to the charge in the court at a time as specified in the citation. The
officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator, endorsed
by such person signing the citation, to answer as specified, shall release the
person from custody. If the person to whom the citation is issued fails to
answer as prescribed in the citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest
and his appearance compelled.
B.   Whenever a resident of this municipality is arrested for the violation of
any ordinance and is not released by being allowed to sign a citation as
hereinabove provided, he shall be admitted to bail or released on his own
recognizance.
C.   Whenever a nonresident of this municipality is arrested for a violation,
other than traffic violation by a law enforcement officer, the defendant shall
be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment.
D.   If the alleged traffic violation is committed by a nonresident of this
municipality, the police officer shall take him into custody under arrest. The
arrested person either shall be taken before the judge for further proceedings
according to law or may be released upon the compliance with any of the
following bonding procedures:
   1.   Posting a cash bail in an amount and in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter; or
   2.   Depositing with the arresting officer an approved guaranteed arrest
bond certificate; or
   3.   Depositing with the arresting officer such person's valid license to
operate a motor vehicle in exchange for a receipt therefor issued by the
arresting officer. Such receipt shall be recognized as a temporary operator's
license and shall authorize the holder thereof to operate a motor vehicle until
the date of his hearing, but not to exceed twenty (20) days. The arresting
officer shall without undue delay deliver the license into the custody of the
court clerk.
Upon providing such required bail, the issuance of a citation, and upon giving
his written promise to appear on the date certain, as provided in subsection A
of this section, the arrested person shall be released from custody.
E.   In the event the offense charged is one which the maximum penalty is more
than thirty five dollars ($35.00) or for which the person arrested is entitled
to a jury trial, such arrested person shall not be permitted bail by posting a
valid driver's license but shall be required to post bail bond as provided in
section
2.24.200 of this chapter. (Ord. 641 §1, 1986)
2.24.181: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
The arresting officer shall indicate on the citation the date of trial, and the
defendant must appear in person or by counsel at the stated time and place. If
the defendant fails to appear in court in person or by counsel to answer the
charge against him, or fails to arrange for a future appearance, the cash bail,
if cash bail has been deposited by the defendant, shall be forfeited. If a
guaranteed arrest bond certificate has been deposited, the bond shall be
forfeited and proceedings to collect the sum involved shall be commenced by the
city attorney. If a license to operate a motor vehicle has been deposited, the
court clerk shall immediately forward to the department of public safety the
driver's license attached to an official notification form furnished by the
department of public safety, advising that the defendant failed to appear and
requesting suspension of the defendant's driver's license pursuant to state
law. If bail has been forfeited, the court may, upon motion of the city
attorney or upon its own motion, issue a bench warrant. (Ord. 480 §2, 1978)
2.24.190: TRAFFIC CITATIONS:
Persons who are cited for violation of one of the traffic regulatory ordinances
of this municipality may elect to pay a fine in the minor violations bureau of
the city in lieu of appearance before the municipal criminal court and such
payment shall constitute a final determination of the cause against the
defendant. The governing body of this municipality shall by resolution
prescribe a schedule of fines to be paid as set out in this section. (Ord. 285
§19, 1969)
2.24.200: RELEASE ON BAIL:
Upon arrest, or upon appearance without arrest in response to citation or
summons, or at any other time before trial, before or after arraignment, the
defendant shall be eligible to be released upon giving bail for his appearance
in an amount and upon conditions fixed by the judge, who shall prescribe
appropriate rules of court for the receipt of bail. In case of arrests made at
night or under other conditions of emergency or when the judge is not
available, the rules shall authorize the chief of police, or his designated
representative, to accept a temporary cash bond, not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than the maximum monetary penalty provided by ordinance for
such offense charged. (Ord. 285 §20, 1969)
2.24.210: ARRAIGNMENT:
Upon making an appearance before the court, the defendant shall be arraigned.
The judge, the attorney of the municipality, or the court clerk, shall read the
complaint to the defendant, inform the person of their legal rights, including
the right of trial by jury, if available, and of the consequences of
conviction, and ask the defendant whether they plead guilty or not guilty. Upon
entering a plea, the judge, the attorney of the municipality, or the court
clerk, shall take the following action:
A.   If the defendant pleads guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and
sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition.
B.   If the plea is not guilty, then the court may proceed to try the case, if
the officer is present for trial, and the defendant is prepared, or may set it
for hearing at a later date if the officer is not present or the defendant is
not prepared for trial.
C.   In the event that the defendant pleads not guilty, the court shall impose
a bond in the maximum amount of the fine that the court may impose. (Ord. 919
§1, 2000)
2.24.220: MISDEMEANOR TRIAL PROCEDURE:
In all trials, as to matters not covered in this chapter, or by the statutes
relating to municipal criminal courts, or by rules duly promulgated by the
supreme court of Oklahoma, the procedures applicable in trials of misdemeanors
in the district courts shall apply to the extent. Provided, the municipal
judges may take judicial notice of all state statutes and the ordinances of the
city of Warr Acres. (Ord. 526 §4, 1982)
2.24.230: DEFENDANT TO BE PRESENT:
Unless excused by the court, the defendant must be present in person at the
trial of his cause or at any other hearing or proceeding as the court may
direct. (Ord. 526 §5, 1982)
2.24.240: FAILURE TO APPEAR ACCORDING TO TERMS OF BOND:
A.   If without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the
terms or conditions of his bond, either for hearing, arraignment, trial or
judgment, or upon any other occasion when his presence in court or before the
judge may be lawfully required, the judge may direct that fact to be entered
upon the court minutes, thereby declaring the bond to be forfeited. Court costs
shall be collectible from the proceeds of the bond.
B.   At the discretion of the judge, he may direct that such forfeiture be
certified to the district court of Oklahoma County to be entered on the
judgment docket as provided in title 11, section 27-118 of the Oklahoma
Statutes.
C.   Such failure to appear shall constitute grounds for the court to exercise
its powers of contempt where no cash bond is available to satisfy any judgment
of the court. (Ord. 526 §5, 1982)
2.24.250: JURY TRIALS:
In all prosecutions in the municipal court for any offense punishable by a fine
of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), excluding court costs, or by
imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment, a jury trial shall be had
unless waived by both the defendant and the city of Warr Acres. In prosecutions
for all other offenses, or the cause wherein a jury trial is waived, the trial
of the cause shall be to the court. All jury trials shall be set at the time of
arraignment. (Ord. 1020 §1, 2006: Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.260: WAIVER OF JURY TRIAL:
The jury trial waiver as provided herein shall be in writing and may be signed
at any time before trial. It shall become a part of the record and shall be
substantially as follows:
   CITY OF WARR ACRES, OKLAHOMA
   vs.      Case #      
   (name of defendant or defendants)
   WAIVER OF JURY TRIAL
I,                          , hereby acknowledge that I am the defendant in the
above styled action; that the potential penalty upon conviction for the offense
charged is a fine in excess of Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment,
or both, and I understand that I am thereby entitled to a jury trial in this
matter.
After being fully advised of the nature of the charges, the potential penalty
and my rights, I hereby voluntarily waive my rights to trial by jury reserving
all other rights to which I am entitled.
               
      DEFENDANT
The City of Warr Acres hereby waives its right to trial by jury in this cause.
               
      FOR THE CITY OF WARR ACRES
The city attorney, municipal court clerk or the municipal judge may, in their
discretion, waive a jury trial on behalf of the city. Provided, if a jury trial
is waived by the defendant at any time after jurors are requested by the judge,
any cost accrued shall be assessed against the defendant. (Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.270: SELECTION AND REQUEST FOR JURORS:
A.   The municipal judge shall by court rule provide for jury terms and the
scheduling of cases for jury trial.
B.   Whenever a calendar has been made up for the trial of cases by jury, the
judge of the municipal court shall timely request, in writing, the chief judge
of Oklahoma County to cause the names of a stated number of jurors, deemed
sufficient to dispose of the cases on the calendar, to be drawn from the jury
in accordance with the governing statutes of the state, and to be certified by
the clerk of the district court to the judge of the municipal court.
C.   If after statutory exceptions are allowed, the listed number is found to
be insufficient, the judge of the municipal court shall make additional
requests for qualified jurors in the same manner as herein provided.
D.   Requests for exemption or release from jury duty shall be directed to the
municipal judge and may only be granted by the judge. (Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.280: SUMMONS OF JURORS:
A.   Upon receipt of the jury list, the clerk of the court shall cause a
summons substantially in the following form to be issued and served upon each
person on the certified list:
   SUMMONS
      CITY OF WARR ACRES   )
         )
      STATE OF OKLAHOMA   )
      TO: (name and address of juror)
You are hereby summoned to appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Warr
Acres to be held at 5930 NW 49th Street, Warr Acres, Oklahoma on the        day
of                 , 200, at the hour of                     , to serve as a
juror in said court, and to continue in such service until discharged by the
Court. Failure to appear is a violation of the municipal ordinances punishable
by a fine not to exceed Thirty-Five Dollars ($35.00) for each day of non-
appearance.
HEREOF fail not under penalty of the law.
ISSUED under authority of said court this          day of               , 200.
                                                
         MUNICIPAL JUDGE
SERVED this          day of                 , 200  , by                        
     
B.   Service of such summons shall be as the judge may prescribe by rule or
direct by order, either in person upon the juror by the chief of police, or by
any member of the police force of the city, or by the clerk of the court
through registered or certified mail directed to the juror at the address as
shown on the jury list with a request for a personally signed returned receipt.
In any proceeding wherein service of summons by mail is an issue, evidence of
mailing of the summons and official postal return shall be prima facie evidence
that the summons was received by the juror and therefore properly served. (Ord.
965 §1, 2002)
2.24.290: DUTIES OF JURORS:
After jurors are sworn they must sit together and hear the proofs and oral
arguments of the parties, which must be delivered in public and in the presence
of the defendant. (Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.300: DUTIES OF THE JUDGE:
In all actions tried before a jury, the judge shall determine all questions of
law including introduction of evidence. He shall also instruct the jury as to
the law. (Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.310: VERDICT OF JURY:
A verdict of the jury may be rendered by the concurring vote of five (5) of the
six (6) jurors. (Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.320: VERDICT REQUIREMENTS:
The verdict of the jury, in all cases must be general. When the jury has
arrived at its verdict, it shall deliver the verdict publicly to the court. The
judge must enter the verdict in the docket or cause it to be so entered. (Ord.
965 §1, 2002)
2.24.330: DISCHARGE OF JURY:
Once impaneled and sworn, the jury must not be discharged until a verdict is
rendered, unless the judge, for good cause, discharges it sooner, in which
event the court may proceed again to trial and so on until a verdict is
rendered. (Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.340: COMPENSATION OF JURORS:
Jurors shall receive for their services the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per
day plus mileage at the rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per mile for necessary
mileage as determined by the most direct route from their residence. Claims for
their expenses shall show the method of computation of the expenses and shall
be verified as other claims against the city. Such claims may be paid out of
the general funds of the city. (Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.350: WITNESS FEES AND MILEAGE:
Witnesses required to testify on behalf of the city may be compensated, if
requested in writing in advance of the trial, in the sum of ten dollars
($10.00) for attendance and mileage, as for jurors. Claims shall be submitted
for payment as claims for jurors; provided, this section shall not apply to any
police officer or peace officer. (Ord. 965 §1, 2002)
2.24.360: COURT COSTS:
When a person enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, pays a fine, or is
convicted of a violation of any ordinance of the city, the court clerk shall
assess costs of prosecution to the defendant in a sum not to exceed thirty
dollars ($30.00) plus the fees and mileage of witnesses. Such costs shall be in
addition to any fine or other penalty which may be imposed. (Ord. 1075 §1,
2009)
2.24.370: ACQUITTAL:
If judgment of acquittal is rendered and the defendant is not to be detained
for any other legal cause, he shall be discharged at once. (Ord. 526 §5, 1982)
2.24.380: JUDGMENT:
A.   If, after conviction, judgment of imprisonment is entered, a copy thereof,
certified by the clerk, shall be delivered to the chief of police or other
appropriate sheriff or police officer. Such copy shall be sufficient warrant
for execution of the judgment.
B.   If a defendant, who is financially able, refuses or neglects to pay a fine
or costs or both, payment may be enforced by imprisonment until the same is
satisfied at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per day. If the defendant is
without means to pay the fine or costs, the judge may direct the total amount
to be entered on the court minutes and thereafter certified to the district
court to be entered on the judgment docket as herein authorized.
C.   All prisoners confined to jail on conviction or on plea of guilty may be
compelled, if their health permits, to work on the public streets, avenues,
alleys, parks, buildings or other public premises or property. For each day of
such work, the prisoner shall be credited five dollars ($5.00) toward any fine
or costs or witness or juror fees or mileage until same are satisfied.
D.   The chief of police, subject to the direction of the mayor, shall direct
where the work shall be performed. The head of the department in charge of the
place where the work is to be performed, himself or by some person designated
by him, shall oversee the work. If a guard is necessary, the chief of police
shall make provision therefor. (Ord. 526 §5, 1982)
2.24.390: SUSPENSION OF JUDGMENT:
Whenever any person shall be convicted, or upon a plea of guilty and sentence,
the judge may suspend the sentence imposed, or any part thereof, upon such
terms as the court shall direct, and subject to the provisions imposed by
section 27-123 of title 11, Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 526 §5, 1982)
2.24.400: SUPERVISION OF JUVENILES:
The judge, in addition to other duties, shall provide for the supervision of
all juveniles who are placed on probation or under suspended sentences which
the court shall pronounce. (Ord. 526 §5, 1982)
2.24.410: DEFERRAL OF SENTENCE:
Upon entering judgment against the defendant, the court may defer sentencing,
upon such terms or conditions as the judge may specify, for a period not to
exceed six (6) months. Upon such deferral, an administration fee not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be imposed as costs in addition to the court
costs. (Ord. 686 §2, 1989: Ord. 526 §5, 1982)
2.24.420: APPEALS:
Appeals from the municipal court shall be had in accordance with the procedure
established by state law therefor, and the municipal judge shall take care that
upon the filing of a proper appeal all necessary documents shall be timely
forwarded to the clerk of the district court of Oklahoma County. (Ord. 526 §5,
1982)
CHAPTER 2.25
JUVENILE OFFENDERS
SECTION:
2.25.010: Jurisdiction
2.25.020: Custody And Detention
2.25.030: Penalties
2.25.040: Confidentiality Of Records
2.25.050: Funds From Fines
2.25.060: Failure Of Parent/Guardian/Custodian Of Juvenile To Appear
2.25.070: Juvenile Proceedings; Privacy
2.25.080: Citation Issued To Juveniles
2.25.090: Traffic Offenses
2.25.010: JURISDICTION:
The municipal court of the city of Warr Acres may elect to exercise original
jurisdiction to hear and determine certain offenses committed by those persons
under the age of eighteen (18) years and penalize those juveniles found guilty,
all as authorized by 10 Oklahoma Statutes, section 7303-1.1. (Ord. 938 §1,
2001)
2.25.020: CUSTODY AND DETENTION:
A child under the age of eighteen (18) years who is taken into custody for the
alleged violation of a municipal ordinance relating to the following offenses:
a) vandalism; b) larceny; c) trespassing; d) assault; e) battery; f) assault
and battery; g) truancy; h) curfew violations; i) possession of nonintoxication
beverage; j) possession of alcoholic beverages; k) disorderly conduct; l)
public intoxication; m) possession of firearms; n) possession of tobacco
products; o) possession of marijuana; p) possession of drug paraphernalia, and
any other ordinances as provided in 10 Oklahoma Statutes section 7303-1.2 as
amended; may be temporarily detained by the city in a certified municipal
juvenile facility under the following conditions:
A.   The municipality shall immediately take all reasonable steps to attempt to
locate the child's parent, legal guardian, legal custodian, or attorney, and
determine if said parent, legal guardian, legal custodian, or attorney is
willing to appear at the municipal juvenile facility and assume personal
custody of the child upon the child's release from such facility.
B.   The child shall be released to the personal custody of his or her parent,
legal guardian, legal custodian, or attorney as soon as practicable, and upon
the written promise of such parent, legal guardian, legal custodian, or
attorney to return the child to municipal court to answer the municipal charges
on the date and at the time set by the municipal court.
C.   The child shall be detained in the municipal juvenile facility for no
longer than twenty four (24) hours; provided, if no parent, legal guardian,
legal custodian, or attorney appears at the municipal juvenile facility and
assumes personal custody of the child within said twenty four (24) hour period,
then custody or release of the child shall be determined pursuant to the
provisions of 10 Oklahoma Statutes, section 7303-1.1.
D.   The child shall not be held in any jail, adult lockup, or adult detention
facility unless total separation exists between juveniles and adult spatial
areas.
E.   The child shall be provided with adequate fresh drinking water.
F.   The child shall be provided with adequate food not less than three (3)
times in a twenty four (24) hour period.
G.   The child shall be provided with adequate bathroom facilities and bedding.
H.   The child shall be provided with any necessary medical care and treatment.
(Ord. 959 §1, 2002: Ord. 938 §1, 2001)
2.25.030: PENALTIES:
Pursuant to the interlocal cooperation agreement between the city and the
district court, as authorized by 10 Oklahoma Statutes, section 7303-1.1 a child
under eighteen (18) years of age may be charged, prosecuted, and if convicted,
fined for violation of a municipal ordinance relating to one or more of the
offenses listed in section
2.25.020 of this chapter; provided that the maximum fine which may be imposed
shall not exceed the maximum fine authorized by law. When assessing punishment,
the court also may require appropriate community service work, not to exceed
ninety (90) hours, in lieu of a fine if the product of multiplying the number
of hours of community service work by the prevailing minimum wage does not
result in a number which exceeds the maximum fine authorized by law, or
restitution, or both community service work and restitution. In addition, the
court may require the child to receive counseling or other community based
services, as necessary. If a child is prosecuted for an offense in the
municipal court, the child shall not be prosecuted for the offense in the
district court. The municipal court may also impose costs as authorized by law.
(Ord. 938 §1, 2001)
2.25.040: CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS:
All municipal arrest records, prosecution records, court records, and court
proceedings for cases involving children under eighteen (18) years of age
charged with violating municipal ordinances relating to one or more of the
offenses listed in section
2.25.020 of this chapter shall be kept confidential and shall not be open to
public inspection except by order of the municipal court or as otherwise
provided by 10 Oklahoma Statutes sections 620.6, 7005-1.1 to 7005-1.5, 7307-1.6
and 7307-1.7. (Ord. 938 §1, 2001)
2.25.050: FUNDS FROM FINES:
Funds generated from fines paid pursuant to prosecutions under this chapter
shall be earmarked and used by the city only for the following purposes:
A.   To fund local programs which address problems of juvenile crime;
B.   To fund the costs of prosecutions authorized by this chapter;
C.   To fund the costs of detention authorized pursuant to this chapter; and
D.   To fund administrative costs related to local programs that address
problems of juvenile crime or related to the prosecution, detention, or
punishment authorized pursuant to this chapter.
Such earmarked funds shall not be used by the city for any purpose other than
purposes set forth in subsections A through D of this section. (Ord. 938 §1,
2001)
2.25.060: FAILURE OF PARENT/GUARDIAN/CUSTODIAN OF JUVENILE TO APPEAR:
It shall be an offense for the parent, legal custodian or legal guardian of a
child to fail to return a child to municipal court to answer the municipal
charges on the date and time set by the municipal court where such parent,
legal custodian, or legal guardian executes a written promise to return the
child to municipal court.
It shall be a defense to a prosecution under this section where the parent,
legal custodian, or guardian appears at the appointed court date and provides
evidence that he or she made a good faith effort to secure the juvenile's
appearance in court. (Ord. 938 §1, 2001)
2.25.070: JUVENILE PROCEEDINGS; PRIVACY:
All cases under this chapter involving juveniles shall be heard separately from
cases involving adults. The hearings shall be private, but persons having a
direct interest in the case may be admitted. Any victim, relative or legal
guardian of a victim of a juvenile criminal act shall be deemed to have a
direct interest in the case. (Ord. 938 §1, 2001)
2.25.080: CITATION ISSUED TO JUVENILES:
If a municipal citation is issued to a juvenile under this chapter, the
municipal court hearing date shall be indicated on the citation, and
notification of the citation shall be mailed by the municipal court to the
parents, guardian, legal custodian or responsible adult relative of the
juvenile. (Ord. 938 §1, 2001)
2.25.090: TRAFFIC OFFENSES:
The municipal court of the city shall retain and exercise original jurisdiction
over juveniles charged with violations of the traffic ordinance of the city,
and sections
2.25.010 through
2.25.080 of this chapter shall not apply to prosecution of juveniles for
traffic violations. (Ord. 938 §1, 2001)
CHAPTER 2.26
TRUANCY
SECTION:
2.26.010: Child To Attend School
2.26.015: Prohibited
2.26.020: Penalty
2.26.010: CHILD TO ATTEND SCHOOL:
It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person having custody of
a child who is over the age of six (6) years and under the age of eighteen (18)
years to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child to attend and comply
with the rules of some public, private, or other school unless other means of
education are provided for the full term the schools of the district are in
session, or the child is excused as provided in title 70 Oklahoma Statutes,
section 10-105 et seq. (Ord. 959 §1, 2002)
2.26.015: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any child who is over the age of sixteen (16) years
and under the age of eighteen (18) years and who has not finished four (4)
years of high school work to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the
rules of some public, private, or other school, or receive an education by
other means for the full term the schools of the district are in session unless
the child is excused from attendance by the provision of 70 Oklahoma Statutes,
section 10-105 et seq. (Ord. 959 §1, 2002)
2.26.020: PENALTY:
The penalty upon a plea of guilty, nolo contendere, or a finding of guilt shall
be a fine of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs. (Ord.
959 §1, 2002)
CHAPTER 2.28
POLICE PENSION AND RETIREMENT FUND 1
SECTION:
2.28.010: Definitions
2.28.020: Board Of Trustees Created
2.28.030: Membership
2.28.040: Officers
2.28.050: Meetings
2.28.060: Quorum
2.28.070: Powers
2.28.080: Payroll Deduction
2.28.090: Deposit Into The System
2.28.100: State Statutes
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS ch. 13A.
2.28.010: DEFINITIONS:
FUND: The Oklahoma police pension and retirement fund.
LOCAL BOARD: The city of Warr Acres police pension and retirement board.
MEMBER: All eligible officers of the city of Warr Acres.
OFFICER: Any duly appointed and sworn full time officer of the regular police
department of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, whose duties are to preserve
the public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime, serve warrants,
enforce all laws and municipal ordinances of this city and who is authorized to
bear arms in the execution of such duties.
STATE BOARD: The Oklahoma police pension and retirement board.
SYSTEM: The Oklahoma police pension and retirement board. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.020: BOARD OF TRUSTEES CREATED:
There is hereby created a local board of trustees which shall have the
operation and management of the police pension and retirement system of the
city, which board of trustees shall consist of the city clerk-treasurer and
three (3) members of the police department of the city, which is designated and
known as the local board of trustees of the city police pension and retirement
system. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.030: MEMBERSHIP:
Within thirty (30) days after the passage of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, the members participating in the system either active or retired from
the police department of the city shall elect by ballot three (3) participating
officers of such police department, one of whom shall serve for the term of one
year, one of whom shall serve for the term of two (2) years, and one for the
term of three (3) years; thereafter members participating in the system either
active on or retired from the police department shall, every year, elect by
ballot one of its members to serve for the term of three (3) years upon the
local board, provided, if the positions of clerk and treasurer are held by one
person, that person shall be allowed only one local board position and one vote
on any matter before the local board. If a vacancy occurs on the local board,
the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
office was previously filled. The ballots shall be placed in a ballot box to be
provided by the city and so conducted that each elector's ballot shall be
secret as in the election for city offices. The city clerk shall conduct the
election by seeing that each and every person so voting is a member
participating in the system, and shall canvass all ballots so voted and shall
certify the results thereof to the mayor. The person receiving the highest
number of votes shall be elected. Each member of the local board of trustees so
elected shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, take and
subscribe an oath of office according to law. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.040: OFFICERS:
On the second Monday of the month, after the election of the local board of
trustees, the local board shall meet at a place designated by the city clerk
and shall choose and elect a chairman and a secretary from the members of the
local board who shall serve for a term of one year or until their successors
are elected. The city clerk shall act as the treasurer of the board of trustees
and serve the local board as provided in this chapter. One year from the date
of the first organizational meeting, and each year thereafter, the local board
shall elect a chairman and secretary from its members. In the event any
chairman or secretary ceases to be a member of the local board the local board
shall elect from its members a chairman or secretary to serve the unexpired
term of the respective member whose membership on the local board is
terminated. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.050: MEETINGS:
The local board shall hold monthly meetings on the second Monday of each and
every month of each year and upon call of its chairman at such other times as
the chairman deems necessary. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.060: QUORUM:
A majority of all the members of the local board shall constitute a quorum and
have the power to transact business. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.070: POWERS:
The local board of trustees shall, in addition to other powers granted in this
chapter, have power to:
A.   Compel witnesses to attend and testify before the local board upon all
matters connected with the operations of this chapter and in the same manner as
is, or may be, provided by law, for the taking of testimony before notaries
public, and its chairman or any member of the local board may administer oaths
of such witnesses;
B.   Provide all rules and regulations needful for its guidance and operation
and shall have the power to amend said rules and regulations as the local board
may determine from time to time;
C.   Review applications for the following:
   1.   Membership in the system,
   2.   Refund of accumulated contributions to members terminating employment,
   3.   Retirement benefits,
   4.   Disability benefits and examinations to determine continuation of
disability benefits,
   5.   Shall recommend approval, disapproval or modification of each
application and the secretary shall forward such recommendations to the state
board within ten (10) days following the local board's decision. Consideration
by the local board shall be pursuant to the rules and regulations of the state
board. The state board shall furnish all required forms. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.080: PAYROLL DEDUCTION:
Commencing on January 1, 1983, the city treasurer shall deduct, each pay
period, from the salary or wages of each paid eligible member of the police
department an amount equal to eight percent (8%) of the total base salary or
wages paid to the eligible members of the police department. The amount so
deducted shall be deposited within ten (10) days following the payroll period
on which the contributions are based, by the city treasurer, into the Oklahoma
police pension and retirement system, state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.090: DEPOSIT INTO THE SYSTEM:
Commencing on January 1, 1983, the city treasurer shall deposit, within ten
(10) days following the payroll period on which the contributions are based,
from the general fund of the city into the Oklahoma police pension and
retirement system, state of Oklahoma, an amount which shall be equal to eight
percent (8%) of the total base salaries or wages paid to eligible members of
the police department; and commencing on January 1, 1984, the city treasurer
shall deposit, within ten (10) days following the payroll period on which the
city's contributions are based, from the general fund of the city into the
Oklahoma police pension and retirement system, state of Oklahoma, an amount
which shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the total base salaries or wages
paid to eligible members of the police department. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
2.28.100: STATE STATUTES:
Provisions of title 11, section 50 of the Oklahoma state statutes, as amended
from time to time, not specified in the chapter are hereby incorporated by
reference. (Ord. 584 §1, 1984)
CHAPTER 2.32
FIREFIGHTERS' RELIEF AND PENSION FUND 1
SECTION:
2.32.010: Definitions
2.32.020: Board Of Trustees Created
2.32.030: Membership
2.32.040: Officers
2.32.050: Meetings
2.32.060: Quorum
2.32.070: Powers
2.32.080: Payroll Deduction
2.32.090: Deposit Into The System
2.32.100: State Statutes
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 361 et seq., 345.
2.32.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the words set out in this section shall have
the following meanings:
FUND: The Oklahoma firefighters' pension and retirement fund.
LOCAL BOARD: The city firefighters' pension and retirement board.
MEMBER: All eligible firefighters of the city.
STATE BOARD: The Oklahoma firefighters' pension and retirement board, state of
Oklahoma.
SYSTEM: The Oklahoma firefighters' pension and retirement system. (Ord. 590 §1,
1984)
2.32.020: BOARD OF TRUSTEES CREATED:
There is created a local board of trustees which shall have the operation and
management of the firemen's pension and retirement system of the city, which
board of trustees shall consist of the mayor, the city clerk-treasurer and
three (3) members of the fire department of the city, which is designated and
known as the local board of trustees of the city of Warr Acres firefighters'
pension and retirement system. (Ord. 590 §1, 1984)
2.32.030: MEMBERSHIP:
The fire department of the city shall elect, by ballot, three (3) members of
such fire department, one of whom shall serve for the term of one year, one of
whom shall serve for the term of two (2) years, and one for the term of three
(3) years; thereafter such fire department shall, every year, elect by ballot
one of its members to serve for the term of three (3) years upon the local
board; provided, if the positions of clerk and treasurer are held by one
person, that person shall be allowed only one local board position and one vote
on any matter before the local board. If a vacancy occurs on the local board,
the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
office was previously filled. The ballots shall be placed in a ballot box to be
provided by the city and so conducted that each elector's ballot shall be
secret as in the election for city offices. The city clerk shall conduct the
election by seeing that each and every person so voting is a member
participating in the system, and shall canvass all ballots so voted and shall
certify the results thereof to the mayor. The person receiving the highest
number of votes shall be elected. Each member of the local board of trustees so
elected shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, take and
subscribe an oath of office according to law. (Ord. 590 §1, 1984)
2.32.040: OFFICERS:
The mayor shall be an ex officio member and chairman of the local board, the
city clerk-treasurer shall be ex officio secretary-treasurer of the local
board. The mayor shall have a casting vote with the members only when necessary
to avoid a tie vote among them. On the second Monday of the month, after the
election of the local board of trustees, the local board shall meet at a place
designated by the city clerk and shall choose and elect a vice chairman from
the members of the local board who serve for a term of one year or until their
successors are elected and promulgate such other rules and offices as may be
necessary to ensure the orderly conduct of business. (Ord. 590 §1, 1984)
2.32.050: MEETINGS:
The local board shall hold monthly meetings on the first Monday of each and
every month of each year and upon call of its chairman at such other times as
the chairman deems necessary. The local board shall keep a record of its
proceedings, which record shall be public record. (Ord. 590 §1, 1984)
2.32.060: QUORUM:
A majority of all the regular voting members of the local board shall
constitute a quorum and have the power to transact business. (Ord. 590 §1,
1984)
2.32.070: POWERS:
The local board of trustees shall, in addition to other powers granted in this
chapter, have power to:
A.   Compel witnesses to attend and testify before the local board upon all
matters connected with the operations of this chapter and in the same manner as
is, or may be, provided by law, for the taking of testimony before notaries
public, and its chairman or any member of the local board may administer oaths
of such witnesses;
B.   Provide all rules and regulations needful for its guidance and operation
and shall have the power to amend said rules and regulations as the local board
may determine from time to time;
C.   Review applications for the following:
   1.   Membership in the system,
   2.   Refund of accumulated contributions to members terminating employment,
   3.   Retirement benefits,
   4.   Disability benefits and examinations to determine continuation of
disability benefits,
   5.   Shall recommend approval, disapproval or modification of each
application and the secretary shall forward such recommendations to the state
board within ten (10) days following the local board's decision. Consideration
by the local board shall be pursuant to the rules and regulations of the state
board. The state board shall furnish all required forms. (Ord. 590 §1, 1984)
2.32.080: PAYROLL DEDUCTION:
Commencing on January 1, 1983, the city treasurer shall deduct, each pay
period, from the salary or wages of each paid and eligible member of the fire
department an amount equal to eight percent (8%) of the total base salary or
wages paid to the members of the fire department. The amount so deducted shall
be deposited each month by the city treasurer into the Oklahoma firefighters'
pension and retirement fund, state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 590 §1, 1984)
2.32.090: DEPOSIT INTO THE SYSTEM:
The city treasurer shall deposit monthly from the general fund into the
Oklahoma firefighters' pension and retirement fund an amount equal to a
percentage of the total actual paid gross salaries of the members of the fire
department in accordance with the following schedule:
A.   July 1, 1992 through June 30, 1993: Eleven percent (11%),
B.   July 1, 1993 through June 30, 1994: Eleven and one-half percent (111/2%),
C.   July 1, 1994 through June 30, 1995: Twelve percent (12%),
D.   July 1, 1995 through June 30, 1996: Twelve and one-half percent (121/2%),
and
E.   July 1, 1996 through June 30, 1997: Thirteen percent (13%)
or in such amount as the Oklahoma legislature may direct by amendment to the
laws governing the firefighters' pension and retirement system. (Ord. 734 §1,
1992)
2.32.100: STATE STATUTES:
Provisions of title 11, section 49 of the Oklahoma state statutes, as amended
from time to time, not specified in this chapter, are hereby incorporated by
reference. (Ord. 590 §1, 1984)
CHAPTER 2.36
EMPLOYEES; COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
SECTION:
2.36.010: Power To Hire Or Replace Employees
2.36.011: Employee Handbook Of Personnel Policies Authorization
2.36.012: The Employee Handbook Of Personnel Policies
2.36.015: Overtime For Holidays
2.36.020: Salary Increases (Rep. by Ord. 974 §1, 2002)
2.36.025: Pay Scale And Merit System For Exempt And Nonexempt, Nonuniform
Employees
2.36.040: Exempt And Nonexempt, Nonuniform Employees Merit System
2.36.100: Police Department Uniforms And Maintenance Allowance
2.36.120: Fire Department Uniforms And Maintenance Allowance
2.36.130: Benefits
2.36.140: Termination Of Employee
2.36.150: Suspend Or Change Benefits Plan
2.36.220: Employee Retirement System; Created; Adopted
2.36.230: Board Of Trustees Of The System
2.36.240: Fund For The System; Pooling Procedure
2.36.250: Appropriations For The System; Transfer Of Funds
2.36.260: Execution Of System Instrument; Pooling Of Fund
2.36.265: Special Retirement Option
2.36.270: Defined Contribution Plan
2.36.271: Administration Of The Pension Plan
2.36.272: Fund For The Defined Contribution Plan
2.36.273: Appropriations Of The Defined Contribution Plan
2.36.274: Execution Of The Defined Contribution Plan
2.36.276: Assumption And Rate Tables
2.36.010: POWER TO HIRE OR REPLACE EMPLOYEES:
The mayor, in coordination with the heads of the departments of the city, is
empowered to hire and/or replace employees of the city, except for all
directors or heads of administrative departments, and all other administrative
officers and employees of the city. (See also charter section 3-1.) (Ord. 685
§1, 1989)
2.36.011: EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK OF PERSONNEL POLICIES AUTHORIZATION:
There is authorized an employee handbook of personnel policies which shall
provide for personnel policies, rules and regulations including employee
benefits applicable to all employees not otherwise represented by a labor
representative or provided by other employment agreements.
The handbook shall be prepared by the mayor and submitted to the council for
approval. Once approved by the council the provisions thereof shall be the
official policies of Warr Acres regulating employee relations between the city
and its covered employees.
The handbook may be updated, modified or changed to meet changing and current
conditions, provided such change or modification shall not become effective
until and after the same has been approved by the council pursuant to a duly
adopted resolution.
All rights, duties, obligations or benefits accrued, established, or vested
prior to the effective date of the employee handbook of personnel policies
shall not be affected by its adoption or approval. (Ord. 720 §1, 1992)
2.36.012: THE EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK OF PERSONNEL POLICIES:
Insert pages 2-1 through 2-33 sections 100 through 600, and appendix A,
complaint form; appendix B, supervisory bypass procedures; appendix C, alcohol
and controlled substance testing policy and procedures; appendix D, nepotism;
appendix E, family and medical leave act (FMLA) policy. (Ord. 927 §1, 2001)
2.36.015: OVERTIME FOR HOLIDAYS:
By amending section 500, subsection 502 overtime, by adding B-4. Any
noncontract employee who is required to work on an authorized holiday will be
paid the eight (8) hours for the authorized holiday, and will be paid for
actual time worked and will be paid a minimum of three (3) hours regardless of
time worked. (Ord. 946 §1, 2001)
2.36.020: SALARY INCREASES:
(Rep. by Ord. 974 §1, 2002)
2.36.025: PAY SCALE AND MERIT SYSTEM FOR EXEMPT AND NONEXEMPT, NONUNIFORM
EMPLOYEES:
The city council shall, from time to time, establish by resolution the rates of
compensation for all city employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement. The rates of compensation for employees covered by a collective
bargaining agreement shall be established by the terms of the collective
bargaining agreement and, in the absence of such an agreement, the compensation
shall be established by the council. The rates of compensation for nonexempt
employees who are not covered by the terms of a collective bargaining agreement
shall be established by a pay scale adopted by the council unless otherwise
stated. The rates of compensation for exempt employees shall be established by
the council. The council shall, from time to time, review the pay scale and
make adjustments thereto as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 1130, 2012)
2.36.040: EXEMPT AND NONEXEMPT, NONUNIFORM EMPLOYEES MERIT SYSTEM:
The city council will establish a merit system for employees related to
increases in compensation for employees. Employees who have not yet reached or
exceeded the maximum compensation established for their position shall be
eligible for a merit increase on their anniversary provided they receive a
satisfactory evaluation. Other adjustments to base compensation or additional
compensation may be provided to an employee based on that employee meeting
objective criteria established for and applicable to all employees within a
particular classification. Such criteria may either be in the form of a hiring
incentive or an incentive for an employee to receive certifications not
regularly required or expected for their current position. The criteria will be
established in advance by the council. (Ord. 1130, 2012)
2.36.100: POLICE DEPARTMENT UNIFORMS AND MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE:
Employees of the police department shall wear uniforms, as may be required and
approved by the police chief, and shall be provided by the city at no cost to
the employee. Uniforms and related items are to be provided based on the needs
of the individual employee for conformance to departmental policy as to form,
function, color, style, quantity and fit as established by the police chief.
Commencing upon the issuance of uniforms, the city will provide the following
employees with a uniform maintenance allowance payable twice a year as set
forth:
A.   The police chief and deputy chief shall receive an annual uniform
allowance payable on the anniversary date of employment not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00). Receipts for approved purchases must be presented
before payment will be made. In addition, the police chief and his deputy shall
receive a uniform allowance of forty dollars ($40.00) per month for which no
receipts shall be required.
B.   In the event an employee is on leave from active duty for one workweek or
more in a one month period, the uniform allowance will be prorated, provided
this subsection shall not apply in instances of vacation or holiday leave of
less than two (2) workweeks. (Ord. 930 §1, 2001: Ord. 869 §1, 1998: Ord. 724
§1, 1992)
2.36.120: FIRE DEPARTMENT UNIFORMS AND MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE:
All employees of the fire department, except those employees represented by a
bargaining agent, shall be issued uniforms and uniform items governed by a
quartermaster system. The quartermaster system shall be under the direct
control of the fire chief and mayor as to the style, type, and apportionment of
uniforms and uniform items. Employees covered hereby shall receive a uniform
maintenance allowance of thirty five dollars ($35.00) per month payable in the
months of July and January of each fiscal year. No receipts shall be required.
(Ord. 723 §1, 1992: Ord. 685 §1, 1989)
2.36.130: BENEFITS:
Benefits shall not be assignable or transferable and are not subject to
garnishment or levy of any kind. Any attempted transfer or pledge of benefits
shall mean that the city will terminate payment of benefits. (Ord. 685 §1,
1989)
2.36.140: TERMINATION OF EMPLOYEE:
An employee may be terminated as freely as if the employee benefits plan were
not in operation. (Ord. 685 §1, 1989)
2.36.150: SUSPEND OR CHANGE BENEFITS PLAN:
The city reserves the right to suspend or change the benefits plan. The city
will notify employees of any suspension or change as soon as practicable. (Ord.
685 §1, 1989)
2.36.220: EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM; CREATED; ADOPTED:
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the city charter, as amended, and by the
laws of the state, and for the purpose of encouraging continuity and
meritorious service on the part of city employees and thereby promote public
efficiency, there is authorized, created, established, approved and adopted,
effective as of November 1, 1973, the funded pension plan designated the
"employee retirement system of Warr Acres, Oklahoma", hereinafter called the
"system", an executed counterpart of which is marked exhibit A, amended by
document 83-1 and document 92-1, and attached to the ordinance codified in this
section and sections
2.36.230 through
2.36.260 of this chapter as a part hereof. (Ord. 735 §1, 1992: Ord. 583 §1,
1984)
2.36.230: BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE SYSTEM:
For the purpose of administration of the system adopted in section
2.36.220 of this chapter, there is established a board of trustees, which shall
be the members of the city council as now existing or as from time to time duly
elected or appointed and constituted. The powers and duties of the board of
trustees shall be as set forth in the system instrument attached to the
ordinance codified herein as exhibit A as amended by document 83-1. (Ord. 583
§3, 1984)
2.36.240: FUND FOR THE SYSTEM; POOLING PROCEDURE:
A fund is provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the persons entitled to
benefits under the system adopted in section 2.36.210 of this chapter. All
contributions to such fund shall be paid over to and received in trust for such
purpose by the city treasurer, who shall be the treasurer of the system. Such
fund shall be pooled for purposes of management and investment with similar
funds of other incorporated cities, towns and municipal trusts in the state as
a part of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund, in accordance with a duly
executed contract for such purpose, which contract shall be executed by the
city council as soon as feasible. The city treasurer shall hold such
contributions in the form received, and from time to time pay over and transfer
the same to the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund, as duly authorized and
directed by the board of trustees. The fund shall be nonfiscal and shall not be
considered in computing any levy when the annual estimate is made to the county
excise board. The fund and system shall be valued every other year for
actuarial soundness by a qualified actuarial firm. (Ord. 362 §3, 1973)
2.36.250: APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE SYSTEM; TRANSFER OF FUNDS:
The city is authorized to incur the necessary expenses for the establishment,
operation and administration of the system adopted in section
2.36.220 of this chapter and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the
city is authorized to appropriate annually such amounts as are required in
addition to employee contributions, to maintain the system and the fund on a
sound actuarial basis in accordance with the respective annual actuarial
valuation. Any appropriation so made to maintain the system and fund shall be
for deferred wages or salaries and for the payment of necessary expenses of
operation and administration, including separate annual appropriations to be
transferred to the trustees of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund for such
purposes, and shall be paid into the fund when available, through the city
treasurer, to be duly transferred by him to the Oklahoma municipal retirement
fund. (Ord. 362 §4, 1973)
2.36.260: EXECUTION OF SYSTEM INSTRUMENT; POOLING OF FUND:
A.   The mayor and city clerk are each authorized and directed to execute (in
counterparts, each of which shall constitute an original) the system
instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary, advisable and proper
to put the system adopted in section 2.36.220 of this chapter and related trust
into full force and effect, and to make such changes therein as may be
necessary to qualify the same under sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the internal
revenue code of the United States. The counterpart attached to the ordinance
codified herein as exhibit A, as amended by document 83-1, which has been duly
executed as set out in this section simultaneously with the passage of the
ordinance codified in this section and sections
2.36.220 through
2.36.250 of this chapter and made a part thereof, is ratified and confirmed in
all respects.
B.   The city council is authorized and directed to proceed immediately on
behalf of the city to negotiate a contract with other incorporated cities and
towns of the state to pool and combine the fund into the Oklahoma municipal
retirement fund as a part thereof, with similar funds of such other cities and
towns, for purposes of pooled management, and investment. The city council
shall manifest approval of such contract and the execution thereof by the mayor
and city clerk, by a formal resolution. (Ord. 583 §5, 1984: Ord. 362 §5, 1973)
2.36.265: SPECIAL RETIREMENT OPTION:
A participant whose integral age and integral years of credited service total
seventy five (75), or more, may elect to retire, and the early retirement
reduction described in article V, paragraph 5.2 of the plan shall not apply.
The election must be made prior to November 1, 1995, and the employee's
retirement date shall not be later than January 2, 1996. (Ord. 771 §1, 1995)
2.36.270: DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN:
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the laws of the state of Oklahoma, and
for the purpose of encouraging continuity and meritorious service on the part
of city employees and thereby promote public efficiency, there is hereby
authorized created, established, and approved and adopted, effective as of
January 1, 2010, the amended and restated plan designated "employee retirement
system of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, defined contribution plan"
(hereinafter called system), an executed counterpart of which is marked exhibit
A (joinder agreement) and exhibit B (amended and restated plan) and attached to
the ordinance codified in this section and sections
2.36.272 through
2.36.274 of this chapter as a part hereof. (Ord. 1078 §1, 2009)
2.36.271: ADMINISTRATION OF THE PENSION PLAN:
For the purposes of administration, the board of trustees created by section
2.36.230 of this chapter shall exercise the powers and sections as are set out
in exhibit A regulating the defined contribution plan. (Ord. 698 §1, 1990)
2.36.272: FUND FOR THE DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN:
A fund is hereby provided for the exclusive use and benefit of the persons
entitled to benefits under the system. All contributions to such fund shall be
paid over to and received in trust for such purpose by the city. Such fund
shall be pooled for purposes of management and investment with similar funds of
other incorporated cities, towns, and municipal trusts in the state of Oklahoma
as a part of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund in accordance with the
trust agreement of the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund, a public trust. The
city shall hold such contributions in the form received, and from time to time
pay over and transfer the same to the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund, as
duly authorized and directed by the board of trustees. The fund shall be
nonfiscal and shall not be considered in computing any levy when the annual
estimate is made to the county excise board. (Ord. 1078 §2, 2009)
2.36.273: APPROPRIATIONS OF THE DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN:
The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, is hereby authorized to incur the necessary
expenses for the establishment, operation, and administration of the system,
and to appropriate and pay the same. In addition, the city of Warr Acres,
Oklahoma, is hereby authorized to appropriate annually such amounts as are
required in addition to employee contributions to maintain the system and the
fund in accordance with the provisions of the defined contribution plan. Any
appropriation so made to maintain the system and fund shall be for deferred
wages or salaries, and for the payment of necessary expenses of operation and
administration to be transferred to the trustees of the Oklahoma municipal
retirement fund for such purposes and shall be paid into the fund when
available, to be duly transferred to the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund.
(Ord. 1078 §3, 2009)
2.36.274: EXECUTION OF THE DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN:
A.   The mayor and city clerk be and they are each hereby authorized and
directed to execute (in counterparts, each of which shall constitute an
original) the system instrument, and to do all other acts and things necessary,
advisable, and proper to put said system adopted in section
2.36.220 of this chapter and related trust into full force and effect, and to
make such changes therein as may be necessary to qualify the same under
sections 401(a) and 501(a) of the internal revenue code of the United States.
The counterpart attached hereto as exhibit A and exhibit B, which has been duly
executed as aforesaid simultaneously with the passage of the ordinance codified
in this section and sections
2.36.270,
2.36.272 and
2.36.273 of this chapter and made a part hereof, is hereby ratified and
confirmed in all respects.
B.   The city council is hereby authorized and directed to proceed immediately
on behalf of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, to pool and combine the fund
into the Oklahoma municipal retirement fund as a part thereof, with similar
funds of such other cities and towns, for purposes of pooled management and
investment. (Ord. 1078 §4, 2009)
2.36.276: ASSUMPTION AND RATE TABLES:
The retirement system defined benefit plan of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, is amended
by adopting revised appendix I to its retirement plan containing the actuarial
factors needed to determine actuarially equivalent options under the plan, same
being exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated
herein by reference. The actuarial assumptions for the retirement plan of Warr
Acres, Oklahoma, effective on July 1, 1991, as follows are approved and shall
be used in computing contribution rates and benefits under the plan:
 
Interest rate           7.5 percent
Disability rate         OASBI incident rate
Mortality table         1983 group annuity
Salary scale            5 percent per year
Disabled mortality rate Social security administration table
 
(Ord. 708 §1, 1991)
CHAPTER 2.37
MAYOR
SECTION:
2.37.010: Salary
2.37.020: Waiver Of Salary
2.37.030: Report Of New And Pending Litigation
2.37.040: Annual Budget
2.37.010: SALARY:
The Mayor of the City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, shall be paid an amended salary
of fifteen thousand eighty dollars ($15,080.00), payable at the rate of one
thousand two hundred fifty six dollars sixty seven cents ($1,256.67) per month.
The salary provided shall be in addition to any allocated expenses authorized
by the Council. (Ord. 1172, 2016)
2.37.020: WAIVER OF SALARY:
The Mayor shall have the option to exercise a waiver of any or all of the
salary provided for in section
2.37.010 of this chapter by executing a written waiver. Upon execution of the
waiver of a salary by the Mayor, the funds allocated for said salary shall be
reallocated to the City's General Fund. (Ord. 611 §1, 1985)
2.37.030: REPORT OF NEW AND PENDING LITIGATION:
The Mayor shall provide the Council a report of all new litigation filed
against the City as it arises. The report shall include: parties to the action;
date filed; nature of the action; nature of remedy or remedies sought;
significant hearing dates; attorney(s) acting on behalf of the City; and
information concerning the results of the litigation completed or settlements
reached, if available and disclosure not prohibited by the terms of the
settlement. (Ord. 784 §1, 1996)
2.37.040: ANNUAL BUDGET:
The Mayor shall furnish the Council with a proposed annual budget, as required
by article 3, section 3-1 of the Charter, which reconciles with the financial
statement and estimate of needs filed annually with the County Excise Board,
pursuant to 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 3002. (Ord. 853-A §1, 1998)
CHAPTER 2.40
SOCIAL SECURITY 1
SECTION:
2.40.010: Purpose; Policy
2.40.020: Execution Of Agreements And Amendments
2.40.030: Withholdings
2.40.040: Employer Contributions
2.40.050: Records And Reports
2.40.060: Other Retirement Systems
2.40.070: Compensation On Fee Basis
 
Notes
1 1. 51 OS ch. 4.
2.40.010: PURPOSE; POLICY:
It is declared to be the policy of the city to extend, at the earliest date, to
the employees and officials thereof not excluded by law or this chapter, and
whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the
benefits of the system of federal old age and survivors' insurance, as
authorized by the federal social security act and amendments thereto, including
public law 734 of the 81st congress. In pursuance of said policy, and for that
purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state
or federal laws or regulations. (Prior code §1-2)
2.40.020: EXECUTION OF AGREEMENTS AND AMENDMENTS:
The mayor is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and
amendments thereto with the state department of public welfare, as agent or
agency, to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in section
2.40.010 of this chapter. (Prior code §1-3)
2.40.030: WITHHOLDINGS:
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose
provided in section
2.40.010 of this chapter are authorized to be made in the amounts and at such
times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations,
and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by said laws
or regulations. (Prior code §1-4)
2.40.040: EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS:
There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as
may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer
contributions, which shall be paid over to the state or federal agency
designated by said laws or regulations. (Prior code §1-5)
2.40.050: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by
applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior code §1-6)
2.40.060: OTHER RETIREMENT SYSTEMS:
There is excluded from this chapter any authority to make any agreement with
respect to any position or any employee or official now covered or authorized
to be covered by any other ordinance creating any retirement system for any
employee or official of the city. (Prior code §1-7)
2.40.070: COMPENSATION ON FEE BASIS:
There is excluded from this chapter any authority to make any agreement with
respect to any position, or any employee or official, compensation for which is
on a fee basis, or any position, or any employee or official not authorized to
be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. (Prior code §1-
8)
CHAPTER 2.44
LOST OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 1
SECTION:
2.44.010: Property Delivered To
2.44.020: Record Of And Disposition Of Property Received
2.44.030: Public Auction
2.44.035: Destruction And Disposal Of Guns
2.44.040: Rightful Owner
 
Notes
1 1. 60 OS ch. 13, § 657.
2.44.010: PROPERTY DELIVERED TO:
When any policeman or officer comes into possession of any property, supposedly
lost, unclaimed or stolen, or takes any property off of or from any criminal or
person believed to be a criminal, he shall forthwith deliver the property to
the chief of police. (Prior code §11-10)
2.44.020: RECORD OF AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY RECEIVED:
The chief of police shall maintain a complete record of all such property
received, showing the date it was received, a description of the article, and
the source from which it was received. When any person, to the satisfaction of
the chief of police, presents proof of ownership thereof, and after the
termination of any pending legal proceedings, the chief of police will return
the article to the owner upon the payment of all reasonable and necessary
expenses incurred in its preservation, to be certified by the chief of police,
who shall take a receipt therefor and shall enter into the record the name of
the person to whom it was delivered, the date of such delivery and any funds
received. Any property not claimed within sixty (60) days from the date of the
receipt of same shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as set forth in this
chapter. (Prior code §11-11)
2.44.030: PUBLIC AUCTION:
Any property, other than animals, firearms, intoxicants and weapons of any kind
remaining in possession of the chief of police for sixty (60) days unclaimed,
shall be sold at public auction, and the proceeds thereof shall be paid to the
city treasurer. A minimum of ten (10) days before the sale of the property, the
chief of police shall post notice of sale and auction in four (4) public places
in the city, one of which shall be the police station, showing a description of
the property to be sold, and the date and place of the sale and auction. Upon
the sale of the property, the chief of police shall enter into the records the
name and address of the person purchasing the property, and the amount paid
therefor. (Prior code §11-12)
2.44.035: DESTRUCTION AND DISPOSAL OF GUNS:
A.   When the chief of police determines that guns which have been confiscated
by his department and are no longer needed for evidence in any criminal
complaint, and he is of the opinion that the guns have no commercial value, and
are sometimes known as Saturday night specials, and in addition in his opinion
the guns should be destroyed, he shall take the following action: He shall
prepare a list describing each gun by manufacturer, model and serial number if
known, previous owner, or the person from whom the gun was obtained.
B.   The chief of police shall notify the owner or person from whom the gun was
obtained at their last known address, first class mail, postage prepaid, twenty
(20) days prior to submitting that list to the city council for their
permission to destroy said guns. At the time of submitting the list the chief
of police shall give details as to the proposed supervised destruction.
C.   After supervised destruction of said guns, the chief of police shall
advise the administration in writing as to the date and method of destruction
and disposal of the scrap gun material. (Ord. 1107, 2011)
2.44.040: RIGHTFUL OWNER:
If the rightful owner of the property recovers the same from the purchaser, the
purchaser shall have the money paid therefor returned to him upon presentation
of a claim duly audited and approved by the city council. (Prior code §11-13)
CHAPTER 2.48
CIVIL DEFENSE 1
SECTION:
2.48.010: Title
2.48.020: Definitions
2.48.030: Office Of Civil Defense Established
2.48.040: Office Space And Equipment
2.48.050: Powers And Duties Of The Director
2.48.060: Enemy Caused Emergencies
2.48.070: Natural Emergency
2.48.080: Liability For Death Or Injury
2.48.090: Contributions
2.48.100: Penalty For Violations
 
Notes
1 1.  63 OS §§ 683.1 et seq., 683.11 et seq.
2.48.010: TITLE:
This chapter is to be known as the CIVIL DEFENSE CODE of the city. (Prior code
§1-58)
2.48.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be construed as follows,
unless a contrary intent appears clear from the context:
CIVIL DEFENSE: The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions other than functions for which primary responsibility is assigned
elsewhere by federal, state or local law or ordinance, to protect the public
peace, health and safety, and to preserve lives and property in the city during
any emergency resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or
from any flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake, storm or other
catastrophe in or near the city and involving imminent or actual peril to life
and property. These functions include administration, organization, planning,
recruiting, training, education, information, welfare service, relief service,
police service, warden service, fire service, rescue service, medical service,
health service, transportation service, communications service, streets and
sewers service, utilities service, general engineering service, plant
protection service, supply service, mutual aid, mobile support, evacuation, and
all other functions necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying
out of the foregoing functions.
ENEMY CAUSED EMERGENCY: Any state of emergency caused by actual or impending
attack, sabotage or other hostile action anywhere within the United States, and
involving imminent peril to lives and property in or near the city. Such
emergency shall be deemed to exist only when the mayor so declares by public
proclamation. Such emergency shall be deemed to continue to exist until the
mayor declares its termination by public proclamation, or until the governing
body declares its termination by resolution.
NATURAL EMERGENCY: Any state of emergency caused by any actual or impending
flood, drought, fire, hurricane, earthquake, storm or other catastrophe in or
near the city, and involving imminent peril to lives and/or property. Such
emergency shall be deemed to exist and to be terminated under the same
conditions as prescribed for an enemy caused emergency. (Prior code §1-59)
2.48.030: OFFICE OF CIVIL DEFENSE ESTABLISHED:
There is established within the executive branch of the city government the
Warr Acres office of civil defense. This office shall consist of:
A.   A civil defense advisory committee, consisting of the mayor as chairman
and of five (5) other members appointed by the mayor and serving at his
pleasure or until the repeal of this chapter. The committee shall elect from
among its members a vice chairman and a secretary. Except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, the committee shall function in an advisory capacity on all
matters pertaining to civil defense. It shall hold regular meetings at least
four (4) times a year, and at other times on the call of the mayor. The
committee shall serve without compensation;
B.   A director of civil defense, who shall be appointed by the mayor and who
shall serve at the mayor's pleasure or until the repeal of this chapter. The
director shall be the executive head of the office of civil defense, and shall
be responsible to the mayor for carrying out the civil defense program of the
city. He shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual
expenses in the conduct of his duties. He shall coordinate the activities of
all organizations for civil defense within the city and shall maintain liaison
with and cooperate with civil defense agencies and organizations of other
governmental units both within and without the state and of the federal
government, and shall have such additional authority, duties and
responsibilities as may be authorized under this chapter or amendments hereto;
C.   Such other volunteer civil defense advisory committees as may be created
by the director for the evaluation of technical, professional or other phases
of the work of the office of civil defense and which may provide advisory
assistance on any matters pertaining thereto. (Prior code §1-60)
2.48.040: OFFICE SPACE AND EQUIPMENT:
Appropriate office space, furniture, equipment and supplies as required shall
be provided for the office of civil defense. Expenditures for these purposes,
within the appropriations therefor, shall be made only on the authority of the
mayor and city council. The director shall also, within the appropriations
therefor, establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers, as he
deems necessary, to serve during an enemy caused or a natural emergency. (Prior
code §1-61)
2.48.050: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR:
The director shall have general direction and control of the office of civil
defense, and shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this
chapter. In so doing the director is expressly authorized to:
A.   Utilize the services, skills, and technical knowledge of all city
officials and employees, and to cooperate, insofar as permitted by other
appropriate legislation, with the federal government, the state and its
subdivisions, with other states and their subdivisions, and with private
agencies, in all matters pertaining to civil defense;
B.   Make, amend and rescind the necessary orders, rules and regulations to
carry out the provisions of this chapter within the limits of the authority
conferred upon him in this chapter, with due consideration to be given to the
plans and powers of the federal government, the government of Oklahoma, and
other public and private agencies and organizations empowered to act in either
enemy caused emergencies or natural emergencies, or both;
C.   Prepare comprehensive plans for the civil defense of the city in both
enemy caused and natural emergencies, such plans and programs to be integrated
and coordinated with the plans and programs of the federal government, of the
government of Oklahoma, and of other public and private agencies and
organizations empowered to act in either enemy caused or natural emergencies or
both;
D.   Establish, within the limits of funds available, a public warning system,
composed of sirens, horns, or other acceptable warning devices;
E.   Establish and carry out recruitment and training programs as may be
necessary to develop an adequate, qualified civil defense volunteer corps;
F.   Conduct drills, exercises and similar programs as may be necessary to
develop a well trained, alert, fully prepared civil defense organization;
G.   Make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities
of this city as he deems necessary to ascertain its capabilities for civil
defense, and plan for the most efficient emergency use therefor;
H.   On behalf of the city, enter into mutual aid arrangements with surrounding
communities, both in the states of Oklahoma and of Texas, subject to the
approval of the city council;
I.   Delegate any administrative authority vested in him under this chapter,
and provide for the subdelegation of any such authority;
J.   Take any other action proper and lawful under his authority to prepare for
either an enemy caused or a natural emergency. (Prior code §1-62)
2.48.060: ENEMY CAUSED EMERGENCIES:
In the event of any actual enemy caused emergency, as proclaimed by the mayor,
the director of civil defense, with the approval of the mayor, may exercise
during such emergency the power to enforce all rules and regulations relating
to civil defense, and acting under the authority of statutes when enacted, or
under the authority of the mayor as an agent of the governor of Oklahoma, may
take control of all means of transportation and communications, all stocks of
fuel, food, clothing, medicine and supplies, and all facilities including
buildings and plants, and exercise all powers necessary to secure the safety
and protection of the civilian population. In exercising such powers, he shall
be guided by regulations and orders issued by the federal government and the
governor of Oklahoma relating to civil defense and shall take no action
contrary to orders which may be issued by the governor under similar emergency
powers. (Prior code §1-63)
2.48.070: NATURAL EMERGENCY:
In the event of any natural emergency as proclaimed by the mayor, the director
of civil defense, with the approval of the mayor and acting under his
instructions, shall coordinate in every way the proper activities of the civil
defense organization. He is specifically charged in such emergency with the
collection, evaluation and dissemination of information to all agencies, both
public and private, participating in the city's civil defense organization or
cooperating in any such emergency. He shall, as director, have the power to
recommend appropriate action, but he shall not otherwise have control over the
participating agencies. He shall also recommend to the mayor the allocation of
any funds received from the federal or state governments or from any other
source to alleviate distress and aid in restoring normal conditions. (Prior
code §1-64)
2.48.080: LIABILITY FOR DEATH OR INJURY:
Neither the city nor any officer or member of the civil defense organization
provided for in this chapter shall be liable for personal injury or property
damage sustained by any person appointed or acting as a volunteer civil defense
worker or member of any agency engaged in civil defense activity prior to or
during either an enemy caused or a natural emergency; or shall the city or any
such officer or member be liable for the death or injury of any persons or
damage to property resulting from such civil defense activity prior to or
during either an enemy caused or a natural emergency. (Prior code §1-65)
2.48.090: CONTRIBUTIONS:
Whenever the federal government or the state, or any person, firm or
corporation offers to the city any services, equipment, supplies, materials or
funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of civil defense, the mayor
may accept such offer and may authorize the director of civil defense to
receive same subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations,
if any, of the agency making the offer. (Prior code §1-66)
2.48.100: PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter in the city, or who
fails to carry out any of the provisions of this chapter or to comply
therewith, or with any of the orders, rules or regulations made under the
authority of this chapter, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not
exceeding twenty dollars ($20.00) for each separate offense. (Prior code §1-67)
CHAPTER 2.50
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES CODE
SECTION:
2.50.010: Definitions
2.50.020: Contractor Selection And Obligations
2.50.030: Medical Director
2.50.040: Insurance Requirements
2.50.050: Response Times
2.50.060: Violations
2.50.070: Penalties
2.50.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ALS FIRST RESPONDER: Any vehicle not normally used for purposes of patient
transport, and which must meet the following requirements: a) be staffed with a
minimum of a paramedic; b) equipped with the required communications, automatic
vehicle locator, and ALS equipment; and c) certain advanced life support
equipment that will meet or exceed State equipment regulations.
AVL: A system utilizing a technology approved by the Coordinator and which
allows real-time monitoring at the locations of all units in service.
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT OR ALS: Means the treatment of life- threatening medical
emergencies by authorized emergency medical technician-paramedics under medical
control, pursuant to the laws of the City or State, or the provision of such
treatment by other qualified and licensed medical or nursing personnel.
AMBULANCE: Any vehicle permitted by the department and the City which is
equipped to provide advanced or basic life support, which is designed,
constructed, maintained, equipped, or operated for, and is used for or intended
to be used for the transportation of patients.
ARRIVAL AT INCIDENT LOCATION: Means the time an ALS ambulance crew or ALS first
responder notifies the E-911 Center that the ambulance or ALS first responder
has arrived at the scene of an incident. In situations when the ambulance or
ALS first responder has responded to a location other than the scene (e.g.,
staging areas for hazardous material, violent crimes incidents, or non- secured
scenes), arrival "at the incident location" shall be the time the ambulance or
ALS first responder arrives at the designated staging location. If an ambulance
or ALS first responder unit fails to report that it has arrived at the incident
location prior to the crew departing the unit, the response time clock shall
not be stopped until the time of the next communication between the ambulance
and the E-911 system.
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT OR BLS: Means the treatment of life- threatening medical
emergencies by an emergency medical technician or other qualified and licensed
medical and nursing personnel using such techniques approved by City, pursuant
to the law of the State.
CONTRACTOR: Means the entity which City has contracted with to provide
emergency medical services.
DEPARTMENT: Oklahoma Department of Health, Office of Emergency Medical Services
Division.
EMS: Means emergency medical services.
EMS COORDINATOR: The employee or official designated by City as the EMS
Coordinator.
EMT: Means emergency medical technician.
E-911 SYSTEM: City's Emergency Communications Center(s) which receives all
requests for emergency medical services, fire service, and law enforcement.
EMERGENCY 911 COMMUNICATIONS: The E-911 system which receives all requests for
emergency medical services, fire service, and law enforcement for the City.
EMERGENCY REQUEST: A request for emergency services received at E-911 or a
request for emergency services transferred from the E-911 system to contractor.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The delivery of emergency medical services, including
without limitation the response to calls for emergency medical assistance, the
rendering of such levels of medical services as are required by applicable law,
including emergency medical treatment rendered by employees of contractor who
are trained as EMT/AEMT's and paramedics and the provision of ambulance
transportation of patients within City.
EMERGENCY TRANSPORT: Is the transport of a patient in an ALS ambulance
resulting from: a) a response to an emergency request, or b) a response to a
non-emergency request which results in a need for emergency services.
LEVEL 0: No ambulances are available within City.
MEDICAL DIRECTOR: Medical director means an individual who has an active,
unencumbered license to engage in the practice of medicine pursuant to title 63
of the Oklahoma Statutes, sections 1-2501 through 1-2516; and, Oklahoma
Administrative Code, chapter 641, Emergency Medical Services.
NON-EMERGENCY TRANSPORTS: Requested medical transports of patient(s), or
unscheduled transports, not meeting the definition of emergency transport of
patient(s).
PARAMEDIC: A person who is certified by the State to perform basic and advanced
life support procedures, pursuant to the provisions of the laws of the State.
PATIENT: An individual who is ill, sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise
incapacitated, and needs, or is at risk of needing, medical attention, or care
on scene and/or during transport to or from a health care facility.
RESPONSE: Means the act of responding to an emergency or a non- emergency
request, which begins with the dispatching of an ambulance and: a) in the case
of a request resulting in a patient being transported, ends with the
ambulance's arrival at the incident location, or b) in the case of a request
which does not result in a patient transported, ends with cancellation of the
ambulance responding to the request.
RESPONSE TIME: That period of time when contractor is notified of a pending
emergency request, until arrival at the incident location.
SERVICE AREA: The City limits of the City of Warr Acres. (Ord. 1177, 2017)
2.50.020: CONTRACTOR SELECTION AND OBLIGATIONS:
City may provide for EMS service within the service area by selecting a
qualified contractor to perform such services. The contractor shall be selected
in accordance with the Charter and ordinances of the City applicable to any
service contract.
A.   Contractor shall:
   1.   Be solely responsible for acquiring and renewing all licenses, permits,
certificates or similar government approvals which are or may be required by
applicable law and department's rules and regulations for conducting services
described herein.
   2.   Accept assignment of Medicare benefits as payment and shall not bill
Medicare beneficiaries for any additional amount except as permitted by the
Medicare Guidelines for the acceptance of assignment.
   3.   Transport patients from all areas of the service area, in accordance
with Medical Control Destination Protocols, to appropriate medical facilities.
   4.   Provide one dedicated, fully staffed and equipped ambulance, twenty
four (24) hours-per-day, 365-days per year in the City limits unless such
ambulances are not available under the terms of this agreement. The ambulance
dedicated to the City will be based in the City limits or on property
immediately bordering the City limits, and will never leave the City to support
another community, except for the City of Bethany, unless resources are
available for such response. Contractor will not reduce ambulance resources to
level zero (0) in City to serve a mutual-aid request response unless under pre-
determined circumstances, or upon approval of City's authorized contract
administrator.
   5.   Staff each ambulance per the State of Oklahoma's rules, regulations,
legislation and laws. Every ambulance which responds to an emergency or non-
emergency request for service shall be staffed and equipped at the paramedic
level of care.
   6.   Provide a standby ALS ambulance for standby upon request of the EMS
Coordinator when: a) there is reason to believe a life threatening public
emergency presently exists in City (to include fire and law enforcement scenes,
when requested), and b) dedicated special events. Contract may request
additional fees related to providing an ambulance stand-by fee for for-profit
events.
   7.   Not deny access to emergency care and transportation to any person
located in the service area, regardless of ability to pay. Payment for services
shall be subject to the following restrictions:
      a.   If a resident of City, who is a payer into City's Ambulance Service
Utility Assessment Program, requires services, contractor shall bill its
charges to all available third-party payers, on behalf of the resident, and
shall limit its collections to those funds received from all available third-
party payers to the extent permitted by all applicable laws, and shall not
balance- bill the patient or other responsible party (except for deductible(s)
and/or co-pays). Provided, however, that the recipient of said services fully
cooperates with EMS by providing required information for use by contractor
and/or its billing agent(s) in a timely manner.
      b.   If a resident of City, who is a payer into the City's Ambulance
Service Utility Assessment Program, requires services but has no insurance,
contractor shall discount its total charges equal to the Center for Medicare
Services (CMS - Medicare) payment allowable (at the time of service),
regardless if the transport is a CMS qualified payer. Provided, however, that
the recipient of said services must fully cooperate with contractor by
providing required information for use by contractor and/or its billing agent
(s) in a timely manner to substantiate the claim of having no insurance.
      c.   If a resident of City requires services but has no insurance,
contractor agrees to discount its total charges equal to the Center for
Medicare Services (CMS - Medicare) payment allowable (at the time of service),
whether the transport is a CMS qualified payer, or not.
   8.   Not offer incentives, by way of additional salaries or wages, or
compensated leave of absence, to employees based upon the number of procedures
performed or based upon mileage for the provision of ambulance transportation.
   9.   Respond to City's inquiries about service and/or complaints within
three (3) business days of notification.
   10.   Enter into a standard HIPAA Business Associate Agreement with City as
the covered entity to provide for the protection of the privacy and security of
health information.
   11.   Submit reports and supporting documentation to City related to
performance of duties governed by this chapter, such reports to be submitted
within twenty (20) business days following the end of each month. The reports
shall detail the preceding month's ambulance calls and their disposition.
   12.   Contractor shall complete and maintain appropriate documentation and
Pre-Hospital Care Reports per State of Oklahoma rules and regulations, and
those regulations of the Federal government.
   13.   Maintain mutual-aid agreements with surrounding, contiguous ambulance
services in accordance with Oklahoma ambulance licensing protocols (310:641-3-
120) to ensure coverage is provided in the event resources exceed that which
contractor is required to provide. Contractor shall, in turn, provide
reciprocal mutual aid service to neighboring communities providing the
capability exists without jeopardizing the requirements of the primary response
area. (Ord. 1177, 2017)
2.50.030: MEDICAL DIRECTOR:
Contractor shall, at all times, ensure that a medical director is retained. The
role of the medical director is as follows:
A.   Oversee contractor's organization in accordance with the State of Oklahoma
Emergency Medical Services Rules and Regulations governing ambulance services.
Provide oversight for contractor, including ultimate responsibility for the
quality of care, treatment, and services provided.
B.   Review contractor's standard of care by incorporating advancements, which
become known and available from time to time, or to correct defects in the
system standard of care discovered as a result of the Quality Improvement
Program. However, no change shall be made in the system standard of care, which
results in a standard that is less than or in contravention of the minimum
standards required by the laws of the State.
C.   Provide medical oversight of contractor's employees including direct and
in-direct medical oversight. The medical director, or designee, shall provide
medical direction in accordance with the State and Federal protocols and
policies and procedures. Other specific oversight responsibilities shall
include, but may not be limited to:
   1.   Monitoring controlled substance usage.
   2.   Monitoring quality assurance reports.
   3.   Conducting case review.
   4.   Determining and implementing clinical performance improvement
initiatives.
   5.   Incident review.
   6.   Complaint review.
   7.   Continuing education.
D.   Review and approve local medical control standards and requirements
(including if necessary, written and practical tests) for EMS personnel
providing care under the medical director's authority in accordance with the
current system standard of care. Personnel subject to such requirement will
include:
   1.   Persons receiving telephone requests for ambulance services first
responders.
   2.   Ambulance personnel.
   3.   Field training personnel.
E.   Administer testing (if necessary) and authorization of EMS system
personnel, and to establish and promulgate written guidelines in connection
therewith.
F.   Develop guidelines for on-line medical control, transport destination
policies and use of air medical services.
G.   Develop standards applicable to on-board equipment used in the delivery of
first response services and contractor's services within the service area.
H.   Report once each year, in writing, to City on the quality of care and
response time performance being provided by all components of contractor's
operation.
I.   Monitor all aspects of system performance including clinical quality of
care and verification of response time performance reported by first responders
and contractor.
J.   Report once each year, in writing, to City on the quality of care and
response time performance being provided by all components of the City's EMS
system.
K.   Monitor all aspects of City's EMS system performance including clinical
quality of care and verification of response time performance reported by first
responders and contractor.
L.   Contractor shall have controlled substance policies and procedures,
consistent with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, and Oklahoma Bureau
of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs requirements, to govern the storage,
inventory, accountability, restocking, and procurement of controlled drugs and
substances permitted and utilized in the provision of ALS by paramedics.
   1.   The medical director shall approve all controlled substance policies
and procedures.
   2.   Any incident of non-compliance with controlled substance policies and
procedures shall be reported immediately to City. (Ord. 1177, 2017)
2.50.040: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Contractor shall keep in full force and effect a policy or policies of
public liability and property damage insurance, executed by a financially
stable insurance carrier(s) which is licensed or permitted to write insurance
by the Oklahoma Insurance Commission, with coverage provisions insuring the
public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by
reason of the operation of contractor's ambulances, and providing that amount
of recovery shall be in limits of not less than the following sums:
   1.   Automobile liability, combined single limit, in the amount of two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00).
   2.   General liability in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence, three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) aggregate.
   3.   Medical professional liability claims made in the amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, three million dollars ($3,000,000.00)
aggregate.
   4.   Worker's compensation in the amount of the statutory limits plus one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) employer's liability, part B workers'
compensation.
   5.   Excess liability coverage in the amount of five million dollars
($5,000,000.00).
Contractor shall have City named as additional insured per the insurance
policy. (Ord. 1177, 2017)
2.50.050: RESPONSE TIMES:
In each thirty (30) day period, (beginning on the first day of each month), not
less than ninety percent (90%) of contractor's responses to emergency requests
shall be performed in less than eleven (11) minutes with an average of ninety
percent (90%) reliability aggregated monthly in the City of Warr Acres.
Contractor will perform all unscheduled non-emergency requests for service
within two (2) hours, with an average of ninety percent (90%) reliability
aggregated monthly. Contractor will respond "emergency status" to all requests
for service presumptively classified or assumed to be an emergency.
A.   To account for unusual factors beyond contractor's control which might
affect the response time, the following requests for ambulance service shall
not be included in the calculation:
   1.   Calls which are canceled prior to arrival if in accordance with
approved medical protocols and based on information received from first
response units on scene or City's 911 Communications Center(s). This includes
calls canceled by the caller prior to arrival.
   2.   Calls during severe weather conditions where response time compliance
is either impossible or could be achieved only at a greater risk to EMS
personnel or the public than would result from a delayed response.
   3.   Requests during a disaster, locally or in a neighboring authority,
which has requested assistance from City.
   4.   Response times outside defined service area.
   5.   Call for service that are deemed excepted for good cause by the City's
EMS Coordinator. Such grounds include, but are not limited to, the transmission
of erroneous, incomplete, or inaccurate information from City's 911 Dispatch
Center(s).
B.   The following response times shall be monitored and accurately recorded so
that continual audit of these times may be performed as a method to assure the
most efficient responses are being performed:
   1.   Time request for EMS response is received at the dispatch center (this
time shall be indicated when sufficient information has been received from the
caller to initiate a response).
   2.   Time ambulance is notified.
   3.   Time ambulance is en route.
   4.   Time ambulance is on the scene.
   5.   Time ambulance is en route to the hospital or is available if not
needed.
   6.   Time ambulance arrives at the hospital.
   7.   Time ambulance is back in service area. (Ord. 1177, 2017)
2.50.060: VIOLATIONS:
A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to commit any of the
following acts:
   1.   To perform or permit anyone to perform duties as an ambulance driver,
attendant (EMT-basic, EMT-D, or paramedic), system status controller, or first
responder without complying with the terms of this chapter, or for any EMT-
paramedic to seek or accept medical direction by radio contact from anyone who
is not a certified "base station physician";
   2.   To use, or cause to be used, an ambulance service other than
contractor, except for those services described in subsection B of this
section;
   3.   For any person, firm or organization to respond to emergency calls
originating within the regulated service area, other than contractor;
   4.   For any person, firm or organization to provide special events
ambulance standby service within the regulated service area, other than
contractor;
   5.   For any person, firm or organization to respond to routine transport
calls originating within the regulated service areas other than contractor;
   6.   To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an
ambulance, or first responder unit.
B.   It shall not be a violation of this chapter, if the vehicle or ambulance
is:
   1.   A privately owned vehicle not used in the business of transporting
patients who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless;
   2.   A vehicle rendering services as an ambulance in the event of a major
catastrophe or emergency when ambulances with certifications based in the
locality of the catastrophe or emergency are incapacitated or insufficient in
number to render the services needed;
   3.   An ambulance owned or operated by, or under contract with, the Federal
or State government;
   4.   An ambulance transporting a patient to a location within the regulated
service area, which transport originated from a point outside the regulated
service area;
   5.   An ambulance responding to a call pursuant to a mutual aid agreement
with contractor;
   6.   A vehicle engaged in a routine transport call to transport a patient
from a hospital, nursing home or freestanding dialysis center (i.e., a dialysis
center not located on hospital grounds) which is located within the regulated
service area to any jurisdiction outside the regulated service area (the
"receiving jurisdiction"), if the receiving jurisdiction allows contractor to
lawfully engage in routine transport calls to transport patients from
hospitals, nursing homes, and freestanding dialysis centers located within that
receiving jurisdiction to destinations within the regulated service area;
   7.   A vehicle engaged in a routine transport call to transport a patient
from a hospital, nursing home, or freestanding dialysis center located within
the regulated service area to any unincorporated area;
   8.   A vehicle engaged in a routine transport call to transport a patient
from a hospital, nursing home, or freestanding dialysis center located in
either the eastern or western division of the regulated service area, to a
destination in the other division of the regulated service area;
   9.   A vehicle engaged in the interstate transport of a patient. (Ord. 1177,
2017)
2.50.070: PENALTIES:
A.   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by fine and costs not to exceed the sum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) excluding costs.
B.   Each day that any violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1177, 2017)
CHAPTER 2.56
MINOR VIOLATIONS BUREAU
SECTION:
2.56.010: Created
2.56.020: Members
2.56.030: Authority
2.56.010: CREATED:
A minor violations bureau of the city is created. (Prior code §1-29)
2.56.020: MEMBERS:
Any member of the police department or administrative section of the city, when
on duty at the city hall, shall be a member of the minor violations bureau.
(Prior code §1-30)
2.56.030: AUTHORITY:
Any member of the minor violations bureau shall accept a waiver of right to
appear in court and plea of guilty and payment of fine and costs from anyone
charged with the violation of the ordinances of the city. (Prior code §1-31)
CHAPTER 2.60
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR
SECTION:
2.60.010: Office Created
2.60.020: Appointment; Removal From Office
2.60.030: Qualifications
2.60.040: General Duties
2.60.050: Acting Director
2.60.010: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of public works director is hereby created and the executive
official in charge shall be known as the public works director. (Ord. 782 §1,
1996)
2.60.020: APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The public works director shall be appointed by the mayor with consent of the
council. This appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory
service. He shall be at will and subject to rules set forth in the employee
handbook of personnel policies. (Ord. 985 §3, 2003: Ord. 782 §2, 1996)
2.60.030: QUALIFICATIONS:
The qualifications for the public works director shall be as established from
time to time by a written job description adopted by the city council. (Ord.
782 §3, 1996)
2.60.040: GENERAL DUTIES:
A.   Duties of the public works director, under the general supervision of the
mayor, shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   1.   Plan, assign, direct and exercise general supervision over all public
works divisions including, but not limited to, sanitation, sewer, streets,
parks, engineering and city garage;
   2.   Prepare and submit budget for public works divisions;
   3.   Make periodic inspection of city public works department facilities and
operations;
   4.   Review reports of all public works department divisions' activities and
progress for evaluation upon request and determine appropriate actions
required;
   5.   Receive complaints concerning city services from citizens and resolve
problems or forward to appropriate division for handling;
   6.   Prepare special reports as required and serve as advisor to mayor and
council;
   7.   Attend council, planning commission, traffic commission and board of
adjustment meetings;
   8.   Respond to questionnaires, surveys and other requests for information
from public, other government agencies, mayor, council and others;
   9.   Prepare applications for grants and funding for public works related
projects;
   10.   Coordinate engineering planning of city projects with consultants,
other cities, state, county and federal agencies;
   11.   Establish division policies and procedures;
   12.   Perform other duties as assigned or required.
B.   The public works director shall have authority in the following areas:
   1.   No authority on private property;
   2.   No code enforcement authority or traffic control unless directly
related to his area of responsibility. If any traffic control must be used then
the police and fire departments shall be properly advised;
   3.   Areas of authority and responsibility limited to all city streets right
of way to right of way, all public easements, all city property, sewers and
sanitation.
C.   Any ruling that may adversely affect a citizen or business may be appealed
to the city council. (Ord. 782 §4, 1996)
2.60.050: ACTING DIRECTOR:
During temporary absence or disability of the public works director, the person
designated by the public works director or the mayor at the time shall serve as
acting public works director. (Ord. 782 §5, 1996)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE 1
Purchases And Repairs   3.04
Returned Checks Or Other Negotiable Instruments   3.05
Unpaid Debts, Accounts Or Fees Owed To The City   3.06
Termination Of Delinquent Utility Accounts   3.07
Tax On Public Utilities   3.08
Sales Tax   3.12
Excise Tax   3.13
Telephone Tax   3.16
Excise Use Tax   3.20
Hotel Tax   3.22
General Schedule Of Fees   3.24
Disposition Of Personal Property   3.28
Public Records; Schedule Of Fees   3.29
Capital Improvement Plan   3.30
Capital Building Fund   3.40
Redevelopment Trust Authority Fund   3.50
Juvenile Court Fund   3.60
 
Notes
1 1. Oklahoma Constitution article 10 § 20.
CHAPTER 3.04
PURCHASES AND REPAIRS
SECTION:
3.04.010: Approval Of Purchase
3.04.011: Authorized Purchases
3.04.020: Contracts; Sealed Bids
3.04.030: Notice For Bids
3.04.040: Filing Of Bids
3.04.050: Emergencies
3.04.010: APPROVAL OF PURCHASE:
The mayor shall contract for and purchase all supplies, materials and equipment
for the offices, departments and agencies of the city government; provided,
that before any such contract is entered into or such purchase is made
involving the expenditure of more than seven thousand five hundred dollars
($7,500.00), the same shall be approved by the council. Except in cases of
purchases of new or used equipment from or through a governmental agency, or
purchases of uniforms, bulk orders of concrete, asphalt, sand, gasoline or
diesel fuel, or in case of an emergency, all purchases in excess of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be submitted to competitive bidding under
such terms as the council shall direct. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
the mayor or the council from authorizing leases of equipment as may be
provided by law.
The purchase of supplies, equipment, materials that are similar or
substantially similar to supplies, equipment or materials made available to the
city pursuant to a valid contract competitively bid by the state of Oklahoma,
or by any political subdivision thereof, by any other state (or political
subdivision thereof), or pursuant to a governmental services administration
(GSA) contract shall be deemed to have met the competitive bidding requirements
of this section. (Ord. 1165, 2015)
3.04.011: AUTHORIZED PURCHASES:
Authorized purchases for the maintenance and operation of the various
departments in the budget shall not be infringed, provided each purchase shall
not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Request for purchases outside the
budget authorization must be approved by the council prior to the actual order.
(Ord. 777 §1, 1996: Ord. 752 §1, 1994)
3.04.020: CONTRACTS; SEALED BIDS:
Except in cases of emergency, before entering into any contract or any purchase
which requires and has the approval of the council, lease or rental contracts
with or without option to purchase excluded, the mayor shall give written
notice for sealed bids for the furnishing of such supplies, materials or
equipment. (Ord. 808 §1, 1996: Ord. 786 §1, 1996: prior code §8-2)
3.04.030: NOTICE FOR BIDS:
The notice required by section
3.04.020 of this chapter shall state the time and place for filing the bids,
and shall contain an accurate description of the supplies, materials or
equipment to be purchased, the time and place the bids shall be opened, and
shall state that all bids may be rejected. (Prior code §8-3)
3.04.040: FILING OF BIDS:
The bids shall be in writing, sealed and filed with the city clerk prior to the
time they are to be opened and the bids shall be opened at the time specified
in the notice, at which time any or all bids may be rejected, or the mayor may
readvertise for bids, or after due consideration thereof may award a contract
to, or purchase such supplies, materials or equipment from, the lowest and best
responsible bidder. (Prior code §8-4)
3.04.050: EMERGENCIES:
It is further provided by this chapter that the mayor shall have the authority,
in cases of "emergency" as hereinafter defined, to effect repairs to any and
all city equipment, buildings or property, not to exceed twelve thousand
dollars ($12,000.00). The mayor shall notify the council of such action within
ten (10) days, or submit a full report at the next council meeting, whichever
shall first occur. The notification or report shall include a statement of the
reasons for his actions. Such statement shall be entered into the official
minutes at the next regular council meeting. For purposes of this chapter,
"emergency" is defined as a condition resulting from a sudden, unexpected
happening, or unforeseen occurrence or condition, and/or situation, either as
to its onset or as to its extent, of such severity or magnitude that immediate
response or action is necessary to preserve the health and safety of the public
or environment or to preserve property. It shall also be defined as a condition
or situation which, if allowed to continue, would lead to economic loss to the
city or to further damage of city equipment, buildings or property. (Ord. 994
§1, 2003: Ord. 873 §1, 1998: prior code §8-5)
CHAPTER 3.05
RETURNED CHECKS OR OTHER NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
SECTION:
3.05.010: Collection Service Charge
3.05.010: COLLECTION SERVICE CHARGE:
A.   There shall be a twenty five dollar ($25.00) service charge imposed on the
issuer and collected by the city for the handling on any checks or other
negotiable instruments when payment thereon is not received when demand is
made.
B.   The city clerk may charge and collect from the issuer of any dishonored
checks or other negotiable instruments which are returned to the city from any
bank or depository institution, the fee prescribed in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 890 §1, 1999: Ord. 594 §1, 1984)
CHAPTER 3.06
UNPAID DEBTS, ACCOUNTS OR FEES OWED TO THE CITY
SECTION:
3.06.010: Cases Referred To Collection Agency; Fee
3.06.010: CASES REFERRED TO COLLECTION AGENCY; FEE:
Any debt or account receivable of the city including, but not limited to,
unpaid fees, penalties, interest and other sums due the city which have been
referred to a collection agency shall have a collection agency fee assessed as
a cost in the respective case. Said fee shall be in the amount of thirty five
percent (35%) or the actual fee charged by the collection agency pursuant to
its contract with the city, if different. (Ord. 1112, 2011)
CHAPTER 3.07
TERMINATION OF DELINQUENT UTILITY ACCOUNTS
SECTION:
3.07.010: Policy
3.07.020: Definitions
3.07.030: Termination Procedures
3.07.040: Stay Of Termination Procedures
3.07.050: Order Of Priority For Payments Made
3.07.060: Termination Process For Sewer Service
3.07.010: POLICY:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to establish the policies which have been
adopted by the City of Warr Acres regarding the determination of delinquency
and the declaration that a utility account has not been paid such that the
services provided to the account holder/property by the City of Warr Acres may
be terminated. This chapter provides for the mandatory process for the
declaration of a delinquency, including establishing the rights of the account
holder and/or property owner to contest the declaration of a delinquency, to
arraign for payment of amounts due and/or to consent to the termination of
utility service(s). This chapter also establishes the process for coordination
with any other public utility providers (e.g., City of Oklahoma City vis-a-vis
water service) who may be requested to terminate 1  their utility service to
the subject account/property so that the termination of service provided herein
may be in effect. (Ord. 1171, 2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See OS tit. 11, § 22-112.5.
3.07.020: DEFINITIONS:
The terms utilized in this chapter shall have the same meaning and incorporate
the same definitions (when applicable) as provided for in title 8,
chapter 8.08 and title 13,
chapter 13.04 of this Code. Further, the following definitions shall be used
and are specific to this chapter:
DELINQUENT: When used in conjunction with the term utility account shall mean a
state where the account holder and/or property owner has failed to pay the full
amount owed on any bill on a utility account, including any service fees,
interest, penalties, and/or required deposits, after thirty (30) days from the
date on which the bill is stated to be due. An account is delinquent after the
first delinquency and any subsequent delinquencies are to be included within
the original delinquency.
FEES: In the context of a utility account shall mean any monies owed to the
City of Warr Acres for the provision of utility service and shall include, but
not be limited to, the service charges for the provision of sewer service and/
or garbage and refuse service, as well as any applicable fees (including, but
not limited to, line maintenance, ambulance service, EPA fees, waste fees,
etc.) as well as any late charges that have been assessed.
UTILITY ACCOUNTS: Shall mean accounts opened and billed by the Warr Acres
Utility Billing Department for the purpose of collecting monies owed (service
charges, fees and/or late charges) to the City of Warr Acres for garbage and
refuse service (see title 8,
chapter 8.08 of this Code) and sewer service (see title 13,
chapter 13.04 of this Code) as well as any other fees which are billed by the
Utility Billing Department. (Ord. 1171, 2016)
3.07.030: TERMINATION PROCEDURES:
Whenever any customer or property owner has failed to pay the full amount owed
for fees on any monthly utility account bill for more than thirty (30) days,
the account is subject to a declaration of delinquency by the City and to
termination of service as provided herein.
A.   Notice: Notice of the proceedings provided for herein shall be provided to
the account holder of record as well as the property owner (where different) by
United States mail postmarked at least fourteen (14) days prior to the deadline
to request a public hearing in front of the City Council and shall be sent to:
   1.   The physical address where the service is provided,
   2.   The address of the account holder as listed on the application for
utility service (if different), and
   3.   The mailing address listed with the Oklahoma County Assessor for the
owner of the subject property (if different than the address for the account
holder or the physical address).
The notice provided herein may also be served on the relevant party by personal
service. Finally, notice may be made for the physical address by posting the
notice on the premises (for multi-family dwellings, such notice shall be posted
on the door of each affected dwelling).
B.   Administrative Fee: There shall be an administrative fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) for the purpose of recovering the City's costs (wages and expenses) in
preparing and sending all notices. This fee shall be waived for any account
where the Council declares that no delinquency exists and may be waived by the
Council in other cases at its discretion.
C.   Termination Of Garbage And Refuse Service: The City may cease providing
garbage and refuse service to any property subject to a delinquency proceeding
as provided herein immediately upon providing notice (by U.S. mail or posting)
to the physical address provided for herein subject to the stay procedures
established in section
3.07.040 of this chapter.
D.   Termination Of Sewer Service: Sewer service may be terminated by the City
upon the declaration of a delinquency by the City Council as provided for in
section
3.07.060 of this chapter and subject to the stay procedures established in
section
3.07.040 of this chapter.
E.   Declaration Of A Finding Of Delinquency: The City Council shall be
responsible for declaring a delinquency in any utility account. Upon such a
declaration, the City may proceed with the termination of any remaining
services to the address as provided for herein. The City Council shall hold a
public hearing prior to making such a declaration as provided herein.
F.   Public Hearing: The City Council, at any regular or special meeting, may
make a finding declaring a delinquency after the opportunity for the account
holder and/or property owner to appear before the Council at a public hearing.
The procedures for such public hearing shall be as follows:
   1.   The notice sent shall indicate that any interested party (resident at
the physical address, account holder and/or property owner) shall have a right
to appear before the City Council. Any interested party must notify the City
Clerk or his/her designee (in person or in writing; if in writing, must be
received by the City prior to the date established herein) of their request for
a public hearing before the City Council at least one business day prior to the
date of the Council meeting as indicated in the notice (e.g., where the Council
is to meet at 6:00 P.M. on a Tuesday, the request for a hearing must be
submitted prior to 5:00 P.M. on the Monday immediately prior to the Council
meeting unless such Monday is a legal holiday and then notice shall be provided
by 5:00 P.M. on the first available business day prior to the Council meeting).
   2.   Council shall determine that the notice requirements have been met and
shall make a record of the same.
   3.   The list of accounts for which a delinquency is to be declared shall be
listed on the consent docket for the Council (by physical address). The Clerk
shall notify the Council which addresses are requested to be removed from the
consent docket for a public hearing. Where an interested party has timely
notified the Clerk of their request for a public hearing, the physical address
for that interested party shall be removed from the consent docket and shall be
heard in a public hearing as provided for herein. Any Council member may, at
his/her discretion, remove from the consent docket any physical address for
which a timely notice has not been received so that a public hearing may be
held. Once all physical addresses for which a public hearing is to be held have
been removed (mandatory removals and discretionary removals), the Council may
proceed to declare, by way of an affirmative vote on the remainder of the
consent docket, that an uncontested delinquency is declared for all physical
addresses which have not been removed from the consent docket.
   4.   The Council shall hold a public hearing on any addresses removed from
the consent docket prior to declaring that a delinquency exists at the subject
physical address. The Council may vote, address by address, to declare a
delinquency exists, to declare that no delinquency exists, to table the hearing
and/or vote on the declaration of a delinquency to a future meeting (no
subsequent notice is required to be sent if the date and time of the future
meeting is stated in the motion), or to remand the account to staff for further
consideration.
   5.   The public hearing on any address subject to termination of utility
services shall consist of a call to the interested party to be heard first,
followed by a call to anyone from the public who wishes to be heard (note:
notices of the hearing are not sent to adjacent property owners and sufficient
notice is given in the posting of the subject properties physical addresses on
the Council's agenda). The Council may hear from any interested party or any
member of the public as to the topic of termination of service. This shall
include hearing from the interested party or a member of the public on the
issues of whether there is cause why the services should not be terminated,
whether there is a dispute (and what evidence exists of the dispute) as to the
amount claimed to be owed, or any other topics relevant to the issue at hand.
   6.   The Council shall open and close the public hearing on majority vote of
the members present. Once the hearing is closed, the Council may take such
action, by motion and majority vote, as is provided for herein.
   7.   If a delinquency is declared by the Council, any utility services
provided to the physical address which have not already been terminated shall
be terminated as provided herein. (Ord. 1171, 2016)
3.07.040: STAY OF TERMINATION PROCEDURES:
Any customer or user who wishes to stay termination proceedings (see section
3.07.030 of this chapter) prior to termination of service may do so as provided
herein. A customer or user may stay termination proceedings by making
arrangements prior to the termination date which are agreeable to the City to
satisfy the full delinquency, provided, however, that a customer or user who
makes such arrangements and who, thereafter, fails to fulfill those
arrangements may be deemed to have defaulted on the agreement and the stay of
termination proceedings may be lifted by the City and the termination
proceedings reinstated where they left off. Additionally, a customer wishing to
stay termination proceedings for the purpose of challenging the finding of a
delinquency by the City Council may do so by depositing with the City an amount
equal to the amount declared to be delinquent by the City and shall further be
responsible for depositing monies equal to fees billed for service which has
not yet been terminated, such deposits being due within thirty (30) days of
billing. Failure to deposit monies equal to the amount owed for ongoing monthly
utility service during the pendency of a stay shall constitute grounds for the
lifting of the stay by the City. A satisfactory deposit shall stay proceedings
for up to six (6) months or longer if deemed appropriate by a court of
competent jurisdiction. During the stay period, the customer or user may
arrange for the rescheduling of the hearing described herein. A customer or
user may also use this sixty (60) day stay period to seek further relief by
whatever legal means available provided, however, that the customer or user
must first contest the validity of the delinquency through the hearing
procedure described herein. In the event the challenge to the amount claimed to
be delinquent is successful and it is determined a lesser amount is owed, the
customer or user shall be entitled to a refund of the amount deposited with the
City in excess of the amount owed. (Ord. 1180, 2018)
3.07.050: ORDER OF PRIORITY FOR PAYMENTS MADE:
Where a utility account is in arrears, subject to termination proceedings, or
has been terminated and subsequent payments are received (not payments made as
a stay deposit under section
3.07.040 of this chapter) in an amount less than the total due (current month
plus any amount in arrears), the monies shall be credited to the account in the
following priority:
A.   Any current (not past-due) balance shall be satisfied first with priority
going to garbage and refuse charges, then to fees, and finally to sewer service
charges.
B.   Once all current balances are satisfied, payments shall begin to satisfy
past due balances in the following priority: late charges, then back due
garbage and refuse charges, then fees, then sewer service charges, and finally
all costs actually incurred by the City of Warr Acres associated with the
termination of water and sewer service.
C.   Where partial payment is made but no agreement staying termination
proceedings has been entered into with the City Clerk (or his/her designee),
the termination proceedings will continue unless and until the amount owed is
either satisfied through payment or a stay is issued. (Ord. 1171, 2016)
3.07.060: TERMINATION PROCESS FOR SEWER SERVICE:
For sewer service, once a delinquency has been declared by the City Council,
the City Clerk shall, within a reasonable time period following the Council
meeting where the delinquency was declared, certify the finding of a
delinquency for each address. Pursuant to Oklahoma Statutes, title 11, section
22-112.5, the following process is established for the termination of sewer
service at a physical address where a delinquency has been declared. This
section shall only apply to those accounts where a delinquency exists for
amounts billed and due on or after the effective date of this chapter. Where a
delinquency is declared by the Council, the following process shall govern the
termination of sewer service:
A.   The City of Warr Acres shall notify any public water provider (e.g., city
of Oklahoma City) of the declaration of the delinquency and shall request the
termination of water service to the subject physical address as provided for
herein.
B.   The City of Warr Acres shall request the termination of water service and
propose a date on which water service is proposed to be terminated, such date
must be at least thirty (30) days after the date the request is sent to the
public water service provider. A copy of this request along with a notice from
the City of Warr Acres of the date water service is proposed to be terminated
shall be sent to the account holder and to the property owner and shall also
include a notice that sewer service will be discontinued on or after the date
on which water service is proposed to be terminated.
C.   The public entity providing water service may terminate water service at
the subject property on the proposed date for termination or within thirty (30)
days thereafter.
D.   Should the sewer or waste water delinquency be resolved during the
pendency of the termination of water service, or sometime thereafter, the City
of Warr Acres shall provide the public water service provider with notice of
the resolution of delinquency no later than the first business day following
resolution. Should the sewer or waste water delinquency be resolved during the
pendency of the termination of water service, or sometime thereafter, the City
of Warr Acres shall provide the account holder and the property owner notice of
the resolution of the delinquency, upon request.
E.   The City of Warr Acres may effect the termination of sewer service anytime
after the date water service is terminated as long as notice was given at least
thirty (30) days prior to the date on which water service was actually
terminated. (Ord. 1180, 2018)
CHAPTER 3.08
TAX ON PUBLIC UTILITIES 1
SECTION:
3.08.010: Required
3.08.020: Exemption
3.08.030: Amount Of Tax
3.08.040: Annual Tax Paid Quarterly
3.08.050: Failure Or Refusal To Pay
3.08.060: Tax To Constitute Lien
3.08.070: Public Utility Commissioner
3.08.080: Quarterly Report; Examination Of Books And Records
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS art. 26.
3.08.010: REQUIRED:
No person, firm, association or corporation, either as principal or agent,
shall conduct, carry on, engage in or operate a business in the city for the
furnishing and sale of power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water for
residential or commercial use without paying to the city an annual tax upon the
gross receipts from residential and commercial sales, which tax shall be in
lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax levied by the
city. (Prior code §15-1)
3.08.020: EXEMPTION:
The tax authorized to be levied under section
3.08.010 of this chapter shall apply to all persons, firms, associations or
corporations engaged in the business of furnishing power, light, heat, gas,
electricity or water within the city limits for residential or commercial use
except it shall not apply to any person, firm, association or corporation
operating under a valid franchise from the city. (Prior code §15-2)
3.08.030: AMOUNT OF TAX:
The amount of tax to be paid to the city shall be two percent (2%) of the gross
receipts from residential and commercial sales of power, light, heat, gas,
electricity or water within the city limits. (Prior code §15-3)
3.08.040: ANNUAL TAX PAID QUARTERLY:
The tax authorized to be levied under section
3.08.010 of this chapter shall be for the full fiscal year, each year. The tax
shall be payable quarterly and shall be placed in the general revenue of the
city. (Charter 2009: prior code §15-4)
3.08.050: FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO PAY:
Any person, firm, association or corporation failing or refusing to pay the tax
authorized to be levied under section
3.08.010 of this chapter shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be ousted
from the city, and in addition thereto an action may be maintained against such
person, firm, association or corporation for the amount of the tax and all
expenses of collection of same, including reasonable attorney fees. (Prior code
§15-5)
3.08.060: TAX TO CONSTITUTE LIEN:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall constitute a first and prior lien on all
of the assets located within the limits of any person, firm, association or
corporation engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas,
electricity or water. (Prior code §15-6)
3.08.070: PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSIONER:
The mayor shall act as public utility commissioner and shall have full
authority to act in dealing with any person, firm, association or corporation
engaged in the furnishing of power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water for
residential or commercial use in the city in collection of the tax levied by
this chapter, and shall make such check of the books, records or audits of said
persons, firms, associations or corporations as may be necessary in the proper
collection of the tax. The public utility commissioner shall furnish a full
written report of all taxes so collected and of all audits or checks made by
him each quarter and such other reports to the city council when requested, and
the reports must be approved by a majority vote of the council; providing,
however, that the mayor may appoint, with the consent of the city council, for
a period of time to be determined by them, a proper and competent person to
serve as public utility commissioner. (Prior code §15-10)
3.08.080: QUARTERLY REPORT; EXAMINATION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Any person, firm, association or corporation engaged in the business of
furnishing power, light, heat, gas, electricity or water for residential or
commercial use in the city shall furnish to the public utility commissioner a
quarterly report of the gross receipts from the sale of power, light, heat,
gas, electricity or water within the city limits and, when so requested in
writing, shall permit the examination of all books, records or audits of said
persons, firms, associations or corporations pertaining to the sale of power,
light, heat, gas, electricity or water by the public utility commissioner or by
a duly authorized auditor representing the city. (Prior code §15-11)
CHAPTER 3.12
SALES TAX 1
SECTION:
3.12.010: Purpose
3.12.020: Definitions
3.12.030: Tax Collector
3.12.040: Permits To Do Business
3.12.050: Taxable Sales Designated
3.12.060: Sales And Receipts Exemptions
3.12.070: Transfer Of Tangible Personal Property Exemptions
3.12.080: Payment Procedure
3.12.090: Bracket System; Remittance
3.12.100: Collection
3.12.110: Classification Of Taxpayers
3.12.120: Vendor's Duty To Collect Tax
3.12.130: Returns And Remittances
3.12.140: Delinquency In Reporting And Remittances
3.12.150: Waiver Of Interest Or Penalty
3.12.160: Erroneous Tax Payment
3.12.170: Penalty
3.12.180: Fertilizer Exempted
3.12.190: Confidentiality Of Records
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS § 1323 et seq., art. 13.
3.12.010: PURPOSE:
It is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the
support of the functions of the municipal government of the city. (Prior code
§8-8)
3.12.020: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma sales tax
code, section 1302, title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes supplement 1965, are
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Prior code §8-19)
3.12.030: TAX COLLECTOR:
"Tax collector", as used in this chapter, means the department of the city
government, or the official agency of the state, duly designated according to
law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax
levied in this chapter. (Prior code §8-18)
3.12.040: PERMITS TO DO BUSINESS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purpose of this
chapter, ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirements for an
additional city permit for the same purpose. (Prior code §8-6)
3.12.050: TAXABLE SALES DESIGNATED:
A.   There is levied an excise tax of two percent (2%) upon the gross proceeds
or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the sales tax law of the
state, including, but not exclusive of, the following:
   1.   Tangible personal property;
   2.   Natural or artificial gas, electricity, ice, steam or any other utility
or public service, except water;
   3.   Transportation for hire of persons by common carriers, including
railroads, both steam and electric, motor transportation companies, taxicab
companies, pullman car companies, airlines, and all other means of
transportation for hire;
   4.   Service by telephone and telegraph companies to subscribers or users,
including transmission of messages, whether local or long distance. This
includes all service and rental charges having any connection with transmission
of any messages;
   5.   Printing or printed matter of all types, kinds and characters and the
service of printing or overprinting;
   6.   Service of furnishing rooms by hotels, apartment hotels, public rooming
houses and public lodging houses and tourist camps;
   7.   Service of furnishing storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and
parking lots;
   8.   Foods, confections, and all drinks sold or dispensed by hotels,
restaurants or other dispensers, and sold for immediate consumption upon the
premises or delivered or carried away from the premises for consumption
elsewhere;
   9.   Advertising of all kinds, types and character, including any and all
devices used for advertising purposes and the servicing of any advertising
devices, except as provided in subsection
3.12.060A14 of this chapter.
B.   Dues or fees to clubs, and the sale of tickets or admission to places of
amusement, to athletic, entertainment, recreational events, or dues or fees for
the privilege of having access to or the use of amusement, entertainment,
athletic or recreational facilities, including free or complimentary passes,
tickets, dues or fees are declared to have a value equivalent to the sale price
of tickets, passes, admissions, fees or dues of like kind or character.
C.   For the purpose of this chapter, sales of services and tangible personal
property made for the purpose of developing real estate, even though such real
estate is intended for resale as real property, are declared to be sales to
consumers or users. Sales of service and tangible personal property, including
materials, supplies and equipment made to contractors who use the same in the
performance of any contract, are declared to be sales to consumers or users and
not sales for resale. Sales of tangible personal property to persons who are
primarily engaged in selling their services shall be deemed sales to consumers
or users and, therefore, taxable. Sales of tangible personal property to
peddlers, solicitors and other salesmen who do not have established places of
business shall be deemed to be sales to consumers or users, and, therefore,
taxable. (Ord. 479 §1, 1978)
3.12.060: SALES AND RECEIPTS EXEMPTIONS:
A.   There is specifically exempted from the tax levied by this chapter the
gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the sales tax law of Oklahoma,
including, but not exclusive of, and derived from, the:
   1.   Sale of nonintoxicating beverages taxed as provided by state law;
   2.   Sale of cigarettes and such tobacco products as are taxed by state law;
   3.   Sale of raw products from the farm, orchard or garden, where such sale
is made by the producer of such raw products directly to the consumer or user;
gross receipts or gross proceeds derived from the sale of livestock, poultry,
poultry products and dairy products by the producers. Exemptions granted by
this subsection A3 shall not apply when such articles are sold, even though by
the producer thereof, at or from an "established business place" not on a farm;
neither shall this exemption apply unless the articles are produced or grown
within the state. The provisions of this subsection A3 are intended to exempt
the sale by livestock producers of livestock sold at special livestock sales.
The provisions of this subsection A3 are intended to exempt the sale of dairy
products when sold by a dairyman or farmer who owns all of the cows from which
the dairy products he sells are produced. The provisions of this subsection A3
shall not be construed to exempt sales by florists, nurserymen and chicken
hatcheries;
   4.   Dues paid to fraternal, religious, civic, charitable or educational
societies or organizations by regular members thereof, provided such societies
or organizations operate under what is commonly termed the lodge plan or
system, and provided such societies or organizations do not operate for a
profit which inures to the benefit of any individual member or members thereof
to exclusion of other members;
   5.   Sale of tangible personal property or services to or by churches,
except where such organizations may be engaged in business for profit or
savings, competing with other persons engaged in the same or similar business;
   6.   Gross receipts and gross proceeds derived from the transportation of
school children to and from schools and high schools in motor and other
vehicles; transportation of persons where the fare of each person does not
exceed fifteen cents ($0.15), or local transportation of persons within the
corporate limits of cities and towns except by taxicabs;
   7.   Sale of food in public, common, high school or college cafeterias and
lunchrooms operated primarily for teachers and pupils, not operated primarily
for the public and not operated for profit;
   8.   Carrier sales made directly to consumers or users of newspapers or any
other periodicals where any individual transaction does not exceed twenty cents
($0.20);
   9.   Sales to the United States government, the state, or any of its
political subdivisions;
   10.   Sale of gasoline or motor fuel on which the motor fuel tax, gasoline
excise tax or special fuels tax has been paid to the state;
   11.   Sale of crude petroleum or natural or casinghead gas and other
products subject to gross production tax under the provisions of the laws of
this state. This exemption shall not apply when such products are sold to a
consumer or user for consumption or use, except when used for injection into
the earth for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the production of oil or
gas;
   12.   Sales of motor vehicles, attached optional equipment and accessories,
on which sale the Oklahoma motor vehicle excise tax has been paid;
   13.   Sales by county, district and state fairs;
   14.   Sale of advertising space in newspapers and periodicals and billboard
advertising services, and sales of time for radio and television broadcasts of
advertising;
   15.   Sales for resale to persons regularly engaged in the business of
reselling the articles purchased, whether within or without the state, provided
that such sales to residents of this state are made to persons to whom sales
tax permits have been issued by the Oklahoma tax commission as provided by law.
This exemption shall not apply to the sales of articles made to persons holding
permits when such persons purchase items for their use and which they are not
regularly engaged in the business of reselling; neither shall this exemption
apply to sales of tangible personal property to peddlers, solicitors and other
salesmen who do not have sales tax permits or established places of business.
Goods, wares, merchandise and property sold for use in manufacturing,
compounding, processing, assembling or preparing for sale shall be classified
as having been sold for the purpose of resale or the subject matter of resale
only in the event that:
      a.   Such goods, wares, merchandise or property is purchased for the
purpose of being manufactured into a finished article and if it becomes a
recognizable, integral part of the manufactured, compounded, processed,
assembled or prepared products, or
      b.   If it is consumed in the process of manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling or preparing products for resale;
   16.   Sale of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons
establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the state, and machinery
and equipment purchased and used by persons in the operation of manufacturing
plants already established in the state; provided this exemption shall not
apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly
used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under this
chapter. "Manufacturing plants" means those establishments primarily engaged in
manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such;
   17.   Sale of tangible personal property manufactured in the state when sold
by the manufacturer to a person who transports it to another state for
immediate and exclusive use in some other state;
   18.   Sale of an interest in tangible personal property to a partner or
other person who after such sale owns a joint interest in such tangible
personal property where the Oklahoma sales or use tax has previously been paid
on such tangible personal property.
B.   Sales of containers shall be exempt when sold to a person regularly
engaged in the business of reselling empty or filled containers, or when he
purchases such containers for the purpose of packaging raw products of farm,
garden or orchard, for resale to the consumer or processor; provided this
exemption shall not apply to the sale of containers used more than once and
which are ordinarily known as returnable containers unless a tax under this
chapter is collected and paid to the tax collector with respect to each and
every transfer by such person of title or possession of such returnable
container if made to any consumer or user within this state, nor shall it apply
to the sale of labels or other materials delivered along with items sold but
which are not necessary or absolutely essential to the sale of the sold
merchandise.
C.   Exemptions of poultry and livestock feed, and farm machinery, as
prescribed by the Oklahoma sales tax code, shall be equally applicable as
exemptions from the tax levied in this chapter. (Prior code §8-10)
3.12.070: TRANSFER OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY EXEMPTIONS:
There is also specifically exempted from the tax levied in this chapter the
transfer of tangible personal property exempted from the sales tax law of the
state, inclusive, but not exclusive of, the following:
A.   From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a reorganization.
As used in this subsection, "reorganization" means:
   1.   A statutory merger of consolidation,
   2.   The acquisition by a corporation of substantially all of the properties
of another corporation when the consideration is solely all or a part of the
voting stock of the acquiring corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary
corporation;
B.   In connection with the winding up, dissolution or liquidation of a
corporation only when there is a distribution in-kind to the shareholders of
the property of such corporation;
C.   To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such corporation where
the former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the
transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or securities received by
each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to
the transfer;
D.   To a partnership in the organization of such partnership if the former
owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer, members
of such partnerships and the interest in the partnership, received by each, is
substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the
transfer;
E.   From a partnership to the members thereof when made in-kind in the
dissolution of such partnership. (Prior code §8-11)
3.12.080: PAYMENT PROCEDURE:
The tax levied in this chapter shall be due and payable at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the sales
tax law of the state. (Prior code §8-12)
3.12.090: BRACKET SYSTEM; REMITTANCE:
A.   The tax levied in this chapter shall be paid to the tax collector at the
time and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales taxes under
the sales tax law of the state.
B.   The following bracket system shall be adopted for the convenience of
vendors in collecting both the two percent (2%) state sales tax and the two
percent (2%) sales tax. Such bracket system is designed so as not to be
inconsistent with the purpose of the bracket system provided in section 1307,
title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes supplement 1971, in respect to the state
sales tax, and is as follows:
 
Amount Of Sale             Tax
$0.01  to $0.12, inclusiveNo tax
0.13  to 0.37, inclusive  $0.01
0.38  to 0.62, inclusive  0.02
0.63  to 0.87, inclusive  0.03
0.88  to 1.12, inclusive  0.04
1.13  to 1.37, inclusive  0.05
 
C.   The use of the above bracket system does not relieve the vendor from the
duty and liability to remit to the tax commission the prescribed amount of
gross receipts or gross proceeds (less the discount allowed by law and
ordinance) derived from all sales. (Ord. 481, 1979: Ord. 473 §1, 1978)
3.12.100: COLLECTION:
Such taxes, penalty and interest due under this chapter shall at all times
constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of
unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Prior
code §8-14)
3.12.110: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers under this
chapter shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma sales
tax code. (Prior code §8-15)
3.12.120: VENDOR'S DUTY TO COLLECT TAX:
A.   The tax levied in this chapter shall be paid by the consumer or user to
the vendor, and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to
collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this
chapter, or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average
equivalent thereof.
B.   Vendors shall add the tax imposed in this chapter, or the average
equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added such tax shall
constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or
user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same
manner as other debts.
C.   A vendor, as defined herein, who wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects
or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied in this chapter, or
wilfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either
directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax
levied in this chapter, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or
otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax, or paying
the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price
including the tax, or in any manner whatsoever, is guilty of an offense, and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than twenty dollars ($20.00)
including costs. (Prior code §8-16)
3.12.130: RETURNS AND REMITTANCES:
Returns and remittances of the tax levied in this chapter, and collected shall
be made to the tax collector at the time, and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma sales tax code;
and remittances of tax collected under this chapter shall be subject to the
same discount as may be allowed by the Oklahoma sales tax code for collection
of state sales taxes. (Prior code §8-17)
3.12.140: DELINQUENCY IN REPORTING AND REMITTANCES:
Section 217 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes supplement 1965, is adopted
and made a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter and interest and
penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are levied and shall
be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by
this chapter; provided, that the failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and
transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by
this chapter shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such
delinquency continues for a period of five (5) days, the taxpayer shall forfeit
his claim to any discount allowed under this chapter. (Prior code §8-20)
3.12.150: WAIVER OF INTEREST OR PENALTY:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
taxpayer's failure to pay the city tax levied in this chapter may be waived or
remitted in the same manner as provided for the waiver or remittance as applied
in administration of the state sales tax provided in section 220 of title 68 of
the Oklahoma Statutes supplement 1965; and to accomplish the purposes of this
section the applicable provisions of section 220 are adopted by reference and
made a part hereof. (Prior code §8-21)
3.12.160: ERRONEOUS TAX PAYMENT:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax levied in this chapter may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
administration of the state sales tax as set forth in section 227 of title 68
of the Oklahoma Statutes supplement 1965; and to accomplish the purposes of
this section, the applicable provisions of section 227 are adopted by reference
and made a part hereof. (Prior code §8-22)
3.12.170: PENALTY:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances required in this
chapter or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending
taxpayer shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty dollars ($20.00)
including costs. (Prior code §8-23)
3.12.180: FERTILIZER EXEMPTED:
In addition to all other exemptions allowed by this chapter the sales of
agricultural fertilizer to persons regularly engaged for profit in the business
of farming and/or ranching which are exempt from state sales taxes under
provisions of section 1305b(a) of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes supplement
1965 shall likewise be exempt from the city sales tax levied in this chapter.
(Prior code §8-24)
3.12.190: CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same, the provisions of section 205 of the Oklahoma sales
tax code, and each subsection thereof is adopted by reference and made fully
effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if herein
set forth in full. (Prior code §8-25)
CHAPTER 3.13
EXCISE TAX
SECTION:
3.13.010: Title And Codification
3.13.020: Tax Imposed
3.13.030: Purpose Of Revenues
3.13.040: Effective Date
3.13.050: Subsisting State Permits
3.13.060: Payment Of Tax
3.13.070: Tax In Addition To Taxes Currently Levied; Administrative Procedures
3.13.080: Amendments
3.13.090: Provisions Cumulative
3.13.010: TITLE AND CODIFICATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF WARR ACRES SALES
TAX ORDINANCE 1044 and the same shall be codified and incorporated into this
code. (Ord. 1044 §1, 2007)
3.13.020: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed an excise tax of one percent (1%) (in addition to any
and all other excise taxes now in force) to be levied upon the gross proceeds
or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma sales tax
code to be placed in a general fund to be used one-half (1/2) for general
governmental and one-half (1/2) for public safety purposes. (Ord. 1044 §2,
2007)
3.13.030: PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues to
be used for general governmental and public safety purposes as described in
section
3.13.020 of this chapter. Said excise tax shall be made available and expended
for the above purposes for no consideration other than the economic benefit to
be provided to the citizens of the city. Proceeds of the excise tax shall be
administered by the city of Warr Acres, provided no proceeds of said excise tax
shall be committed or expended without the prior consent and approval by the
Warr Acres city council. (Ord. 1044 §3, 2007)
3.13.040: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this chapter and the collection of the excise tax referenced
herein shall become effective on and after April 1, 2008, subject to approval
by a majority of the qualified electors of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma,
voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 1044 §4, 2007)
3.13.050: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Oklahoma tax
commission pursuant to the Oklahoma sales tax code are, for the purposes of
this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional city permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 1044 §5, 2007)
3.13.060: PAYMENT OF TAX:
The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the
manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state
tax law of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 1044 §6, 2007)
3.13.070: TAX IN ADDITION TO TAXES CURRENTLY LEVIED; ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise taxes levied
or assessed by the city pursuant to existing city ordinances (the "existing
ordinances"); provided, however, that those provisions, if any, of said
existing ordinances relating to definitions; tax collector defined;
classification of taxpayers; permit to do business; subsisting state permits;
the portion of tax rate–sales subject to tax, pertaining to sales subject to
tax (not rate of tax); the provisions of said existing ordinances regarding
exemptions and other exempt transfers; the provisions of said existing
ordinances regarding tax due when–returns– records; the portion of said
existing ordinances regarding tax constituting debt; vendor's duty to collect
tax; returns and remittances–discounts; interest and penalties–delinquencies;
waiver of interest and penalties; erroneous payments–claim for refund;
fraudulent returns; and records confidential shall apply to the excise tax
levied and assessed by this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, references
in said existing ordinances, to specific provisions of the Oklahoma Statutes
shall be deemed to be references to said statutory provisions, as amended.
(Ord. 1044 §7, 2007)
3.13.080: AMENDMENTS:
The people of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, by their approval of this
chapter at the election hereinabove provided for, hereby authorize the city by
ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or
additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter
as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness or in order to make
the same consistent with the Oklahoma sales tax code, as amended, except that
the rate of the tax herein provided for shall not be changed without approval
of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (Ord. 1044 §8, 2007)
3.13.090: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of city ordinances. (Ord. 1044 §9, 2007)
CHAPTER 3.16
TELEPHONE TAX 1
SECTION:
3.16.010: Purpose; Tax Imposed
3.16.020: Fee In Lieu Of Other Concessions
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS art. 27, § 2442 et seq.
3.16.010: PURPOSE; TAX IMPOSED:
A.   By grants made by and under general laws operative in the state, the
owners of telephone lines in the state are granted the right to use public
grounds, streets, alleys and highways in the state subject to the control of
the proper municipal authorities under their police power as to what grounds,
streets, alleys or highways the lines shall run over and across and as to what
place the poles to support the wires are located. In the proper performance of
the police power of the city in exercising such control of the use of the
streets, alleys and highways in the city and in the inspection of the
construction of the telephone lines and equipment and the location thereof,
both over and under the ground, incurs expense and renders services in
connection therewith which should be borne and compensated for by the owners of
the telephone lines.
B.   There is levied an annual inspection fee and service charge upon each and
every person, firm and corporation operating a telephone exchange or rendering
telephone service in the city, in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the
gross revenues for each current year for exchange telephone transmission
service rendered wholly within the limits of the city to compensate the city
for the expense incurred and services rendered incident to the exercise of its
police power, supervision, police regulation and police control of the
construction of lines and equipment of the telephone company in the city. The
inspection fee and charge shall be due and payable to the city on or before
March 1 of each year, commencing with January 1, 1968, for the calendar year
ending December 31, 1968, preceding or fractional part thereof, and shall be
paid into and appropriated and expended from the general revenue fund of the
city. (Prior code §15-13)
3.16.020: FEE IN LIEU OF OTHER CONCESSIONS:
During continued substantial compliance by the owner of any telephone exchange
or telephone service, the charge levied by this chapter shall be and continue
to be in lieu of all concessions, charges, excise, franchise, license,
privilege and permit fees or taxes or assessments except ad valorem taxes;
provided, however, that it is not intended to extinguish, abrogate or change
any existing arrangement whereby the city is permitted to use any underground
conduit, duct, space or pole contacts of the company for the fire alarm and/or
police call systems of the city. (Prior code §15-14)
CHAPTER 3.20
EXCISE USE TAX
SECTION:
3.20.010: Definitions
3.20.020: Tax Collector
3.20.030: Classification Of Taxpayers
3.20.040: Subsisting State Permits
3.20.050: Purpose Of Revenues
3.20.060: Excise Tax On Storage, Use Or Other Consumption Of Intangible,
Personal Property Levied
3.20.070: Exemptions
3.20.080: Payment Procedure
3.20.090: Bracket System
3.20.100: Tax Constitutes Debt
3.20.110: Collection Of Tax
3.20.120: Businesses Not Within The State Or Both Within And Without The State
3.20.130: Revoking Permits
3.20.140: Returns And Remittances
3.20.150: Erroneous Tax Payment
3.20.160: Fraudulent Returns
3.20.170: Confidentiality Of Records
3.20.180: Delinquency Of Reporting And Remittances
3.20.190: Waiver Of Interest Or Penalty
3.20.200: Provisions Cumulative
3.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma use tax
code, section 1401 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes 3981, are adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter. In addition thereto, the following
words and terms shall be defined as follows:
CITY: The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
TRANSACTION: Sale. (Ord. 654 §17, 1987)
3.20.020: TAX COLLECTOR:
The term "tax collector" as used in this chapter means the department of the
city government or the official agency of the state duly designated according
to law or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax
levied in this chapter. (Ord. 654 §18, 1987)
3.20.030: CLASSIFICATION OF TAXPAYERS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the classification of taxpayers hereunder
shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma use tax code.
(Ord. 654 §19, 1987)
3.20.040: SUBSISTING STATE PERMITS:
All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission
pursuant to the Oklahoma use tax code are for the purpose of this chapter
ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional
city permit for the same purpose. (Ord. 654 §20, 1987)
3.20.050: PURPOSE OF REVENUES:
It is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide revenues for the
support of the functions of the municipal government of the city, and any and
all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the governing body of the
city for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized by
the charter of the city, and the statutes of the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 654
§21, 1987)
3.20.060: EXCISE TAX ON STORAGE, USE OR OTHER CONSUMPTION OF INTANGIBLE,
PERSONAL PROPERTY LEVIED:
There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using
or otherwise consuming within the municipality tangible, personal property
purchased or brought into this municipality, an excise tax on the storage, use
or other consumption within the municipality of such property at the same rate
as the sales tax, as set out in section
3.12.050 of this title, on the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall
be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming, within the
municipality, tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the
municipality. The additional tax levied hereunder shall be paid at the time of
importation or storage of the property within the municipality and shall be
assessed to only property purchased outside Oklahoma; provided, that the tax
levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended
solely for use outside the municipality, but which is stored in the
municipality pending shipment outside the municipality or which is temporarily
retained in the municipality for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing,
alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment of the
tax authorized herein may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax
previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted
shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by
the municipality had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. (Ord.
1009 §1, 2005: Ord. 654 §1, 1987)
3.20.070: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply:
A.   In respect to the use of an article of tangible, personal property brought
into the city by a nonresident individual visiting in this city for his or her
personal use or enjoyment while within the city;
B.   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property purchased for resale
before being used;
C.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property on
which a tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the Oklahoma tax code
and the city excise use tax ordinance codified in this chapter, has been paid
by the person using such tangible, personal property in the city, whether such
tax was levied under the laws of Oklahoma or some other state or municipality
of the United States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already
been subjected to a tax by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in
respect to its sale or use, in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the
Oklahoma use tax code and the city excise use tax ordinance codified in this
chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to it by a rate
measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the Oklahoma
use tax code and the city excise use tax ordinance codified in this chapter,
and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed.
Provided, that no credit shall be given for taxes paid in another state or
municipality, if that state or municipality does not grant like credit taxes
paid in Oklahoma and the city;
D.   In respect to the use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by
persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and
machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of
manufacturing plants already established in the city. Provided, this exemption
shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and
is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation
under the sales tax code of the city. The term "manufacturing plants" shall
mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing
operations, and generally recognized as such;
E.   In respect to the use of tangible, personal property now specifically
exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the city;
F.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible, personal property
brought into the city by an individual with intent to become a resident of this
city where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or
enjoyment;
G.   In respect to the use of any article of tangible personal property used or
to be used by commercial airlines or railroads;
H.   In respect to livestock purchased outside Oklahoma and brought into this
city for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold. (Ord. 654 §2,
1987)
3.20.080: PAYMENT PROCEDURE:
The tax levied by this chapter is due and payable at the time and in the manner
and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the use tax code of
the state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 654 §3, 1987)
3.20.090: BRACKET SYSTEM:
A bracket system is adopted for the convenience of vendors in collecting both
the two percent (2%) state use tax and the two percent (2%) city use tax. Such
bracket system is designed and shall be interpreted so as not to be
inconsistent with the purpose of the bracket system established by the Oklahoma
tax commission in respect to the state use tax and is as follows:
 
Amount Of Sale            Tax   
$0.01  to $0.09                No tax
0.10  to 0.29                  $0.01
0.30  to 0.49                  0.02
0.50  to 0.69                  0.03
0.70  to 0.89                  0.04
0.90  to 1.00                  0.05
 
The use of the above bracket system does not relieve the retailer or vendor
from the duty and liability to remit to the commission an amount equal to five
percent (5%) of the gross receipts or gross proceeds (less the discount allowed
by the law and ordinances) derived from all sales during the taxable period.
(Ord. 654 §4, 1987)
3.20.100: TAX CONSTITUTES DEBT:
Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a
prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured
creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 654 §5, 1987)
3.20.110: COLLECTION OF TAX:
Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without
the state of Oklahoma, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a
place of business outside this state for use in this city shall at the time of
making such sales collect the use tax levied by this chapter from the purchaser
and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed
by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation, require such
receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name
and address of all his agents operating in this city and location of any and
all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in this
city. (Ord. 654 §6, 1987)
3.20.120: BUSINESSES NOT WITHIN THE STATE OR BOTH WITHIN AND WITHOUT THE STATE:
The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the tax levied in this chapter by any retailer or vendor not
maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of
tangible personal property for use in this city and by the out of state place
of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both
within and without Oklahoma and making sale of tangible, personal property at
such out of state place of business for use in this city. Such retailer or
vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes, by the
tax commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as
it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer
or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his
knowledge for use within this city. Such authority and permit may be canceled
when at any time the tax commission considers that such tax can more
effectively be collected from the person using such property in this city.
Provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed
by delivery to the purchaser within this city by the retailer or vendor in such
retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common
carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable
city sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and
reported under taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. (Ord. 654 §7,
1987)
3.20.130: REVOKING PERMITS:
Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this
state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax
levied in this chapter, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or the Oklahoma use tax code or any order, rules and regulations of the
tax commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for
in section 1408 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes 1981, by order revoke the
use tax permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such
retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in this state
may, after notice and hearing above provided, cancel said corporation's license
to do business in this state and shall issue a new license only when such
corporation has complied with the obligations under this chapter, the Oklahoma
use tax code, or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission. (Ord.
654 §8, 1987)
3.20.140: RETURNS AND REMITTANCES:
Returns and remittances of the tax levied in this chapter and collected shall
be made to the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as
prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma use tax code;
and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same
discount as may be allowed by said code for the collection of state use taxes.
(Ord. 654 §9, 1987)
3.20.150: ERRONEOUS TAX PAYMENT:
Refund of erroneous payment of the city use tax levied in this chapter may be
made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and
procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for
administration of the state use tax as set forth in section 227 of title 68 of
the Oklahoma Statutes 1981, and to accomplish the purpose of this section, the
applicable provisions of said section 227 are adopted by reference and made a
part of this chapter. (Ord. 654 §12, 1987)
3.20.160: FRAUDULENT RETURNS:
In addition to all civil penalties provided by this chapter, the wilful failure
or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances required in this
chapter, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of
avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under
this chapter shall be an offense, and upon conviction thereof the offending
taxpayer shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and costs, or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 654 §13, 1987)
3.20.170: CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared,
and to protect the same the provisions of section 205 of title 68 of the
Oklahoma Statutes 1981, of the state use tax code, and each subsection thereof,
is adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the city use tax as if set forth in full in this chapter.
(Ord. 654 §14, 1987)
3.20.180: DELINQUENCY OF REPORTING AND REMITTANCES:
Section 217 of title 68 Oklahoma Statutes, 1981, is adopted and made a part of
this chapter, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as
therein specified are levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in
reporting and paying the tax levied by this chapter. Provided, that the failure
or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and
remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this chapter shall cause
such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a
period of five (5) days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any
discount under this chapter. (Ord. 654 §10, 1987)
3.20.190: WAIVER OF INTEREST OR PENALTY:
The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a
retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the city tax levied in this chapter may
be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or
remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in
section 227 of title 68 of the Oklahoma Statutes 1981, and to accomplish the
purposes of this section the applicable provisions of said section 227 are
adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 654 §11, 1987)
3.20.200: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of the city ordinances. (Ord. 654 §15, 1987)
CHAPTER 3.22
HOTEL TAX
SECTION:
3.22.010: Short Title
3.22.020: Definitions
3.22.030: Levied; Amount
3.22.040: Exemptions; Acknowledgment; Records
3.22.050: Tax Designated On Bills
3.22.060: Operator Responsible For Collection
3.22.070: Certificates Of Registration
3.22.080: Records Required
3.22.090: Returns
3.22.100: Payment Of Tax
3.22.110: Delinquent Taxes
3.22.120: Interest On Unpaid/Delinquent Taxes
3.22.130: Collection By Suit
3.22.140: Bond Required
3.22.150: Assessment And Determination Of Tax
3.22.160: Refunds
3.22.170: Notices
3.22.180: Remedies Exclusive
3.22.190: Violations And Penalties
3.22.200: Operator's Discount For Record Keeping
3.22.210: Confidentiality
3.22.220: Use Of Funds
3.22.230: General Powers Of Clerk
3.22.240: Administration Of Oaths And Compelling Testimony
3.22.250: Proceedings To Recover Tax
3.22.260: Amendments
3.22.270: Provisions Cumulative
3.22.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF WARR ACRES HOTEL TAX
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings described to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Warr Acres.
HOTEL: Any building or building structures, trailer, or other facility in which
the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which five
(5) or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests, whether such
rooms are in one or in several structures. This term shall include hotels,
apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses,
inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space where bed
space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by "permanent
residents", and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or
space are furnished for a consideration. This term shall not include hospitals,
sanitariums or nursing homes, nor shall this term affect "permanent resident"
facilities as defined in this section for residents for terms in excess of
thirty (30) days.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any
room or rooms in a hotel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings
or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of
the room.
OCCUPANT: A person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right
to the use or possession of any room or rooms in a hotel under lease,
concession, permit, right to access, license to use, or other agreement.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel in this city, including, but not limited
to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, manager or similar agent, or any other person otherwise operating
such hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy
of any room in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the
current calendar year or preceding year.
RENT: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and
property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which
credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any reduction
therefrom whatsoever.
RETURN: Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided.
ROOM: Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of the hotel which
is available for or let for the use of or possessed for any purpose other than
a place of assembly. As used herein, "place of assembly" means a room or space
which is capable of being occupied by seventy five (75) or more persons and
which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall
include: dance halls, cabarets, nightclubs, restaurants, any room or space for
public or private banquet, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings, lodge and
meeting halls or rooms, skating rinks, gymnasiums, swimming pools, billiard,
bowling and table tennis rooms, halls or rooms used for public or private
catering purposes, funeral parlors, markets, recreational rooms, concert halls,
broadcasting studios, and all other places of similar type of occupancy.
TAX: The tax levied pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.030: LEVIED; AMOUNT:
There is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax of five and one- half percent
(51/2%) upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent for
every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in this city, except that this
tax shall not be imposed where the rent is less than the rate of three dollars
($3.00) per day. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.040: EXEMPTIONS; ACKNOWLEDGMENT; RECORDS:
A.   Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this
chapter:
   1.   Permanent residents;
   2.   The United States government or any agency or division thereof;
   3.   The state of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof;
   4.   Any public school or state accredited private school, provided that its
primary purpose is not carrying on a business for profit;
   5.   Any church, provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a
business for profit.
B.   Acknowledgment Required: Every hotel shall submit a monthly exemption
form, as provided by the city clerk, with each monthly room tax report. This
exemption form will indicate the name of the person seeking exemption, the
exempt organization with which they are affiliated, the period of occupancy,
number of rooms occupied and any other information required by the city clerk.
Every exemption form shall be signed by the hotel manager or authorized agent,
so that the signature shall serve as an acknowledgment that all information
contained in the exemption form is true and correct. Upon submission of these
forms to the city, the city clerk shall make a final determination as to the
validity of all claimed exemptions. Should the city clerk determine that a
claimed exemption is not valid, the hotel shall be assessed the then current
percentage of tax applicable, within three (3) months of the date that the
exemption is claimed. The hotel claiming such exemption shall become liable for
payment of the tax and shall submit the same with their next monthly tax
remittance.
For purposes of this section, an exemption will not be validated by the city
clerk unless the exemption is claimed for the month in which it accrues. For
good cause shown, the city clerk may grant an extension for claiming an
exemption.
C.   Records Required: Every operator shall be required to maintain copies of
monthly room reports, monthly exemption forms and individual exemption forms
upon the business premises of the hotel for a period of three (3) years. Such
records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon
demand by the city clerk, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city.
For purposes of this section, individual exemption forms shall be available
from the city clerk and shall include the following:
   1.   A statement declaring the reason for exemption;
   2.   The name, signature, address, home telephone and work telephone numbers
of the person claiming the exemption;
   3.   The date on which the exemption form is completed; and
   4.   An acknowledgment, by signature, of the exemption by an employee or
agent of the hotel. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.050: TAX DESIGNATED ON BILLS:
The operator shall separately designate, charge and show the tax on all bills,
statements, receipts or any other evidence of charges or payments of rent for
occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.060: OPERATOR RESPONSIBLE FOR COLLECTION:
The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the
occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.070: CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION:
A.   Prior to commencement of business or opening, every hotel operator shall
file with the city clerk:
   1.   A certificate of registration;
   2.   An affidavit and designation of operator.
The required filings shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk.
B.   The city clerk shall, within five (5) days after receipt of the required
registration and affidavit, issue without charge, to each operator, a
certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the
occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each certificate or
duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of
authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it
may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking
occupancy. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and
shall be surrendered immediately to the city clerk upon the cessation of
business at the hotel named, or upon its sale or transfer, or upon the change
of designated operator. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.080: RECORDS REQUIRED:
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy of all rent paid, charged
or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such form as the city clerk
may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for inspection and
examination at any time upon demand by the city clerk, or a duly authorized
agent or employee of the city, and shall be preserved for a period of three (3)
years, except that the city clerk may consent to their destruction within that
period or may require that they be kept longer. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.090: RETURNS:
A.   Every operator shall file with the city clerk a return of occupancy and of
rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the period ending the last day of
every month of each year. Said returns are to be filed on a monthly basis and
are due no later than the fifteenth day of the month directly following the
reporting period.
B.   The clerk may permit or require returns to be made by shorter or longer
periods and upon such dates as the clerk may specify. The form of the return
shall be prescribed by the clerk and shall contain such information as the
clerk may deem necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. The
clerk may require amended returns to be filed within ten (10) days after notice
and to contain the information specified in the notice. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.100: PAYMENT OF TAX:
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall
pay to the clerk the taxes imposed by this chapter upon the rents included in
such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator acting or
purporting to act under the provisions of this chapter. All taxes for the
period for which a return is required to be filed shall be due from the
operator and payable to the clerk on or before the date fixed for the filing of
the return for such period without regard to whether a return is filed or
whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and the
taxes due thereon. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.110: DELINQUENT TAXES:
The tax levied by this chapter shall be due and payable when the return is
filed. All taxes not paid within fifteen (15) days following the last day of
the period shall be delinquent. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.120: INTEREST ON UNPAID/DELINQUENT TAXES:
If any tax levied by this chapter becomes delinquent, the person responsible
and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of
one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month on the unpaid balance from the date
of delinquency. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.130: COLLECTION BY SUIT:
Such taxes and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior,
superior and paramount claim as against the claim of unsecured creditors and
may be collected by suit as any other debt. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.140: BOND REQUIRED:
Where the clerk believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave
the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason the
clerk deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under this chapter, the
clerk may require such operator to file with the city a bond issued by a surety
company authorized to transact business in this state in such amount as the
clerk may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due,
or which may become due from such operator. In the event the clerk determines
that an operator is to file such bond, the clerk shall give notice to such
operator specifying the amount of bond required. The operator shall file such
bond within five (5) days after the giving of such notice unless, within such
five (5) days, the operator shall request in writing, a hearing before the city
council or its designee, at which the propriety and amount of the bond shall be
determined by the city council or its designee. Such determination shall be
final and shall be complied with, within fifteen (15) days thereafter. In lieu
of such bond, securities approved by the clerk, or cash in such amount as the
clerk may prescribe, may be deposited with the clerk, who may at any time after
five (5) days' notice to the depositor, apply them to any tax and/or penalties
due, and for that purpose the securities may be sold at a public or a private
sale. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.150: ASSESSMENT AND DETERMINATION OF TAX:
If a return required by this chapter is not filed, or if a return when filed is
incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the clerk
from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be
estimated on the basis of external indices such as number of rooms, location,
scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number
of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such assessments shall be
given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Such
assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine that tax unless the
person against whom it is assessed, within ninety (90) days after the giving of
notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing to the city council or its
designee for a hearing or unless the clerk on his own motion shall reassess the
same. After such hearing, the city council or its designee shall give written
notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed and
such determination shall be final. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.160: REFUNDS:
A.   The clerk shall refund or credit any tax erroneously, illegally or
unconstitutionally collected if written application to the clerk for such
refund shall be made within two (2) years from the date of payment thereof. For
like causes, and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the
initiative and the order of the clerk. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons
therefor shall be stated in writing. Such application may also be made by the
person who has collected and paid such tax to the clerk, providing that the
application is made within one year of the payment of the occupant to the
operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he has
repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made.
The clerk, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit thereof
on payment due from the applicant.
B.   Upon application for a refund, the clerk may receive evidence with respect
thereto, and make such investigation as he/she deems necessary. After making a
determination as to the refund, the clerk shall give notice thereof to the
applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within
ninety (90) days after such notice, shall apply in writing to the City Council
or its designee for a hearing. After such hearing, the City Council, or its
designee, shall give written notice of the decision to the applicant. (Ord.
1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.170: NOTICES:
Notices provided for under this chapter shall be deemed to have been given when
such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the
United States mail, addressed to the last known address of the operator. (Ord.
1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.180: REMEDIES EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided in this chapter shall be exclusive remedies available to
any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1061
§1, 2008)
3.22.190: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
The failure or refusal of any operator/taxpayer to make reports and remittances
herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the
purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof
rightfully due under this chapter or failure to post a bond, shall be an
offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be subject
to punishment of a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court costs. Each day a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and is subject to all
penalties herein. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.200: OPERATOR'S DISCOUNT FOR RECORDKEEPING:
In order to remunerate an operator for keeping tax records, filing reports, and
remitting the tax when due, a two percent (2%) discount shall be allowed upon
all taxes paid prior to the time they become delinquent. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.210: CONFIDENTIALITY:
The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the
administration of the Hotel Tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and
to protect the same, the provisions of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 205,
supplement 1993, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference
and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the tax as if
herein set forth. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.220: USE OF FUNDS:
All taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be set
aside and used for general government purposes, including the purposes of
encouraging, promoting and fostering convention and tourism, recreational,
economic development and cultural benefits for the City of Warr Acres and its
residents as follows: one-fourth (1/4) to be allocated to Economic Development
Fund, and three-fourths (3/4) to remain in the General Fund for general
expenditures. (Ord. 1185, 2018)
3.22.230: GENERAL POWERS OF CLERK:
In addition to all other powers granted to the Clerk, he/she is hereby
authorized and empowered:
A.   To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the carrying
out of this chapter for the purposes thereof.
B.   To extend for cause shown, the time for filing and return for a period not
exceeding sixty (60) days; and for cause shown to waive, remit, or reduce
penalties or interest.
C.   To delegate his/her functions hereunder to an assistant or other employee
or employees of the City.
D.   To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed by
this chapter.
E.   To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents.
(Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.240: ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS AND COMPELLING TESTIMONY:
The Clerk, or his/her designated representative, shall have the power to
administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in
the exercise of their powers and duties under this chapter. The Clerk shall
have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to
the performance of his/her duties hereunder and all the enforcement of this
chapter and to examine them in relation thereto. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.250: PROCEEDINGS TO RECOVER TAX:
A.   Whenever any taxpayer or other person shall fail to collect and pay over
any tax or any tax penalties due and owing, or interest imposed by this chapter
as herein provided, the city attorney shall, upon request of the city clerk,
take appropriate action to enforce the payment of same.
B.   Pursuant to the authority of 68 Oklahoma Statutes section 2701 et seq.,
all taxes, interest and penalties imposed by this chapter, are hereby declared
to constitute a lien in favor of the city of Warr Acres, upon all franchises,
property and rights to property, whether real or personal, then belonging to or
thereafter acquired by the person, firm or corporation owing the tax, whether
such property is employed by such person, firm or corporation in the conduct of
its business or in the hands of an assignee, trustee, or receiver, for the
benefit of a creditor, from the date said taxes are due and payable under
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.260: AMENDMENTS:
The citizens of Warr Acres, by their approval of this chapter at the election
herein provided, hereby authorize the city council by ordinance duly enacted,
to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method
and manner of administration and enforcing this chapter as may be necessary or
proper for efficiency and fairness; except that the rate of the tax herein
provided shall not exceed five and one-half percent (51/2%) without approval of
the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
3.22.270: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other
taxing provisions of the city ordinances. (Ord. 1061 §1, 2008)
CHAPTER 3.24
GENERAL SCHEDULE OF FEES
SECTION:
3.24.010: Group Homes
3.24.010: GROUP HOMES:
The fees for filing an application for a group home shall be according to the
following:
 
Area Of Subject Property                        Initial Fee  Public Hearing Fee
0 square feet, but not over 43,560 square feet  $175.00      $600.00
Over 43,560 square feet, but not over 217,800   250.00       675.00
square feet
Over 217,800 square feet                        325.00       750.00
 
(Ord. 673 §1, 1988)
CHAPTER 3.28
DISPOSITION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
3.28.010: Procedure
3.28.010: PROCEDURE:
A.   The chief of police is authorized to sell personal property other than
money or legal tender of the United States, which has come into his possession
in any manner if:
   1.   The owner of the personal property is unknown or has not claimed the
property; and
   2.   The property has been in the custody of the chief of police for at
least six (6) months or for such other minimum time as may be required by state
law, whichever is less; and
   3.   The property or any part thereof is no longer necessary to be held as
evidence or for any other purpose in connection with any litigation.
B.   The chief of police shall file an application in the district court of
Oklahoma County requesting the authority of the court to conduct a sale of such
personal property. The chief of police shall attach to his application a list
describing such property including any identifying numbers and marks, the date
the property came into his possession, and the name of the owner and his
address, if known. The court shall set the application for hearing not less
than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after filing of the
application.
C.   At least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing, notice of the
hearing shall be sent by certified mail to each owner at his address as listed
in the application. The notice shall contain a brief description of the
property of the owner and the place and date of the hearing. The notice shall
be posted at Warr Acres city hall, and at two (2) other public places in the
municipality.
D.   If no owner appears and establishes ownership to the property at the
hearing, the court shall enter an order authorizing the chief of police to sell
the personal property for cash to the highest bidder, after at least five (5)
days' notice of the sale has been published. The chief of police shall make a
return of the sale, and the order of the court confirming the sale shall vest
title to the property in the purchaser. After payment of court costs and other
expenses, the remainder of money received from the sale of the personal
property shall be deposited in the municipal general fund.
E.   All money or legal tender of the United States which has come into the
possession of the chief of police pursuant to the circumstances provided for in
subsection A of this section shall be transferred by the chief of police to the
city clerk for deposit in the municipal general fund. Prior to any such
transfer, the chief of police shall file an application in the district court
of Oklahoma County requesting the court to enter an order authorizing him to
transfer the money for deposit in the municipal fund. The application shall
describe the money or legal tender, any serial numbers, the date the same came
into his possession, and the name of the owner and his address, if known. Upon
filing the application which may be joined with an application as described
under subsection B of this section, a hearing shall be set not less than ten
(10) days or more than twenty (20) days from the filing of the application.
Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided for in subsection C of this
section. The notice shall state that upon failure of anyone to appear to prove
ownership to the money or legal tender, the court shall order the same to be
deposited in the municipal general fund. The notice may be combined with a
notice to sell personal property as provided for in subsection B of this
section. If no one appears to claim and prove ownership to the money or legal
tender at the hearing, the court shall order the same to be transferred to the
municipal general fund as provided in this subsection.
F.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dangerous or deadly
weapons, narcotic or poisonous drugs, explosives or any property of any kind or
character, which the possession of is prohibited by law. By order of the trial
court, any such property filed as an exhibit or held by the municipality shall
be destroyed or sold or disposed of pursuant to the conditions prescribed in
such order.
G.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to animals. (Ord. 749 §1,
1994)
CHAPTER 3.29
PUBLIC RECORDS; SCHEDULE OF FEES
SECTION:
3.29.060: Copying And Inspecting
3.29.060: COPYING AND INSPECTING:
Except as otherwise provided in this schedule or by state statute, the fees for
inspection and copying of public records shall be:
 
A. Photocopy of public document including hard copy of microfilm; per page of        $ 0.25
   any documents
B. Certification, official seal affixed, per page                                    1.00
C. Search fee for time spent locating requested records, when the request is:        16.00
   1.   Solely for commercial purpose; or
   2.   Clearly would cause excessive disruption of essential city functions;
   per hour or portion thereof
                                                                                     35.00 per
D. Computer generated reports, not including search time, per hour of computer       hour
   time or any part thereof                                                          ($9.00 per
                                                                                     1/4 hour)
E. Reproduction of audiotape; includes search time and cost of tape, time to         35.00 per
   locate subject material and produce duplicate tape                                tape
   Reproduction of videocassette tape recordings of city council meetings and        35.00 per
F. other meetings of boards and commissions of the city (subject to                  tape
   availability)
G. Codes and ordinances, as per schedule and on file in the office of the city
   clerk
H. Council agenda packet subscription service                                        250.00
I. Payment in advance to the city treasury of the above fees is required, when:
   1.   The number of documents exceeds 50 pages
   2.   A search time of 3 hours or more is estimated
   3.   A computer or audio time of 2 hours or more is estimated
J. Vehicle accident report:
   1.   Driver, passenger or involved pedestrian:
         a.   Within 6 months of incident                                   No charge
         b.   After 6 months; includes search fee                           $2.00
   2.   Insurance companies or other requests which are commercial (includes      4.00
   search fee)
   Crime incident report, stolen vehicle report, per report: (Information
K. released can include the following: incident number, incident location,
   incident date and time, reporting officer, and brief summary. Exempt material
   excluded.)
   1.   Victim (within 6 months of incident)                                      No charge
   2.   Victim (after 6 six months; includes search fee)                          $2.00
   3.   Insurance companies or other requests which are commercial (includes      4.00
   search fee)
   Criminal history check (arrest record): (application or preemployment, per
L. name) (information released: "No record found" or "Our records contain arrest           3.00
   information")
M. Arrest transcript record, including disposition, if available                     6.00
N. Photographs:
   1.   5 inches by 7 inches, each                                                2.50
   2.   8 inches by 10 inches, each                                               10.00
   3.   Search fee for time spent reviewing negatives if entire roll not
   requested:
         a.   Fee per hour with 1 hour minimum                            10.00
         b.   Fee per each quarter hour in excess of 1 hour minimum         2.50
   4.   Custom photographic work fee, in addition to the cost of each photograph
   and any search fee, if applicable:
         a.   Fee per hour with 1 hour minimum                              10.00
         b.   Fee per each quarter hour in excess of 1 hour minimum         2.50
O. Cassette tape recording of dispatch transmission
   1.   Noncommercial use, per 60 minute tape                                     35.00
   2.   Commercial use, per 60 minute tape                                        43.00
P. Computer generated dispatch incident log (if available):
   1.   Noncommercial use, per incident
            Computer                                                        1.00
            Typed                                                           2.00
   2.   Commercial use, per incident
            Computer                                                        3.00
            Typed                                                           6.00
Q. Certification (official seal thereof)
   1.   Per report/incident                                                       2.00
R. Noncriminal fingerprint cards                                                     10.00 per
                                                                                     card
 
(Ord. 821 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 3.30
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
SECTION:
3.30.010: Percentage Of Total Annual General Fund Revenue Dedicated To Capital
Improvements (Rep. by Ord. 1040 §1, 2007)
3.30.020: Capital Building Plan Department
3.30.010: PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL ANNUAL GENERAL FUND REVENUE DEDICATED TO CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1040 §1, 2007)
3.30.020: CAPITAL BUILDING PLAN DEPARTMENT:
The council shall establish and maintain a capital building plan department
under the general fund. The department shall be used to fund additions,
alterations, repairs, maintenance, demolition and new construction including
architectural, engineering, drafting and other pertinent professional services
related to construction of city buildings and structures. (Ord. 876 §1, 1999)
CHAPTER 3.40
CAPITAL BUILDING FUND
SECTION:
3.40.010: Establishment
3.40.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
The council shall establish and maintain a capital building fund. The fund
shall be used to fund additions, alterations, repairs, maintenance, demolition
and new construction including architectural, engineering, drafting and other
pertinent professional services related to construction of city buildings and
structures. (Ord. 903 §1, 2000)
CHAPTER 3.50
REDEVELOPMENT TRUST AUTHORITY FUND
SECTION:
3.50.010: Establishment
3.50.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
The council shall establish and maintain a redevelopment trust authority fund.
The fund shall be used to fund all expenses in connection with the authority
granted to the redevelopment trust authority fund. (Ord. 936 §1, 2001)
CHAPTER 3.60
JUVENILE COURT FUND
SECTION:
3.60.010: Establishment 
3.60.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
The council shall establish and maintain a juvenile court fund. The fund shall
be earmarked and used only for the following purposes:
A.   To fund local programs which address problems of juvenile crime;
B.   To fund the costs of prosecutions authorized;
C.   To fund the costs of detention authorized;
D.   To fund administrative costs related to local programs that address
problems of juvenile crime or related to the prosecution, detention or
punishment authorized;
E.   To fund the costs of community intervention centers authorized. (Ord. 939
§1, 2001)
TITLE 4
RESERVED
TITLE 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Regulations   5.04
Alcoholic Beverages   5.08
Amusement Devices   5.12
Daycare Centers And Family Daycare Homes   5.16
Coin And Vending Machines   5.20
Convalescent, Rest And Nursing Homes   5.28
Oil Wells And Gas Wells   5.32
Pawnbrokers   5.34
Tattoo And Body Piercing Establishments   5.35
Preschools   5.36
Mixed Alcoholic Beverage Establishments   5.40
Taxicabs And Livery Cars   5.44
Residential Sales And Garage Sales   5.48
Wrecker Vehicles, Equipment And Services   5.52
Alarm Systems   5.53
Fair Housing   5.54
Mobile Food Service Establishments   5.55
Dockless Bicycles And Scooters   5.56
Medical Marijuana   5.57
CHAPTER 5.04
REGULATIONS
SECTION:
Article A. General Regulations
5.04.010: License Required
5.04.020: License Regulations
5.04.030: Display Of License
5.04.040: Revocation And Cancellation Of License Or Permit
5.04.050: Board Of Equalization
Article B. Specific Business
5.04.060: General Business License Required; Fee; Exception And Penalty
5.04.070: Home Occupation
5.04.101: Bingo Games
5.04.110: Restaurants And Food Service Establishments
Article C. Peddlers
5.04.200: Definition
5.04.201: License Required
5.04.202: Bond Required
5.04.203: Application; Fees
5.04.204: Hours Of Solicitation
5.04.205: Exceptions
5.04.206: Regulations Of License
5.04.207: Revocation Of License
5.04.208: Appeal
5.04.209: Penalty
Article D. Secondhand Dealers Of Precious Metals Or Gems
5.04.331: Definitions
5.04.332: License Required
5.04.333: Bond Required
5.04.334: Application; Fee
5.04.335: Records Of Transactions
5.04.336: Goods Kept Within City Limits
5.04.337: Denial Or Revocation Of License
5.04.338: Advertising
5.04.339: Penalty
Article E. Contractors
5.04.350: License Revocation
5.04.360: Building And House Moving Contractors; License Required
5.04.370: Building And House Moving Contractors; Occupation Tax
5.04.380: Building And House Moving Contractors; Bond
5.04.390: Paving Contractors
5.04.391: Street And Storm Sewer Contractors
5.04.400: Sewer Line Contractors
5.04.410: Water Line Contractors
5.04.420: Plumbing, Heat And Air And Electrical Contractors - License Required
- Fee
5.04.430: Plumbing, Heat And Air, Electrical And Roofing Contractors; Work
Permit Required
5.04.440: Plumbing Work Permits; Fee Schedule
5.04.450: Heat And Air Work Permits; Fee Schedule
5.04.460: Electrical Work Permits; Fee Schedule
5.04.070: Roofing Work Permits; Fee Schedule
5.04.475: Private Trash And Refuse Haulers; License And Bond Required
Article F. Penalty
5.04.480: Violation; Penalty
Article G. Massage Establishments
5.04.510: Definitions
5.04.520: Exceptions
5.04.530: Licensing
5.04.540: Application Fees And Annual License Fees
5.04.550: Applications
5.04.560: Display Of License
5.04.570: Facilities
5.04.580: Records To Be Kept
5.04.590: Unlawful Acts
5.04.600: Inspections
5.04.610: Revocation And Suspension
5.04.620: Sale Or Transfer
5.04.630: Existing Operations
5.04.640: Operation Contrary To Provisions
5.04.650: Massages As Employee Benefit On Periodic Basis
5.04.660: Outcall Service
5.04.670: Operating Hours
5.04.680: Alcoholic Beverages And Low Point Beer
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.04.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation or association, either as principal or agent,
shall, in the city, conduct, pursue, carry on or operate any calling, trade,
profession or occupation named in this chapter without first paying in advance
to the city treasurer the license fee or tax prescribed in this chapter and
presenting a receipt for same to the city clerk, who thereupon shall issue a
license. (Prior code §5-1)
5.04.020: LICENSE REGULATIONS:
All licenses, except as otherwise provided, shall expire on July 31 next after
the same are issued. No license shall be issued until full amount prescribed
therefor shall be paid to the city treasurer, and no license shall in any case
be prorated, returned or transferred from one person to another person; no free
license shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, for any cause, nor any sum
accepted less than the amount herein prescribed nor for a shorter period than
herein required; except that upon application and approval of same by the city
council, no license fee shall be charged for any scientific and literary
lectures and entertainments, concerts or other entertainments given exclusively
by citizens of the city. All licenses shall be signed by the city clerk or her
designee and the corporate seal of the city shall be affixed. (Ord. 814 §1,
1997: prior code §5-2)
5.04.030: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every person, firm, corporation or association having a license, identification
tag, badge or plate as provided in this chapter shall at all times keep the
same in some conspicuous place in the business establishment, or vehicle, or on
his or her clothing or other personal property, and shall exhibit the same when
requested to do so by any police officer or other proper person representing
the city, or when applying for renewal of the same. A separate license must be
obtained for each separate branch, establishment, or place of business in which
a trade, calling, profession or occupation is carried on or pursued or
conducted, and each license shall authorize the person obtaining it to carry
on, pursue or conduct only that trade, calling, profession or occupation
described in such license, and only at the location or place of business which
is indicated thereby, and in conformity to the ordinances of the city and the
laws of the state; and no license shall be transferable from one person to
another; providing, however, that in the event of a change of location of a
duly authorized business or occupation, the city clerk shall, without
additional compensation, endorse the change of location of the business. (Prior
code §5-3)
5.04.040: REVOCATION AND CANCELLATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Nothing in this chapter shall operate to prevent the revocation and
cancellation of any license or permit issued by the city clerk after ten (10)
days' notice in writing to the licensee or permittee by the city clerk setting
forth the basic grounds for seeking such revocations. The time, place and cause
shall be set out in the notice and such hearing shall be before the municipal
judge, whose decision shall be final; providing that any revocation shall in
one event relieve the offender from any additional penalties provided by law
and by this chapter. (Prior code §5-47)
5.04.050: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION:
Within ten (10) days after the passage of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, the mayor shall appoint three (3) members from the city council to act
as a board of equalization in hearing of all protests against the city in the
enforcement of this chapter. The board shall hold hearings or make
investigations of assessed valuations of any merchant it may deem necessary,
and shall have the authority to make reasonable adjustments of valuations. The
board shall hold hearings of all complaints on tax matters and shall make such
recommendations to the city council that it may deem proper to amend or change
this chapter for the equitable assessment of occupation taxes in the city. No
member of the board of equalization shall be removed from the board without
cause, and such removal shall be by the vote of the city council. The mayor
shall fill any vacancy that may exist on the board. (Prior code §5-4)
ARTICLE B.  SPECIFIC BUSINESS
5.04.060: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; EXCEPTION AND PENALTY:
A.   No person, firm, association or corporation, either as principal or agent
whose principal place of business is located within Warr Acres shall engage in
business, calling, trade, profession or occupation named in this section
without first having applied for and been issued a business license from the
City, unless exempted as provided for herein or under the laws of the State of
Oklahoma. The following businesses shall be subject to the provisions of this
section:
   1.   Auctioneers, contractors, druggists, hawkers, peddlers, bankers,
brokers, pawnbrokers, merchants of all kinds, grocers, confectioners,
restaurants, butchers, taverns, public boarding houses, billiard tables,
bowling alleys and other amusement devices, drays, hacks, carriages, omnibuses,
carts, wagons and other vehicles used in the Municipality for pay, hay scales,
lumber dealers, furniture dealers, saddle or harness dealers, stationers,
jewelers, livery stable keepers, real estate agents, express companies or
agencies, telegraph companies or agencies, shows, theaters, all kinds of
exhibitions for pay, also photographers, photographers' agents, agents of all
kinds and solicitors.
B.   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title or chapter, the
required fee for being issued a license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per
year.
C.   All scientific and literary lectures and entertainment shall be exempt
from the requirement of procuring a business license from the City, as shall
all concerts and musical or other entertainment given exclusively by the
citizens of the City. Insurance agents and agencies shall also be exempt from
the licensing requirements pursuant to the State of Oklahoma Attorney General
Opinion 81-169.
D.   Persons engaged in business as a home occupation, as set forth in title 19
of this Code, and who hold a valid home occupation license shall be exempt
under this section.
E.   All persons, firms, associations, or corporations required to collect
Sales Tax pursuant to title 68, section 1350 et seq., of the Oklahoma State
Statutes, shall submit proof of a valid Sales Tax permit designating the City
code for Warr Acres (5528) before a business license will be issued.
F.   It shall be an offense for any person, firm, association or corporation to
engage in any business within the City, without having paid the fee and been
issued a business license from the City Clerk, in violation of this section,
and, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court, shall be subject to a fine
of two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs. A violation of this section
shall be considered a continuing offense and each day's violation shall be
deemed to be a separate violation punishable as such. (Ord. 1006 §1, 2005: Ord.
978 §1, 2003: Ord. 855 §1, 1998: Ord. 719 §1, 1992)
5.04.070: HOME OCCUPATION:
No person, firm, association, or corporation shall engage in a business
permitted in a residence and qualified as a home occupation without first
having obtained a license from the City of Warr Acres and paying an annual fee
of thirty dollars ($30.00). (Ord. 1183, 2018)
5.04.101: BINGO GAMES:
No person, firm, or corporation shall, within the City, engage in the
conducting of bingo games without first having paid to the City Treasurer an
annual permit fee in the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) and having
obtained a business permit from the City Clerk. No business permit for the
conducting of bingo games shall be issued by the City Clerk prior to the bingo
game operator having been issued a bingo license by the State pursuant to title
21, section 995.1 et seq., of the Oklahoma Statutes, and having been granted a
special use permit pursuant to title 19, chapter 19.54 of this Code. (Ord. 645
§1, 1986)
5.04.110: RESTAURANTS AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS:
No person, firm, association or corporation shall be permitted to operate any
restaurant or food service establishment within the City, whether sit down,
takeout, drive-through, delivery or catering food service, or to be issued a
license from the City for such operation without first demonstrating compliance
with all ordinances pertaining to food handling establishments and all
applicable health and sanitation requirements relating to the same as
prescribed by the Oklahoma City-County Health Department, including showing
proof to the City of having been issued a current food service operator
certificate by the City-County Health Department to at least one full time
employee employed in such establishment. (Ord. 662 §1, 1987: Prior Code §5-19)
ARTICLE C.  PEDDLERS
5.04.200: DEFINITION:
The word "peddler" as used in this chapter shall mean any individual, whether a
resident of the City or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck
or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or
from street to street taking or attempting to take orders for sale of books,
artworks or other literary products sold by subscription, goods, wares and
merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for present or future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the present or
future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments
on such sales or not. The word "peddler" shall include the terms "canvasser",
"solicitor", "hawker", "transient or itinerant peddler, merchant or vendor" or
"transient or itinerant photographer". (Ord. 585 §1, 1984)
5.04.201: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate as a peddler without first securing a license and
making payment therefor as provided in this article. (Ord. 585 §1, 1984)
5.04.202: BOND REQUIRED:
Every applicant shall file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the
city in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with surety acceptable
to and approved by the mayor, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully
with all the applicable provisions of this code, the ordinances of the city and
state law regulating and concerning the business of peddling and guaranteeing
to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a down payment will be
accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler, and
further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with such
peddler that the property purchased will be delivered according to the
representations of such peddler. Action on such bond may be brought in the name
of the city to the use or benefit of the aggrieved person. However, action may
be taken on the bond by any citizen who has been damaged by the applicant.
(Ord. 585 §1, 1984)
5.04.203: APPLICATION; FEES:
A.   Application Shall Be Filed With The City Clerk: Applicants for a license
hereunder shall file with the city clerk, in duplicate, a sworn application in
writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk.
B.   Contents Of Application: The application shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:
   1.   The full name, description, birth date and social security number of
each applicant;
   2.   The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant and
telephone numbers;
   3.   Nature of business and kinds of goods to be sold, and if applicant is a
farmer or truck gardener, whether said goods are produced by him on lands he
owns, cultivates and controls;
   4.   If employed by another, the name and address of applicant's employer
together with a brief description of credentials showing the exact
relationship;
   5.   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
   6.   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery;
   7.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
felony, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor and a statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any, crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature
of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
   8.   Description and license number or other identification of any vehicle
to be used;
   9.   Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or
receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
   10.   The last five (5) municipalities wherein the applicant has worked
before coming to this city;
   11.   A letter, to be attached to the application, of authorization from the
property owner of permission for applicant to sell from their private property
with the exact location of where the applicant wishes to sell;
   12.   The state sales tax permit number, along with a copy of said permit,
issued by the Oklahoma tax commission unless the applicant can prove to the
clerk's satisfaction that he is not a vendor within the definition of the state
sales tax code;
   13.   Other relevant information as may be required by the city clerk for
the investigation of the applicant.
C.   Investigation Fee: At the time of filing the application, a nonrefundable
fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost
of investigation of the facts stated therein.
D.   Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a license, the original
shall be referred to the chief of police who shall cause an investigation and
report to be made of any criminal record of the applicant. The chief of police
shall complete his investigation within five (5) working days of receipt of the
application from the city clerk.
   1.   If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant's criminal record
is unsatisfactory and/or the facts stated in his application are found to be
untrue the chief of police shall so advise the city clerk, in writing, and
return the application to the city clerk who shall notify the applicant that
his application is disapproved and that no license shall be issued.
   2.   If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant's record is
satisfactory and the statements made in the application are true and correct
the chief of police shall so advise the city clerk, in writing, and return the
application to the city clerk, who shall upon payment of the required fee issue
the license to the applicant.
E.   License Fee: The license fee shall be paid to the city clerk in advance in
the amount as follows:
 
Per day   $  5.00
Per week  10.00
Per month 25.00
Per year  100.00
 
   (Ord. 585 §1, 1984)
5.04.204: HOURS OF SOLICITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling
within the city between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. the following morning except by specific appointment with or
invitation from the prospective customer. (Ord. 850 §1, 1998: Ord. 585 §1,
1984)
5.04.205: EXCEPTIONS:
Sections
5.04.201 through
5.04.203 of this article shall not apply to:
A.   Any nonprofit, tax exempt charitable, educational, religious or government
organization as those terms are defined by applicable state and federal laws.
B.   Sales made to dealers or permanent merchants by commercial travelers
selling in the usual course of business. (Ord. 850 §1, 1998: Ord. 585 §1, 1984)
5.04.206: REGULATIONS OF LICENSE:
Expiration of license, payment, display of license when required, provisions
for nontransferable license shall be complied with as enumerated in general
regulations as set out in sections
5.04.020 and
5.04.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 585 §1, 1984)
5.04.207: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked as set
forth in section
5.04.040 of this chapter for any of the following causes:
A.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application
for license;
B.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying
on his business as a peddler;
C.   Any violation of this section;
D.   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
E.   Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety, or general welfare of the public. (Ord. 585 §1, 1984)
5.04.208: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the city clerk or chief of police in the
denial of a license as set forth in subsection
5.04.203D1 of this article shall have the right of appeal to the city council.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk, within fourteen (14)
days after notice of the action complained of has been given to the applicant
personally or mailed, postage prepaid, to his last known address. The city
council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of
such hearing shall be given to the applicant at least five (5) days prior to
the date set for hearing. The decision and order of the city council on such an
appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 585 §1, 1984)
5.04.209: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections
5.04.200 through
5.04.206 of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine
not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense and a fine not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense thereafter. (Ord. 586 §1,
1984)
ARTICLE D.  SECONDHAND DEALERS OF PRECIOUS METALS OR GEMS
5.04.331: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the use of terms used in this article:
EMPLOYEE: Any person working for a dealer, whether or not the person is in the
direct employment of the dealer or works full time or part time, who handles
used precious metals or gems for the dealer. Employee shall not mean a person
employed by a bank, armored car company or other business entity acting in the
sole capacity of bailee for hire relationship with a dealer.
GEM: Any precious or semiprecious stone or item containing a precious or
semiprecious stone customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation.
PRECIOUS METALS: Platinum, gold or silver, but shall not mean any ingot or bar
manufactured by a commercial mint nor shall it mean any or all coins.
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEM DEALER: Any person, partnership, sole proprietorship,
cooperation or association which, in their regular course of business, takes,
receives, pays for or transfers used precious metals or gems, excluding any
supervised financial institution as defined by the Oklahoma consumer credit
code, pawnbrokers licensed pursuant to Oklahoma pawnshop act, and jewelers
whose principal business is the sale of items purchased directly from the
original manufacturer, wholesaler or their authorized representative and who in
the regular course of such business, accept trade in of items defined in this
act as precious metals or gems, so long as the item or items to be traded are
not greater in value than the item or items to be purchased. For purposes of
this exception, retail jewelers may not buy used precious metals or gems for
cash consideration only.
SECONDHAND OR USED: Previously sold or traded by a retailer. (Ord. 688 §1,
1989)
5.04.332: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate as a dealer or employee thereof in secondhand or used
precious metals or gems without first securing a license and making payment
therefor as provided in this article. The license shall be for a twelve (12)
month period of time. (Ord. 536 §2, 1982)
5.04.333: BOND REQUIRED:
Before a regulatory license shall be issued to a secondhand precious metals or
gems dealer, the applicant shall execute a satisfactory bond with a surety
licensed to do business in Oklahoma payable to the city in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful compliance by the
applicant, his or its servants, agents or employees with all applicable
ordinances and laws, and conditioned further to indemnify and to save the city
harmless from damages arising from the failure of the applicant, his or its
servants, agents or employees to comply faithfully with all applicable
ordinances and laws. Any person who obtains a judgment against any such
applicant which is not satisfied may obtain an assignment of rights of the city
upon said bond and may then bring an action thereof in any court having
jurisdiction. (Ord. 536 §3, 1982)
5.04.334: APPLICATION; FEE:
A.   Application To Be Filed With City Clerk: Applicants for a license
hereunder shall file with the city clerk in duplicate a sworn application in
writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk.
B.   Contents Of Application: The application shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:
   1.   Full name, address, description, birth date, driver's license number,
and social security number of each individual applicant;
   2.   Business address or addresses, if more than one;
   3.   Description and license number or other identification of any vehicle
to be used;
   4.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
felony, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
C.   Fingerprinting And Photographing: Each individual applicant for a license
or permit shall submit to fingerprinting and photographing by the police
department.
D.   Fee: There is levied a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the dealer
license and a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the employee license herein
required.
E.   Separate License Required For Each Location: A separate regulatory license
shall be required for each location, place or premises used for the conducting
of a secondhand precious metals or gems business and each regulatory license
shall designate the location or place of premises to which it applies. In
addition, such business shall not be carried on or conducted in any other place
than that designated in or by such regulatory license. Further, such regulatory
license shall not be transferable. (Ord. 536 §4, 1982)
5.04.335: RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS:
A.   Every dealer shall keep a tightly bound book or books, not looseleaf, with
pages numbered in sequence, in which there shall be legibly written at the time
of any transaction made with any person involving the purchasing of any
secondhand article containing in whole or in part, any precious metals or gems,
the following information:
   1.   An account and description of the item(s), article(s), or thing(s)
purchased, including if applicable the manufacturer's name, the model, the
model number, the serial number and any engraved number(s), initial(s) or
marking(s);
   2.   The amount of money involved in the transaction;
   3.   The date and time of the transaction;
   4.   The name and residence of the person involved in the transaction with
the dealer, along with the person's date of birth and general physical
description, including hair color and approximate height and weight, and social
security number, driver's license number and a photograph of the seller or
sellers, for identification purposes only, that shall be retained by the
dealer;
   5.   The signature of the seller.
B.   The book(s) required by this section shall be retained for a period of
five (5) years on the premises of the secondhand precious metals business. Such
book(s) shall be made available during regular business hours to any law
enforcement officer. A full and accurate copy of the records required to be
kept by this section shall be filed with the police department within twenty
four (24) hours of the transaction on forms approved by the police department.
Every entry in such books shall be made in ink and shall not in any manner be
obliterated or erased.
C.   Provided however, nothing in this section shall require a dealer to
furnish the description of any new property purchased from manufacturers or
wholesale dealers at an established place of business or of any goods purchased
from any bankrupt stock. Such goods shall be accompanied by a bill of sale or
other evidence of open and legitimate purchase; the bill shall be available for
inspection. (Ord. 536 §5, 1982)
5.04.336: GOODS KEPT WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
Every dealer must keep at a location within the city limits, as designated in
the license application, all secondhand precious metal articles, made in whole
or in part of gold or silver or platinum or gems which shall be open to
inspection by any law enforcement officer at reasonable times for a period of
ten (10) days. During this period, the appearance of such article shall not be
altered in any way. A dealer is not prohibited from selling or arranging to
sell such articles during the ten (10) day period as long as such article
remains in his possession as required by this article. (Ord. 536 §6, 1982)
5.04.337: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A.   No regulatory license shall be issued to any applicant who has been
convicted of any felony or a crime involving fraud, theft or receiving or
possession of stolen property in the five (5) years immediately preceding the
date of the regulatory license application.
B.   The conviction of any dealer for any felony or crime involving fraud,
theft or receiving or possessing stolen property or for any violation of this
article shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation of the regulatory
license. (Ord. 536 §7, 1982)
5.04.338: ADVERTISING:
All advertising by precious metals dealers, as defined in this article, must
include the following wording in any advertisement:
Dealer License No.                 . Photographic identification of seller
required before purchase.
(Ord. 536 §8, 1982)
5.04.339: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall wilfully violate any provision of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each offense. (Ord. 536 §9, 1982)
ARTICLE E.  CONTRACTORS
5.04.350: LICENSE REVOCATION:
The mayor shall have the right to revoke the license of any contractor or
person who continues to violate the provisions of this chapter upon proper
notice being given to the licensee and when the licensee has had time and an
opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 404 §1, 1976: prior code §5-46)
5.04.360: BUILDING AND HOUSE MOVING CONTRACTORS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, association or corporation shall engage in the business of
moving buildings or houses for pay by use of any vehicular device or devices,
within the city, without first having obtained a license from the city clerk to
do so. Application for such license shall be in writing, shall show the name
and address of such business. If such business is a partnership, the
application shall show the name and address of each member thereof; and if such
applicant is a corporation, the application shall show the corporate name of
such applicant, and the business address of such applicant. Such applicant
shall be accompanied by the bond provided for in section
5.04.380 of this article. (Prior code §5-33)
5.04.370: BUILDING AND HOUSE MOVING CONTRACTORS; OCCUPATION TAX:
There is levied an occupation tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year upon the
business or occupation defined in section
5.04.360 of this article. (Prior code §5-34)
5.04.380: BUILDING AND HOUSE MOVING CONTRACTORS; BOND:
No license shall be issued or granted to any person, firm, association or
corporation to engage in the business of moving buildings or houses in the city
unless such person, firm, association or corporation has previously entered
into an approved bond or undertaking covering all permits issued to such
person, firm, association or corporation during the period for which it is
executed, in the penal sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), payable to the
city. Such bond shall be conditioned that he or they will comply with all
ordinances of the city relating to and regulating the occupation of house or
building moving; that he or they will restore or cause to be restored, with
materials of like kind and quality, all streets, sidewalks, curbing and
gutterings in the city in anywise damaged by the principal obligor while moving
houses or buildings pursuant to a license granted under this section and
sections
5.04.360 and
5.04.370 of this article; that the principal obligor will restore or cause to
be repaired, with materials of like kind and quality, any damage to privately
owned property, houses, buildings or stationary objects lawfully on or adjacent
to said street or highway within the city, and restore or pay reasonable
damages for injuries to shrubs, trees, grass, flowers, lawns and the like on
privately owned property or on parks or parkways owned or controlled by the
city; and that the principal obligor will protect and save harmless the city
against any liabilities imposed by law against the city, on account of
negligence on the part of the principal obligor as a direct result of the
moving of any house, building or buildings pursuant to license granted under
this section and sections
5.04.360 and
5.04.370 of this article. (Prior code §5-35)
5.04.390: PAVING CONTRACTORS:
For all persons, firms, associations or corporations engaged in contracting for
the paving of sidewalks, driveways, approaches, or repairing the same, it will
be required that, prior to engaging in such work in the city, a license be
procured from the city clerk and that an annual license fee in the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) be paid to the city for said license. In addition,
where removal of curbing for the construction of driveways or for other
purposes is involved, a permit fee shall be required. Where construction or
surfacing of access driveways, off street parking areas, and aisles is involved
in the work contracted for, the contractor must submit detailed plans for such
work, including drainage plans, to the city for review and approval by the city
engineer. (Ord. 632 §1, 1985)
5.04.391: STREET AND STORM SEWER CONTRACTORS:
A.   No person, firm, association or corporation, acting as principal or agent,
shall engage in or carry on the business of contracting for or operating as a
street or storm sewer contractor and performing street or storm sewer
construction in any of the streets, alleys, easements, or other property of the
city without first having paid to the city treasurer a license fee or tax in
the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and by presenting the receipt
for same to the city clerk and procuring a license therefor;
B.   A maintenance bond must be obtained by the contractor and submitted to the
city, as prescribed in section
12.04.030 of this code;
C.   A full set of plans for the construction work to be done which have been
drafted by an engineer currently licensed in the state of Oklahoma, with said
plans bearing the Oklahoma seal of the engineer, must be submitted for review
and approval by the city engineer and all work done must be inspected and
approved by the city building inspector or other city official duly appointed
by the mayor and qualified to make such inspections as conforming with all
applicable requirements of this code, particularly those prescribed in title
19,
chapter 19.44 of this code. (Ord. 632 §2, 1985)
5.04.400: SEWER LINE CONTRACTORS:
A.   No person, firm, association or corporation, acting as principal or agent,
shall engage in or carry on the business of contracting for or operating as a
sewer line contractor and performing sewer line construction in any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements or other property of the city without
having first paid to the city treasurer a license fee or tax in the sum of
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), and by presenting the receipt for same
to the city clerk and procuring a license therefor.
B.   A maintenance bond with a term of two (2) years and providing for one
hundred percent (100%) coverage of the total cost of the sewer line
construction project must be procured before any construction work may be
commenced.
C.   A full set of construction plans must be submitted to the city engineer
and such plans must be approved by the state health department prior to any
construction work being commenced.
D.   All construction work must be inspected by the city building inspector or
any other person duly appointed by the mayor who is qualified to make such an
inspection and a pressure test of the sewer line which has been constructed,
performed and the same approved by the city building inspector or other duly
appointed city personnel before any backfilling over the line is carried out.
E.   A final inspection by the city of the manholes and infiltration must be
completed and approved by the city before the work is accepted by the city.
(Ord. 632 §3, 1985)
5.04.410: WATER LINE CONTRACTORS:
A.   No person, firm, association or corporation, acting as principal or agent,
shall engage in or carry on the business of contracting for or operating as a
water line contractor and performing water line construction in any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements or other property of the city without
having first paid to the city treasurer a license fee or tax in the sum of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and by presenting the receipt for same to the
city clerk and procuring a license therefor;
B.   A maintenance bond with a term of two (2) years and providing for one
hundred percent (100%) coverage of the total cost of the water line
construction project must be procured before any construction work may be
commenced;
C.   A full set of construction plans must be submitted to the City Engineer
and an inspection of all street cuts and paving bores to be made as part of the
water line construction project which must be approved and found to be in
conformance by the City building inspector or other duly appointed and
qualified City personnel with title 12 of this Code;
D.   Municipalities and political subdivisions who desire to do water line
construction or maintenance within the City, shall not be required to pay for a
license nor procure a maintenance bond. However, application for a permit to do
such work, with a full set of construction plans must be submitted to the City
and/or be on file with the municipality or political subdivision which is
performing the work and for a paving cut and excavation permit. Construction
standards shall meet or exceed the standards of this Code and shall not be in
conflict therewith;
E.   Contractors hired by other municipalities and political subdivisions to do
work in the City shall be required to procure or have procured a current water
line contractor's license from the City Clerk prior to performing water line
work in the City, and to submit a copy of a maintenance bond for said work
which they procured for and filed with the municipality or political
subdivision which hired them for said work, with the requirement that said bond
name the City of Warr Acres as a third party beneficiary or a named insured on
said bond. Application for a permit to do such work, with a full set of
construction plans must be submitted to the City and/or be on file with the
municipality or political subdivision for which the contractor is doing the
work, and for a paving and excavation permit, with fee and deposit, and
pursuant to standards as specified in title 12,
chapter 12.02 of this Code. Construction standards for all work shall meet or
exceed the standards prescribed in this Code and not be in conflict therewith.
(Ord. 671 §1, 1988: Ord. 632 §4, 1985)
5.04.420: PLUMBING, HEAT AND AIR AND ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS - LICENSE REQUIRED
- FEE:
A.   No person, firm, association or corporation shall, as principal or agent,
engage in or carry out the business of contracting for plumbing, heat and air,
or electrical services within the City without first having been issued a
plumbing, heat and air, or electrical contractor's license from the City.
B.   Heat and air contractors shall be required to present documentation that
they are currently licensed by the State of Oklahoma and to pay a one hundred
twenty five dollar ($125.00) license fee to the City Clerk's Office in order to
be issued a heat and air contractor's license from the City.
C.   Electrical contractors applying for a license to perform services within
the duty, said application being made and said work to be performed and
completed prior to July 1, 1988, shall be required to present documentation to
the City Clerk's Office that they are currently licensed by the State of
Oklahoma, a license and permit bond in the amount of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) naming the City as obligee, and current liability insurance with a
minimum coverage of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), and to pay a license
fee in the amount of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) in order to be
issued an electrical contractor's license from the City. Effective July 1,
1988, electrical contractors applying for a license to perform services within
the City shall no longer be required to procure a license and permit bond
naming the City as obligee nor to furnish a copy of their liability insurance
policy with minimum limit of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), but shall be
required, upon said date, to present documentation that they are currently
licensed by the State of Oklahoma.
D.   Plumbing contractors applying for a license to perform services within the
City shall be required to present documentation to the City that they are
currently licensed by the State of Oklahoma, a license and permit bond in the
amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) naming the City as obligee, and
current liability insurance with a minimum coverage of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), and shall be required to pay a license fee in the amount of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) in order to be issued a plumbing
contractor's license from the City. (Ord. 1183, 2018)
5.04.430: PLUMBING, HEAT AND AIR, ELECTRICAL AND ROOFING CONTRACTORS; WORK
PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   All plumbing, heat and air, electrical and roofing contractors conducting
any work within the City, shall be required to obtain a work permit for the
work to be performed and may not commence such work until the work permit has
been issued by the City. Any person commencing any plumbing, heat and air,
electrical or roofing work requiring a permit prior to obtaining such permit,
shall be subject to one hundred percent (100%) of the required fee in addition
to the regular required fees.
B.   Plumbing contractor work permit fees shall be required as prescribed in
the fee schedule set out in section
5.04.440 of this article. Heat and air contractor work permit fees shall be
required as prescribed in the fee schedule set out in section
5.04.450 of this article. Electrical contractor work permit fees shall be
required as prescribed in the fee schedule set out in section
5.04.460 of this chapter. Roofing contractor work permit fees shall be required
as prescribed in the fee schedule set out in section
5.04.470 of this chapter.
C.   All work or installations performed by plumbing, heat and air, electrical
and roofing contractors within the city must be carried out in a workmanlike
manner and all materials utilized and installed must be of standard quality and
kind. All work completed must be inspected and approved by the city building
inspector or such other person appointed and designated by the mayor who is
qualified to make such inspections. No inspections or approval of work
completed shall be conducted by the city unless the contractor has been issued
a work permit by the city as prescribed in this chapter.
D.   All roofs shall be covered with approved roof coverings properly secured
to the building or structure to resist wind and rain. Roof coverings shall be
designed, installed and maintained in accordance with approved manufacturer's
installation instructions to ensure the reliability and proper performance of
the product such that the roof covering shall serve to protect the building or
structure.
All residential and commercial roofing systems shall be installed in accordance
with the most current city of Warr Acres building codes, title 16, chapter
16.04 of this code. (Ord. 1133, 2013)
5.04.440: PLUMBING WORK PERMITS; FEE SCHEDULE:
 
 
Permit Fee 
Sinks                                                                 $ 10.00
Dishwasher:
 Commercial                                                           25.00
 Domestic                                                             10.00
Disposal:
 Commercial                                                           25.00
 Domestic                                                             10.00
Baptistry                                                             25.00
Dental chairs                                                         25.00
Reinspections, each                                                   30.00
Drinking fountains                                                    10.00
Drains:
 Condensation drain                                                   10.00
 Floor drain                                                          10.00
Closet                                                                10.00
Lavatories                                                            10.00
Bathtubs                                                              10.00
Shower                                                                10.00
Urinals                                                               10.00
Heaters:
 Bathroom wall heater                                                 10.00
 Water heater                                                         20.00
Sewers:
 Sanitary sewer (new - excluding tap fee)                             40.00
 Storm sewer (new)                                                    50.00
Water (new)                                                           40.00
Gas (pressure test)                                                   25.00
Construction gas                                                      25.00
Sill cocks                                                            25.00
Washing machine                                                       10.00
Clothes dryer                                                         10.00
Floor furnace                                                         20.00
Wall heater                                                           25.00
Unit heater                                                           25.00
Vented appliances                                                     25.00
Swimming pools:
 Private                                                              250.00
 Public                                                               20.00
Water softener                                                        25.00
Alteration or moving building                                         10.00
Drain                                                                 35.00
Laundry facilities:
 Laundry pit                                                          10.00
 Help yourself laundry maximum (same location)                        150.00
    Each                                                           10.00
Sump pump                                                             20.00
Septic tank                                                           10.00
Automatic car wash                                                    100.00
Fire sprinkler                                                        150.00
 Yard line                                                            35.00
 Yard sprinkler                                                       17.00
Residential (new construction). Inclusive of all fixtures integral to
the structure. Exterior work based on additional individual charges.  50.00
Base per dwelling unit.
Each additional bathroom more than one or part thereof                17.00
Replacements                                                          Fee
Water extension over 10 feet                                          $25.00
Gas extension over 10 feet                                            25.00
Sewer extension over 10 feet                                          40.00
Soil pipe extension                                                   25.00
Grease traps                                                          25.00
Minimum:
 Commercial                                                           30.00
 Residential                                                          15.00
 
(Ord. 1022 §2, 2006: Ord. 629 §2, 1985)
5.04.450: HEAT AND AIR WORK PERMITS; FEE SCHEDULE:
 
 
Permit Fee 
Minimum fee                                    $35.00
Forced heating units (gas and electric)        35.00
Fan coil unit with ductwork                    17.00
Forced air conditioning:
 Class E, from 1/8 HP or tons to 4 HP or tons  30.00
 Class D, from 4 HP or tons to 25 HP or tons   35.00
 Class C, from 25 HP or tons to 60 HP or tons  60.00
 Class B, from 60 HP or tons to 100 HP or tons 70.00
 Class A, from 100 HP or tons and up           175.00
Reinspection                                   20.00
Boilers                                        20.00
 
(Ord. 1182, 2018)
5.04.460: ELECTRICAL WORK PERMITS; FEE SCHEDULE:
 
 
Permit Fee 
Minor electrical wiring:
 Residential outlets                     $30.00
 Commercial outlets                      30.00
Residential new construction:
 Base fee                                75.00
 Rough in                                30.00
 Final in                                30.00
 Reinspection                            20.00
Residential add on:
 Minor wiring no service change          35.00
 Cutover:
  Up to 200 amps                         35.00
  Each additional 100 amps               35.00
 Temporary pole                          30.00
 Meter inspection no elec.               20.00
 Manufactured housing                    35.00
 Manufactured housing no elec.           8.00
 Swimming pool wiring                    35.00
 Construction heat total elec.           20.00
 Carnivals, circus, etc.                 35.00
Commercial new construction:
 Floor area less than 4,000 square feet: 100.00
  Base fee                               50.00
  Each additional 100 amps               50.00
  Part rough in (slab, flr, ser)         20.00
  Rough in                               25.00
  Final in                               30.00
  Reinspection                           35.00
 Floor area 4,000 square feet or more:
  Base fee                               150.00
  Each additional 100 amps               70.00
  Part rough in (slab, flr, ser)         15.00
  Rough in                               25.00
  Final in                               35.00
  Reinspection                           40.00
Commercial add on:
 No change of original size in service   80.00
 Service change:
  200 amps                               80.00
  100 amps extra                         80.00
 Reinspection                            20.00
 
(Ord. 1182, 2018)
5.04.470: ROOFING WORK PERMITS; FEE SCHEDULE:
The permit fee for roofing shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). Reinspection fee
shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. 1133, 2013)
5.04.475: PRIVATE TRASH AND REFUSE HAULERS; LICENSE AND BOND REQUIRED:
A.   No person, firm, association or corporation shall engage in the business
of collecting, transporting or disposing of "garbage", "rubbish" or "rubble",
as defined in title 8,
chapter 8.08 of this Code, for pay by use of any vehicular device or devices or
other equipment within the City limits without first having obtained a license
from the City Clerk to do so. Application for such license shall be in writing,
shall show the name and address of such business, the name and address of each
member of the business if it is a partnership or, if a corporation, the
corporate name of the applicant and the business address of the corporation.
B.   Upon the submission of the license application, an annual license fee in
the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) must be paid to the City
Treasurer in full. The license shall be for a term from May 1 until April 30
next after the same is issued. No license shall in any case be prorated. Upon
expiration of the license, the private hauler contractor must apply for a
renewal and pay the annual license fee. No license shall be issued until the
license fee is paid in full and without a bond accompanying the license
application as provided for herein.
C.   No license shall be issued or granted to any person, firm, association or
corporation to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing
of garbage, rubbish or rubble within the City limits unless such person, firm,
association or corporation has previously entered into an approved bond or
undertaking covering all contracts for trash and refuse hauler service, which
such person, firm, association or corporation has entered into to perform
within the City during the period for which the bond or undertaking is executed
in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) payable to the City. Such
bond shall be conditioned that the person, firm, association or corporation
shall comply with all ordinances of the City relating to and regulating garbage
and refuse collection and disposal; that all streets, sidewalks, curbing and
guttering within the City which are in any way damaged by the principal obligor
while collecting, transporting or disposing of garbage or refuse pursuant to a
license granted under this section shall be restored or repaired by the
principal obligor with materials of like kind and quality; that the principal
obligor will restore or cause to be repaired, with materials of like kind and
quality, any damage to privately owned property, houses, buildings or
stationary objects lawfully on or adjacent to any street or highway within the
city, and restore or pay reasonable damages for injuries to shrubs, trees,
grass, flowers, lawns and the like on privately owned property or on parks or
parkways owned or controlled by the city which are caused by the principal
obligor while collecting, transporting or disposing of garbage or refuse
pursuant to said license; and that the principal obligor will protect and save
harmless the city against any liabilities imposed by law against the city on
account of negligence on the part of the principal obligor as a direct result
of collecting, transporting or disposing of garbage or refuse pursuant to the
license granted under this section.
D.   The granting of a private trash and refuse hauler license by the city
shall entitle the licensed private hauler to contract and provide service to
only those parties who have procured a permit, per section
8.08.070 of this code, which is current and valid. Any duly licensed private
hauler who is found to have performed service to a party who has not been
granted a permit from the city or whose permit has lapsed or is no longer valid
shall be guilty of an offense and subject to having its license revoked
pursuant to the revocation procedures as stated in section
5.04.040 of this chapter.
E.   Any person, individual, corporation, association or joint venture who is
found in violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense and be subject
to a fine not to exceed seventy dollars ($70.00) for each offense and each
day's continued violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense
and be punishable as such. (Ord. 605 §1, 1985)
ARTICLE F.  PENALTY
5.04.480: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm, association, corporation or individual found guilty of a
violation of any provisions of this chapter is guilty of an offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00), plus costs. (Ord. 853 §1, 1998: prior code §5-48)
ARTICLE G.  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
5.04.510: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed herein:
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against the human body:
A.   By stroking, rubbing, kneading, tapping, pounding, manipulating,
vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the soft connective tissue of
another person;
B.   By use of the hands, feet, or otherwise, with or without apparatus or
supplementary aids such as vibrators, lotions, powders, hot or cold packs, or
other preparations; and
C.   When such activity is taken for any type of consideration or gratuity.
An external bath in which the stroking of the body of another is a significant
component is also included within this definition.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business where any person regularly engages
in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be conducted any business of the
manipulation of the body by means of "massage", as defined, either on or off
the premises.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN OR THERAPIST: Any person who administers to another person
for any consideration or gratuity, based, at least, on two hundred fifty (250)
training hours for technicians or five hundred (500) classroom hours for
therapists of formal training and experience.
OPERATOR: Any person owning or operating a massage establishment, including,
but not limited to, the manager or person in charge of a corporate business
which operates a massage establishment.
OUTCALL SERVICE: A service where "massage" as defined is conducted off site of
the street address of the operator's business.
STUDENT: A person undertaking a course of study that is designed to qualify
them for a massage technician or therapist in not more than two (2) years.
(Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.520: EXCEPTIONS:
The following classes of persons and establishments are exempted from this
chapter:
A.   Physicians, surgeons, osteopaths, physical therapists, chiropodists,
podiatrists, or chiropractors licensed in the state of Oklahoma; provided, that
employees or contractors of licensed physicians, surgeons, and osteopaths may,
by written contract, provide an outcall service in the private residences of
their patients, and such massages at the patient's home are also exempt.
B.   Registered nurses and licensed practical nurses, who are licensed in the
state of Oklahoma, performing such services in their usual nursing duties.
C.   Beauticians and barbers duly licensed under the laws of this state in the
course of practice of their usual and ordinary vocation and profession, as
defined by the laws of this state; except that this exemption shall apply
solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp, hands or feet of a patron for
cosmetic purposes.
D.   Massage practices at the athletic department of any state accredited
school, college, university, seminary, or in connection with the conduct of
athletics.
E.   Hospitals, clinics, nursing and convalescent homes and other similar
institutions dedicated to medical or nursing practices, licensed under the laws
of this state, where massage and baths may be given to their patients.
Employees and contractors of the respective institutions shall be exempt from
this article while in the normal course of their employment within the
institution.
F.   Massage practiced by students in a state certified institution of learning
established for such instruction.
G.   Massage of the hands, wrists, ankles, or feet only of an otherwise clothed
person; provided, that furniture such as a couch or chair that contains
vibratory equipment may also be used by the massage recipient contemporaneously
with the massage of the named extremities. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.530: LICENSING:
A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a massage
establishment or outcall service without having first obtained a current
license to do so, as hereinafter provided.
B.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to perform the services
of a massage technician or therapist, without first having obtained a current
license to do so.
C.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for an operator of a massage
establishment to permit any person within the establishment to act as a massage
technician or therapist, unless the said person so acting is duly licensed as
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.540: APPLICATION FEES AND ANNUAL LICENSE FEES:
A.   Application processing fee for any type of license (whether granted or
denied):
 
Massage establishment                      $100.00
Massage technician or therapist or student 45.00
Outcall service                            45.00
 
B.   The annual renewal fee of any license shall be as follows:
 
Massage establishment                      $75.00
Massage technician or therapist or student 30.00
Outcall service                            30.00
 
C.   Application fees and annual renewal fees are nonrefundable. The
application fees shall be paid at the time of the submission of an application
for a license and are not prorated. If a license shall be issued, the license
fee shall be due and payable on May 1 of each year thereafter. In the event
that the licensee shall cease operations before the end of a period for which a
license is issued, the license fees shall not be refundable or prorated.
D.   The initial establishment, technician or therapist, and outcall license
shall not expire until April 30, 2008, at eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59)
P.M. Thereafter, such licenses shall expire on April 30 next following
issuance. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.550: APPLICATIONS:
A.   Commercial Massage Establishment: The operator of the massage
establishment seeking to obtain a license for operation within a commercially
zoned property shall submit a written application to the city clerk so that it
may be determined:
   1.   That the applicant is an adult.
   2.   If the applicant is a corporation, the date and state of incorporation;
name and address of the registered agent for the state of Oklahoma and names
and addresses of officers and directors of said corporation shall be stated.
   3.   The applicable zoning of the property where the establishment is to be
located (applicants shall provide the physical address for the establishment).
   4.   That all employees involved in massage have been examined and have been
issued a health certificate by a medical doctor stating that they have, within
thirty (30) days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free
from any contagious or communicable diseases of a type transmittable during
massage, as to all persons who shall have physical contact with patrons.
   5.   That the applicant and each employee thereof have not previously been
convicted of any criminal violation involving moral turpitude.
B.   Massage Technician Or Therapist Or Student: Any person seeking to obtain a
license as a massage technician or therapist shall submit a written application
to the city clerk containing, but not limited to, the following information:
   1.   The full name and present physical address of the applicant, and all
aliases by which the applicant is or may be known as well as the full name and
present physical address of the commercial massage establishment(s) employing
or proposing to employ the applicant, with proof of employment or conditional
offer of employment from said establishment(s).
   2.   All addresses and the employment history of the applicant for the three
(3) years preceding the application.
   3.   The applicable zoning of the property where the business is to be
located.
   4.   Written proof that the applicant is an adult and eligible to work in
the United States.
   5.   Applicant's height, weight, date of birth, color of eyes and hair.
   6.   Two (2) portrait photographs which meet the federal standards for
passport photographs, one of which shall be attached to the license issued by
the city clerk.
   7.   The massage or similar business history of the applicant, including
whether such person has ever had a similar license revoked or suspended and the
reasons therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such
action of suspension or revocation.
   8.   All convictions involving moral turpitude for the seven (7) years
preceding the application.
   9.   A certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has,
within thirty (30) days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to
be free of any contagious or communicable disease which might be transmitted by
personal contact of a kind customary for massage.
   10.   An applicant for a massage technician or therapist license must
furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from an institution recognized
by any state wherein the practice or profession of massage technician is
taught, together with a transcript reflecting successful completion of a total
of two hundred fifty (250) hours for a technician, or five hundred (500) hours
of coursework for a therapist, which includes classroom work in applied
anatomy, physiology, contraindications of massage and ethics at any institution
of higher learning accredited by the state wherein the institution is located.
The classroom hours may include up to one hundred (100) hours of practical
experience as supported by a clinical practicum log. In the alternative,
applicants may show that they have successfully passed an examination and are
in current good standing with a certifying agency which meets the standards of
and is approved by the national commission of certifying agencies such as the
national certification exam created by the national certification board for
therapeutic massage and bodywork or applicant is applying to renew a previously
issued Warr Acres license.
   11.   An applicant for a massage student license must furnish proof of age
showing the student to be at least age twenty one (21), and proof of admission
as a student to a massage school or massage establishment within the city
limits, for a course study or training leading to the student becoming a
massage technician or therapist, together with a school transcript or training
log for all massage work done by the student in the year immediately preceding
the application; provided, that in the absence of medical necessity, a student
must complete at least two hundred fifty (250) hours per year until completion
of the course of study or training. Provided further, that a student license
shall be valid only for work performed on site and under the direction of the
school or establishment that is providing the coursework. Such other
identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters
hereinabove specified as required to be set forth in the application.
   12.   Classification of license desired.
   13.   For renewals, proof of professional continuing education achieved
during the preceding twelve (12) months. Such proof shall consist of at least
four (4) hours of continuing learning experience which enhance and expand the
skill, knowledge, and attitudes of practicing massage therapists and
technicians to render competent professional service; such proof shall include:
      a.   The name of the program;
      b.   A course outline or general description of the course;
      c.   Course provider and instructor;
      d.   Dates of the training or instruction; and
      e.   Hours awarded by the national certification board for therapeutic
massage and bodywork.
C.   Residential Massage Establishment: An operator of a massage establishment
seeking to obtain a license for operation within a residentially zoned property
shall submit a written application to the city clerk so that it may be
determined that:
   1.   The applicant is an adult.
   2.   The applicant is the actual resident of the property for which the
license is sought.
   3.   No person other than actual residents of the household will perform
"massage" as defined in this chapter, and then only if licensed as a massage
technician or therapist.
   4.   The applicant has been examined and has been issued a health
certificate by a medical doctor stating that he or she has, within thirty (30)
days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free from any
contagious or communicable diseases of a type transmittable during massage, as
to all persons who shall have physical contact with patrons.
   5.   The applicant has not previously been convicted of any criminal
violation involving moral turpitude.
D.   Issuance: The city clerk shall investigate the validity of the statements
contained in the application for a license required under this chapter. Refusal
or failure to submit a true and accurate application, containing all
information required, shall be grounds for the city clerk to refuse to accept
this application or refuse to issue such license until such time as the
application is accurately completed.
E.   Reciprocity Based Upon Preexisting Practical Training: Full time,
practical experience in Oklahoma City or in another city with comparable
regulation, which experience is based upon at least two hundred fifty (250)
hours of training, shall be considered the substantial equivalent of a diploma
or certificate of graduation for the purpose of obtaining a massage technician
license in Warr Acres; provided, such Warr Acres technician license is first
obtained prior to April 30, 2007, and maintained in a current status
thereafter.
F.   Record Maintenance: All records of the application shall be maintained by
the city clerk, under normal document maintenance procedures. (Ord. 1135, 2013)
5.04.560: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every person, partnership, firm or corporation, to whom a massage establishment
license shall have been granted, under this article, shall display said license
in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering
the premises where the massage is given. Every person to whom a massage
technician or therapist license shall have been granted under this article, and
who is working in a licensed establishment, shall affix a nameplate or similar
means of identification conspicuously to the garment of the person so that the
person's identity may be readily ascertainable. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.570: FACILITIES:
No massage establishment license shall be licensed or renewed on commercial
property unless inspection by the city of Warr Acres building department and
fire department certifies that the establishment complies with the following
minimum requirements:
A.   Minimum lighting and ventilation shall be provided in commercial
facilities in accordance with the building code. In addition, either direct or
indirect lighting of not less than forty (40) foot-candles shall be provided in
such room or enclosure where services are performed on patrons, and each
minimum lighting shall be in use when services are being performed.
B.   Approved storage facilities shall be provided and used for the storage of
clean linens in all commercial facilities.
C.   Adequate equipment shall be provided for disinfecting and sterilizing
instruments used in administering or practicing massage. Such instruments shall
be sterilized after each use.
D.   Hot and cold running water shall be available at all times.
E.   Massage establishments in the massage technicians' or therapists' own
residence shall have no more than two (2) patrons on the premises at any one
time.
F.   Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A
minimum of one toilet and one washbasin, and facilities to provide a safe and
secure place to keep valuables and personal items, shall be provided in every
massage establishment; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are
to be served simultaneously at a commercial massage establishment, a separate
massage room, or rooms, and separate dressing facilities shall be provided for
male and female patrons.
G.   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and
all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be in good
repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat
rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments,
and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and massage tables shall be thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected after each use.
H.   Clean and sanitary linens shall be provided for the use of each patron.
The table shall be provided with clean and sanitary linen, paper towel or sheet
for each patron.
I.   A price schedule for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area or otherwise readily available to all prospective patrons.
J.   In a commercial environment, all massages shall be performed in a massage
room designed for such purpose. No doorway to such room shall be locked during
a massage session.
K.   All massage establishments shall be located in conformity with the Warr
Acres zoning code, within commercial districts, or as a home occupation within
residential districts.
L.   All massage technicians and therapists shall thoroughly wash or otherwise
cleanse their hands prior to each massage. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.580: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
A.   The operator of each massage establishment shall keep and maintain up to
date a register of all employees, including their address, date of birth, sex,
and duties. The operator shall maintain an up to date roster at each
establishment site listing the names, addresses, dates of birth and gender of
all therapists, technicians and/or students employed and authorized to work at
the facility and shall further provide said roster to the city's code
enforcement officer. The roster (both on site and the copy provided to the
city) shall be updated immediately following any change in employment of any
therapist, technician and/or student (i.e., new hires and/or separations of
employment).
B.   Every operator shall keep a record of all treatments rendered either on or
off the business site, and shall describe the address of the patron, the
technician, therapist or student rendering such treatment, and the date of such
treatment. Said records shall be maintained for a period of one year, and shall
be available for inspection during normal business hours by officials of the
city. (Ord. 1135, 2013)
5.04.590: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A.   Any operator of any massage establishment, or any other employee of such
massage establishment, or any massage technician or therapist, is hereby
prohibited from:
   1.   Engaging in prostitution, oral copulation, masturbation, sexual
intercourse, or any other act designed or intended to arouse or gratify the
sexual desires of any massage patron;
   2.   Soliciting, directly or indirectly, any person to engage in
prostitution, oral copulation, masturbation, deviant sexual intercourse, or
other act designed or intended to arouse or gratify the sexual desires of any
massage patron, whether such acts are intended to occur on or off the premises
of the massage establishment;
   3.   Engaging in a display amounting to indecent exposure;
   4.   Opening to the public for business without a licensed technician or
therapist or student on site; or
   5.   Opening to the public for business without an operator present who has
access to all rooms, desks, file cabinets and/or locations on the premises.
B.   Any operator who knows or reasonably should know that any acts prohibited
by this section have occurred, or are occurring in or upon the premises of the
establishment, shall be deemed guilty of committing such act and shall also be
held liable as a principal.
C.   It shall further be a violation for any operator to violate any section of
this chapter.
D.   Any person convicted under this section for a violation of any provision
of this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine
of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs or other fees. (Ord.
1135, 2013)
5.04.600: INSPECTIONS:
A.   At least twice a year the city may make an inspection of each massage
establishment in the city to determine compliance with the provisions of this
article. Nothing herein shall preclude authorized city employees or agents from
making additional inspections of the premises and records at any reasonable
time during the hours of operation. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any
operator of a massage establishment to refuse to allow the aforementioned
inspection.
B.   Inspection of the premises shall be limited to those areas not in actual
use at the time of inspection; provided, nothing herein shall be construed to
preclude a peace officer from inspecting any area pursuant to a warrant, or as
otherwise authorized by applicable law. (Ord. 1135, 2013)
5.04.610: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION:
A.   Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to revocation
or suspension, whenever the holder thereof shall violate any of the provisions
of this article or other applicable ordinances of the city of Warr Acres
relating to massage establishments.
B.   Upon commencement of revocation and suspension proceedings, the council
shall set a time and place for the hearing of the matter.
C.   The licensee shall be given notice of the time, place, nature of the
revocation or suspension hearing to be held, and a description of the violation
asserted. Such notice shall be served personally or by mailing by first class
U.S. postal service mail, certified, with return receipt requested, to the last
address furnished to the city by the licensee, said mailing occurring at least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
D.   The city council may preside over the hearing or, in the alternative, may
appoint a hearing officer, which may be a council member, or a special
committee of the council, to preside over such hearing.
E.   The hearing officer or the chairman of the special committee shall have
the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas.
F.   All evidence shall be recorded stenographically or by electronic recording
device. If the hearing is before a hearing officer, the officer shall prepare a
summary of the evidence and shall make recommendations in writing to the city
council within ten (10) days after the close of the hearing. A copy of this
summary and recommendation shall be transmitted to the licensee. At its next
regularly scheduled meeting following the receipt of such summary and
recommendations, the council shall consider same. In its discretion, the
council may reject the hearing officer's recommendation, or may refer the
matter back for further proceedings, or may adopt the recommendation, with or
without modification, or may order a new hearing before the entire council.
G.   The city clerk may summarily suspend any license now or hereafter issued
to any person pursuant to this article whenever the holder thereof shall be
convicted of a violation of any provisions of this article under which such
license was issued or whenever, in the judgment of the city clerk, the public
welfare requires the same. Any person may appeal to the city council from the
action of the city clerk in summarily suspending any such license. Appeal from
the city clerk's suspension of the license shall be to the city council under
the procedures hereinbefore stated.
H.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to carry on or engage
in the business, as herein described in this article, while any suspension or
revocation is in effect. (Ord. 1093, 2010)
5.04.620: SALE OR TRANSFER:
A.   No license shall be transferable from one license holder to another. A new
application shall be made by any transferee desiring to own or operate a
presently licensed massage establishment.
B.   Any sale or transfer, or any interest in an existing massage
establishment, or any application for an extension or expansion of the premises
or removal of the massage establishment to another location, shall require
inspection and shall require compliance with all applicable provisions of this
article and all other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.630: EXISTING OPERATIONS:
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date of this article and shall
include any person or persons whose application may be presently under
consideration or investigation by the city; provided, however, that those
massage establishments in actual existence and operation prior to the date of
adoption of this article shall have a two (2) month grace period from the
effective date hereof, within which to comply with all the conditions and
requirements of this article as set out herein, including, but not limited to,
all licensing, structural and sanitation provisions. Notwithstanding any
provisions to the contrary, any existing massage establishment shall have a
full time massage technician who has met the licensing requirements of this
article, on their staff not later than thirty (30) days from the effective date
of this article. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.640: OPERATION CONTRARY TO PROVISIONS:
Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be
unlawful and a public nuisance. At the discretion of the city council, the city
attorney, in addition to all other remedies set forth hereunder, may commence
an action or actions for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the
manner provided by law to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to
grant such relief. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.650: MASSAGES AS EMPLOYEE BENEFIT ON PERIODIC BASIS:
When a business which does not provide massages to the public, but chooses to
provide massages to its own employees as an employee benefit on a periodic
basis, such a business shall not be required to be licensed as a massage
establishment so long as such massages are given under written contract with
the licensed massage technician with a copy filed in the office of the city
clerk, and the massage technician provides massages only through the clothing
of the employee benefited. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.660: OUTCALL SERVICE:
No massage technician or therapist shall provide service by providing massages
at a private location, except under the following circumstances:
A.   The massage technician or therapist must specify in the application for a
license that an outcall service will be provided.
B.   No outcall massage service shall be provided after nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. nor before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.; nor may any patron of an outcall
service be less than eighteen (18) years of age, unless such service is based
on parental consent or a physician's instructions as shown by a written
instrument.
C.   All towels, linens, and paper products shall be clean, and shall be
laundered or disposed of after each use.
D.   All instruments, apparatus, and equipment of a nondisposable nature shall
be disinfected after each use.
E.   The massage technician or therapist shall maintain a written log of all
outcall services, including the date, time, and location of the service
provided, plus the name and home address of each patron served, and the fee
paid. Such record shall be available for inspection by any authorized
representative of the city, during normal business hours, on demand. Such
record shall be preserved by the massage technician or therapist for not less
than eighteen (18) months.
F.   Students shall not be used in any outcall service, but may observe a
technician or therapist in an outcall service.
G.   The outcall service must have an address within the city limits of Warr
Acres, where all applicable records are kept. Such a record location may be
separate, or combined with other facilities associated with the lawful
business. (Ord. 1035 §1, 2007)
5.04.670: OPERATING HOURS:
No massage establishment shall be kept open or massages performed between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 1128,
2012)
5.04.680: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND LOW POINT BEER:
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage as defined in 37
Oklahoma Statutes section 506, or low point beer as defined in 37 Oklahoma
Statutes section 163.2, on the premises of any massage establishment or where
massage is being conducted. (Ord. 1128, 2012)
CHAPTER 5.08
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 1
SECTION:
5.08.010: Definitions
5.08.020: Annual Occupation Tax
5.08.030: Certificate Of Occupation Tax
5.08.040: Retail Dealer In Nonintoxicating Alcoholic Beverages
5.08.050: Annual Report
 
Notes
1 1. 37 OS; 37 OS §§ 163.1 et seq., 518.
5.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
All of the terms and phrases used in this chapter shall be given the same use
and meaning as defined by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Control Act, 37 Oklahoma
Statutes 1981. (Ord. 615 §1, 1985)
5.08.020: ANNUAL OCCUPATION TAX:
A.   There is levied and assessed upon each person, partnership, firm or
corporation entering upon any occupation relating to alcoholic beverages within
the City which is listed in the schedule herein and who has been issued a
current and lawful license by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Law Enforcement
(ABLE) Commission an annual Occupation Tax in the prescribed amount as follows:
 
1.  Brewer                                                          $1,250.00
2.  Distiller                                                       3,125.00
3.  Winemaker                                                       625.00
4.  Oklahoma winemaker                                              75.00
5.  Rectifier                                                       3,125.00
6.  Wholesaler                                                      3,500.00
7.  Class B wholesaler                                              625.00
8.  Retail package/spirits store                                    900.00
9.  Mixed beverage:
     Initial                                                        1,000.00
     Renewal                                                        900.00
10. Caterer:
     Initial                                                        1,000.00
     Renewal                                                        900.00
11. Special event (per day)                                         50.00
    Service organizations which are exempt under section 501(c)(19)
12. of the Internal Revenue Code for mixed beverage or bottle club  200.00
    licenses
13. Retail beer                                                     500.00
14. Retail wine                                                     1,000.00
15. Beer and wine (on premises)                                     500.00
 
B.   The Occupation Taxes listed in subsection A of this section for brewer or
Class B wholesaler who also holds a license from the State to manufacture or
wholesale any nonintoxicating malt beverage shall be reduced by seventy five
percent (75%). (Ord. 1191, 2018)
5.08.030: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPATION TAX:
A.   Any person, partnership, firm or corporation holding a current State of
Oklahoma alcoholic beverage license entering upon any business located within
the City shall be required to pay an annual Occupation Tax as prescribed in
section
5.08.020 of this chapter to the City Clerk must be issued an Occupation Tax
certificate from the City on or before the date upon which such person,
partnership, firm or corporation enters such occupation. Thereafter, the
Occupation Tax shall be paid annually to the City on or before July 1.
B.   Upon presentation of copy of a current State of Oklahoma alcoholic
beverage license the City Clerk shall issue an Occupation Tax certificate which
must be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises of anyone who has
entered into any occupation listed herein in section
5.08.020 of this chapter within the City so that it may be easily ascertained
by the City officials that said establishment is currently paid upon its
Occupation Tax for operating a business or occupation within the City relating
to alcoholic beverages. No Occupation Tax certificate will be issued until a
State of Oklahoma alcoholic beverage license has been procured and a copy
thereof presented to the City Clerk.
C.   The Occupation Tax prescribed herein shall be prorated in the following
manner: Any occupation listed in section
5.08.020 of this chapter which is to begin operations more than six (6) months
prior to June 30 of any year shall be required to pay the requisite Occupation
Tax in full; any occupation listed in section
5.08.020 of this chapter which is to begin operations less than six (6) months
prior to June 30 of any year shall be required to pay one-half (1/2) the
requisite Occupation Tax.
D.   Any person who engages in any of the occupations listed in section
5.08.020 of this chapter without paying the required Occupation Tax imposed
therefor in advance of engaging in such operation shall be guilty of an offense
against the City of Warr Acres and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined the
sum of not more than seventy dollars ($70.00) excluding costs. Each day of such
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 615 §1, 1985)
5.08.040: RETAIL DEALER IN NONINTOXICATING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
For operation of the business of a retail dealer in nonintoxicating alcoholic
beverages, a license fee shall be assessed and levied by the City upon any
person, partnership, firm or corporation operating such a business in the
amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) per year where such nonintoxicating alcoholic
beverages are sold for consumption on the premises or ten dollars ($10.00) per
year where such beverages are sold for consumption off the premises; provided,
that where such business is begun less than six (6) months before June 30
during any given year, the license fee must be paid in full. All licenses
issued pursuant to this title, chapter and section shall expire on June 30 next
year following their issuance. (Ord. 620 §1, 1985)
5.08.050: ANNUAL REPORT:
The City Clerk shall make an annual report to the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage
Law Enforcement (ABLE) Commission covering the fiscal year, showing the number
and class of State licenses subject to the Occupation Tax and the amount of
money collected from said tax. (Ord. 615 §1, 1985)
CHAPTER 5.12
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
5.12.010: License Required
5.12.020: Fee For License
5.12.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation within the
City to keep, operate, maintain or control or to be in charge of any device or
machine requiring the deposit of a coin or token for the use, operating or
playing thereof, which is held out to the public for the playing of marble
games, basketball games, football games, golf, poker or other card games, or to
keep, operate, maintain, control and be in charge of any other similar
amusement device without first having paid to the City Treasurer the license
fee provided in section
5.12.020 of this chapter and obtaining from the City Clerk a license to do so,
which license shall be at all times prominently displayed upon such machine or
device. (Ord. 353 §2, 1972)
5.12.020: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fee for keeping, operating, maintaining, controlling or being in
charge of any marble games or other similar device as set forth in this chapter
shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per year per machine. (Ord. 1183, 2018)
CHAPTER 5.16
DAYCARE CENTERS AND FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES 1
SECTION:
5.16.010: Definitions
5.16.020: License Required
5.16.030: Revocation, Suspension Or Denial Of License
5.16.040: Zoning Restrictions
5.16.050: Construction Requirements; Inspections
5.16.060: Penalty
5.16.070: Responsible Parties; Violation
 
Notes
1 1. 10 OS ch. 18. See also
  chapter 5.36 of this title regarding preschools.
5.16.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
CHILD: Any person who has not reached the age of eighteen (18).
CHILDCARE FACILITY: Any public or private institution, child placing agency,
foster family home, group home, daycare center or family care home providing
either full time care for children away from their homes and which is owned or
controlled by a political subdivision, a cooperation, an unincorporated
organization, an association or individual.
DAYCARE CENTER: A licensed or approved childcare facility which receives and
provides care and protection for eight (8) or more children apart from their
natural parents, legal guardians or custodians and outside the home where they
reside for any part of a twenty four (24) hour period.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A licensed or approved childcare facility located in a
detached single-family residential unit which receives and provides care and
protection for seven (7) or fewer preschool children under five (5) years of
age, apart from their natural parents, legal guardians, and outside of the home
where they reside for any part of a twenty four (24) hour period, including any
preschool children under five (5) years of age living in the family daycare
home.
The definitions of "daycare center" and "family daycare home" shall not include
informal arrangements which parents, legal guardians or custodians make for
their children which are made independently with neighbors, friends, relatives
and others, caretakers in the child's home, and shall not include care by
churches or other religious or public institutions where children are cared for
within the institutional building while their parents or legal guardians or
custodians are attending services, meetings or classes, or other church related
or religion related activities and shall not include nursery schools and other
preschools, kindergartens or other facilities of which the purpose is primarily
educational, recreational or medical treatment. (Ord. 851 §1, 1998: Ord. 738
§1, 1993: Ord. 634 §1, 1985: Ord. 623 §1, 1985)
5.16.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to open, operate, or maintain a
daycare center or family daycare home without having obtained a valid license
from the city to operate such, as provided for in this chapter. Such license
shall not be transferable either as to place or person and the license fee
shall not be prorated for any portion of a year. A license shall not be issued
by the city until the applicant for said license has met the following
requirements:
A.   The applicant has been issued a valid license by the state of Oklahoma
department of human services pursuant to title 10 of Oklahoma Statutes 1963,
section 405 and is in compliance with section 401 and 415 of said act.
B.   The applicant has demonstrated that he or she is in compliance with the
zoning requirements of the city.
C.   All outside premises of the family daycare home where the children of the
family daycare home will be cared for or where they recreate shall be
completely enclosed by a fence which has a minimum height of four feet (4').
All outside premises of a daycare center where the children are cared for or
where they recreate shall also be completely enclosed by a fence which has a
minimum height of four feet (4'), except where such outside premises abuts
residentially zoned property in which case, pursuant to section
19.37.060 of this code, said premises must be enclosed by a sightproof or
opaque fence or wall which shall not be less than six feet (6') in height.
D.   The applicant has paid to the city an annual license fee in the following
amounts: seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a daycare center license and twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for a family daycare home license.
E.   The total number of children in care shall be limited to seven (7). The
number shall include the caregiver's own preschool children under five (5)
years of age who live in the home.
   1.   One Caregiver: When only one caregiver is present, the guidelines on
the ages and total number of children in care that shall be complied with are:
 
Under 2 Years 2 Years And Older Total
0 7 7
1 6 7
2 5 7
3 3 6
4 1 5
5 0 5
 
   2.   Two Caregivers: When seven (7) children are in care and more than two
(2) of those children are under two (2) years of age, an assistant caregiver
shall be present. The guidelines that shall be complied with are:
 
Under 2 Years 2 Years And Older Total
3             4                 7
4             3                 7
5             2                 7
6             1                 7
7             0                 7
 
   (Ord. 851 §1, 1998: Ord. 634 §1, 1985: Ord. 623 §1, 1985)
5.16.030: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Revocation, suspension or denial of state license by the state shall be
sufficient reason for revocation, suspension or denial of a license by the
city. There shall be no appeal to the city council. (Ord. 623 §1, 1985)
5.16.040: ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
A.   Daycare centers shall be permitted only in commercial zoning districts as
provided for and pursuant to title 19 of this code.
B.   Family daycare homes shall be permitted only in a single-family
residential zoning district as provided for and pursuant to title 19 of this
code.
C.   Any exceptions to zoning restrictions imposed on the establishment and
operation of a daycare center or family daycare home within the city, including
daycare centers operated and conducted by recognized and duly organized
religious and charitable organizations, shall only be permitted where
authorized by and pursuant to applicable provisions of title 19 of this code.
(Ord. 623 §1, 1985)
5.16.050: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; INSPECTIONS:
All property used for daycare centers and family daycare homes must meet all
requirements of the state and must also meet construction requirements as
prescribed in the city building code and all applicable amendments thereto
which are made or which become incorporated on or subsequent to the effective
date of this section. Any new construction addition, alteration or major
remodeling must meet all applicable city building code requirements. Annual
inspection by the city building inspector and the fire inspector is required.
(Ord. 1111, 2011)
5.16.060: PENALTY:
Any person, or persons, who violates, omits or neglects any of the provisions
of this chapter or who fails to comply with this chapter or with any of the
requirements of this chapter is guilty of an offense and shall be liable to a
fine of not more than twenty dollars ($20.00), including fine and cost; and
each day violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord.
623 §1, 1985)
5.16.070: RESPONSIBLE PARTIES; VIOLATION:
The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof where anything
in violation of this chapter is placed or exists, or any person or persons
employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of
any such violation is guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be
fined as provided in section
5.16.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 623 §1, 1985)
CHAPTER 5.20
COIN AND VENDING MACHINES 1
SECTION:
5.20.010: Definition
5.20.020: License Required
5.20.030: Fee For License
5.20.040: Maintenance And Inspection
5.20.050: Revocation Of License
5.20.060: Term Of License
5.20.070: License Renewal Delinquency
5.20.080: Music Machine License Required
5.20.090: Fee For Music Machine License
5.20.100: Maintenance And Inspection Of Music Machines
5.20.110: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS § 1501 et seq.
5.20.010: DEFINITION:
A "vending machine or device" is a machine or device which does nothing more
than deliver automatically an article or quantity of merchandise, commodity or
service upon deposit of a coin or token in such machine or device. In any
vending machine having more than one slot for coins or tokens, or where there
is more than one machine in combination, or in multiple units, each unit shall
constitute a separate machine for licensing purposes; and there shall be
affixed to each unit, in a conspicuous place, a license tag or receipt
containing the name, address and telephone number of the licensee, the
expiration date of such license, and the signature of the City Clerk. (Prior
Code §13-90)
5.20.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall keep, operate, maintain, control or be in
charge of any vending machine, as defined in this chapter within the City
limits unless there has been paid in advance to the City Treasurer an annual
license fee as provided for in section
5.20.030 of this chapter, and unless there has been issued a license receipt by
the City Clerk, which license receipt shall be at all times prominently
displayed upon such machine or device. (Prior Code §13-88)
5.20.030: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fee to be paid on any vending machine described in this chapter
shall be five dollars ($5.00) per year for the keeping, operating, maintaining,
controlling or being in charge of such machine or device. The fee for any penny
vending machine shall be one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. 1183, 2018)
5.20.040: MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to operate,
maintain, control or be in charge of any vending machine or device as set forth
in this chapter unless said machine or device is in proper mechanical working
condition to operate upon deposit of the stated coin or token in the manner
advertised or represented to the public to so operate. In the event any such
machine or device vends any article of food or material for human consumption,
the same shall be kept clean and sanitary in every respect and shall comply
with all the health and sanitary ordinances of the City and the laws of the
State, and shall be so constructed that the contents thereof will at all times
be protected from contamination, dust, dirt, odors and filth. It shall be the
duty of the City Clerk, City Health Officer, or any other proper person
authorized by the Mayor to inspect each vending machine not less than once
every three (3) months to see that the regulations set out in this section are
complied with. (Prior Code §13-91)
5.20.050: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The Mayor is authorized to revoke any vending machine license when he finds any
provision of the ordinances of the City or the laws of the State relating to
such machines is violated, or that such machine is being operated as a slot
machine as defined in this Code, or is a gambling device; providing, however,
that before revoking any such license, the City Clerk or City Attorney shall
cause written notice to be served upon the licensee, or his agent, attorney or
legal representative, or the custodian in charge of said machine or device at
least five (5) days prior to such hearing, advising such licensee that a
hearing will be held, at a time and place fixed in the notice, to determine
whether the license should be revoked. It is unlawful for any person to operate
any such machine or device during any period in which the license covering any
such machine or device is revoked. The provisions of this section shall in no
way limit or interfere with the enforcement of ordinances generally, but shall
be cumulative and in addition of such penalties. (Prior Code §13-92)
5.20.060: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued for any machine or device described in this chapter shall
be paid per year, the fiscal year for all licenses beginning on June 1 and
ending on May 30 the following year. The license issued on any machine or
device installed after July 1 may be paid for on the fraction of the year
remaining. (Prior code §13-93)
5.20.070: LICENSE RENEWAL DELINQUENCY:
All licenses which become due on June 1, or at any other stated time, shall be
considered delinquent if not paid within fifteen (15) days thereafter. On any
license not paid after fifteen (15) days from the due date and becoming
delinquent as provided in this section, there shall be a penalty attached, in
addition to the full sum of the tax, of three dollars ($3.00), which shall be
collected in the same manner as the license. The addition, if any, of a penalty
to a license shall not exempt the licensee or any other person from whom the
license may be collected from any penalty to which he or she may be liable for
violating any of the provisions of this section, and any penalty that may be
attached thereto must be paid in the full amount. (Prior code §13-94)
5.20.080: MUSIC MACHINE LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation within the
city to keep, operate, maintain, control or be in charge of any machine or
device requiring the deposit of a coin or token for the operation thereof,
which is held out to the public for the playing of recorded music, without
first having paid to the city treasurer the license fee provided for in section
5.20.090 of this chapter and obtaining from the city clerk a license to do so,
which license receipt shall be at all times prominently displayed upon such
machine or device. (Prior code §13-85)
5.20.090: FEE FOR MUSIC MACHINE LICENSE:
The license fee for the keeping, operating, maintaining, controlling or being
in charge of any machine or device as set forth in section
5.20.080 of this chapter shall be five dollars ($5.00) per year. (Prior code
§13-86)
5.20.100: MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF MUSIC MACHINES:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to keep,
operate, maintain, control or be in charge of any machine or device as set
forth in section
5.20.080 of this chapter unless such machine or device is in proper mechanical
working condition at all times to provide for the customer or player the exact
amount and kind of music as is advertised or represented on the machine that
the customer or player shall receive upon the deposit of the stated coin or
token. It shall be the duty of the city clerk or other person so designated by
the mayor to inspect such machine or device not less than once every three (3)
months and as often as the records are changed on the machine. The inspector
shall determine what records or reproductions are fit and suitable to be played
or reproduced on the machine or device, and is empowered and authorized to
reject any recording found to be indecent or immoral. (Prior code §13-87)
5.20.110: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of any offense as defined in this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than eighteen dollars ($18.00)
and two dollars ($2.00) costs for each offense. Each day constitutes a distinct
and separate offense for any violation or any part thereof. (Prior code §13-95)
CHAPTER 5.28
CONVALESCENT, REST AND NURSING HOMES 1
SECTION:
5.28.010: Definitions
5.28.020: Permit Required
5.28.030: State License Required
5.28.040: Application For Permit
5.28.050: Conditions Of A Permit
5.28.060: Fee For A Permit
5.28.070: Rules And Regulations; Inspections
5.28.080: Issuance, Suspension Or Revocation Of A Permit
5.28.090: Assistance Of Officers And Departments Of The City
5.28.100: Units Allowed
5.28.110: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 1-801 et seq.
5.28.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning, the
following words shall be defined as follows:
CLINICAL OR CONVALESCENT CARE: Care given to a person because of prolonged
mental or physical illness or defect or recovering from any injury, illness or
disease, and including any or all of the procedures commonly employed in caring
for the sick, such as administration of medicine, preparation of diet, giving
of bedside care and carrying out treatment prescribed by a duly licensed
practitioner of the healing arts.
CONVALESCENT OR REST HOMES: Any home, establishment or institution offering
and/or providing planned continuing care for one or more persons, not related
to the operator, who by reason of advancing age or physical infirmity are
partially unable to care for themselves, or who occasionally require care
incident to old age or physical infirmity. The furnishing of board, room and
laundry, separately or combined, to any person or persons, regardless of age,
shall not, in itself, be deemed care incident to old age.
HEALTH OFFICER: A duly appointed Oklahoma state commissioner of health or the
Oklahoma County director of health, or their duly appointed field
representative, or the city clerk.
NURSING HOME: Any home, establishment or institution offering and/or providing
clinical and convalescent care for one or more persons not related to the
operator, who are unable to care for themselves by reason of advancing age,
physical infirmity, prolonged illnesses or defects, or who are recovering from
illness, injury or disease, and including any or all procedures commonly
employed in caring for the sick, such as administration of medicine,
preparation of diets, getting bedside care and carrying out treatment
prescribed by a duly licensed practitioner of the healing arts.
RELATED INSTITUTIONS: Any home, establishment or institution offering and/or
providing planned continuing care, personal service, or clinical or
convalescent care for any person or persons not related to the operator, as
described in the definitions for rest homes and nursing homes.
UNIT: One bed. (Ord. 297 §2, 1969)
5.28.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
After December 2, 1969, no person, corporation, partnership or association
shall establish, conduct or maintain within the city limits any convalescent
home, rest home, nursing home or related institution, within the meaning of
this chapter, without first obtaining a permit in the manner provided in this
chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to hotels or other similar places that
furnish only board and room, or either, to their guests. (Ord. 297 §1, 1969)
5.28.030: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, partnership, association or corporation may continue to operate an
existing nursing home, convalescent home, rest home or related institution, or
open a convalescent home, rest home, nursing home or related institution after
the second day of December, 1969, unless such operation has been approved by
the department of health of the state and a permit has been issued as provided
in this chapter. Before a permit is issued under this chapter, the person,
partnership, association or corporation applying shall submit a current and
valid license issued by the state. (Ord. 297 §3, 1969)
5.28.040: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person, partnership, association or corporation desiring a permit under
this chapter shall file with the city clerk a verified application containing
the name of the applicant desiring the license, the type of institution to be
operated, the location thereof, the name of the person in charge thereof, and
such other information as the city clerk may require. Any application on behalf
of a corporation or association shall be made by any two (2) officers thereof
or by its managing agent and shall furnish like information. The application
shall be on a form prescribed, prepared and furnished by the city clerk. (Ord.
297 §4, 1969)
5.28.050: CONDITIONS OF A PERMIT:
The application of any person, partnership, association or corporation for a
permit to operate a rest home, "nursing home" or related institution as defined
in this chapter shall be accompanied by a base fee plus an amount calculated
upon the bed capacity of the rest home, "nursing home" or related institution
as defined in this chapter. The fee shall be payable for each year. No
proration shall be allowed. No fee shall be refundable. All permits and
renewals thereof shall expire on April 30 of each year, shall be on a form
prescribed by the city clerk, shall not be transferable or assignable, shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, shall be issued only
for the premises named in the application, and shall be renewable from year to
year upon submitting evidence of a current state license and payment of the
permit fee as in the procurement of the original permit. All such fees shall be
payable to the city clerk. (Ord. 297 §5, 1969)
5.28.060: FEE FOR A PERMIT:
There is levied a fee for the permit required in this chapter in the basic
amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year with an additional fee of one
dollar ($1.00) per bed per year. (Ord. 297 §11, 1969)
5.28.070: RULES AND REGULATIONS; INSPECTIONS:
The city and/or the state commissioner of health is authorized to establish and
promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary in connection with
licensing and operation of rest homes, nursing homes and related institutions,
provided such rules and regulations shall be subject to approval by the city
council. The fire chief shall make quarterly inspections to determine whether
or not the licensed premises are operated and maintained in a safe and proper
manner in compliance with this chapter and the state current regulations and
their amendments as promulgated by the state department of health. (Ord. 297
§6, 1969)
5.28.080: ISSUANCE, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT:
The city clerk is authorized to issue and renew permits for the operation of
rest homes, nursing homes or "related institutions" as defined in this chapter
which are found to comply with the provisions of this chapter and any
regulation lawfully promulgated by the city and/or the state commissioner of
health. The city clerk is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under
this chapter on any of the following grounds:
A.   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations
issued pursuant hereto;
B.   Permitting, abetting or aiding the commission of any illegal act in such
institution;
C.   Conduct or practice deemed by the state commissioner of health to be
detrimental to the welfare of the patients of the institution;
D.   Upon notice by the state county board of health that the state license of
any person, partnership, association or corporation has been revoked, suspended
or canceled. (Ord. 297 §7, 1969)
5.28.090: ASSISTANCE OF OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS OF THE CITY:
It shall be the duty of the engineering department, the building inspector and
the city fire chief to assist the state/county commissioner of health in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter insofar as the functions of these
respective officers and departments are concerned with the health, welfare and
safety of any person or persons cared for in any rest home, "nursing home" and
"related institutions" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 297 §8, 1969)
5.28.100: UNITS ALLOWED:
Units shall not exceed twenty (20) units per acre. (Ord. 297 §9, 1969)
5.28.110: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter is
guilty of an offense, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine and costs not
to exceed the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00), and each day such violation is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 297 §11, 1969)
CHAPTER 5.32
OIL WELLS AND GAS WELLS 1
SECTION:
5.32.010: Intent And Purpose
5.32.020: Definitions
5.32.030: Permit Required
5.32.035: Prohibitions
5.32.040: Application, Fee For A Permit
5.32.050: Issuance Or Refusal Of Permit
5.32.060: Insurance And Bond
5.32.080: Enhanced Recovery And Saltwater Disposal Wells; Permits Required
5.32.090: Annual Fee To Operate
5.32.100: Disposal Of Saltwater
5.32.110: Compliance
5.32.120: Surface Casing
5.32.140: Abandonment And Plugging
5.32.160: Well Location
5.32.170: Fences
5.32.180: Noise And Other Nuisances
5.32.190: Equipment Maintained; Sign Posted
5.32.200: Storage Tanks And Separators
5.32.210: Fire Prevention
5.32.220: Pits
5.32.225: Retaining Walls
5.32.230: Motive Power
5.32.240: Derrick Or Drilling Rig
5.32.260: Drilling Operations
5.32.265: Hole To Be Cased Or Plugged
5.32.270: Streets And Alleys
5.32.280: Produced Gas
5.32.290: Acidizing Or Fracturing Processes
5.32.300: Swabbing, Bailing Or Purging
5.32.310: Rupture In Surface Casing
5.32.320: Pollution Prohibited
5.32.330: Safety Precautions
5.32.350: Water For Muds
5.32.360: Oil And Gas Inspector
5.32.370: Filing Of Reports And Records
5.32.380: Shutting In Or Closing Of Any Well
5.32.390: Pressure Lines Inspected
5.32.400: Ingress And Egress
5.32.410: Order To Cease Operations
5.32.420: Appeals
5.32.425: Approval Or Disapproval Of Permit Recommendation
5.32.430: Excavation Or Construction, Permit Required
5.32.440: Annual Fee For Conduits
5.32.450: Applicability To Existing Conditions
5.32.455: Violation Of This Chapter
5.32.460: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. 52 OS § 291 et seq.
5.32.010: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
Whereas the imprudent operation of an oil and gas facility can constitute a
menace to the public health, safety and welfare of the city of Warr Acres, it
is the intent and purpose of this chapter that oil and gas operations be
reasonably regulated for the public good. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ABANDONED WELL:
   A.   Each well in which no production casing has been run, and for which
drilling or testing operations have ceased for thirty (30) consecutive days; or
   B.   Any other well for which there is no current city permit.
ARTIFICIAL PRODUCTION: The raising to the surface of the earth, by means other
than natural flow, petroleum or natural gas.
CITY: The municipality of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
CITY COUNCIL: The governing body of the city.
CORPORATION COMMISSION: The Oklahoma corporation commission.
DELETERIOUS SUBSTANCE: Any chemical, saltwater, oil field brine, waste oil,
waste emulsified oil, basic sediment, mud or injurious substances produced or
used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and
processing of oil, gas or condensate.
ENHANCED RECOVERY: An operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into a
source of supply for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom.
MAYOR: The chief elected official of the city.
NATURAL PRODUCTION: The raising to the surface of the earth, by natural flow,
petroleum or natural gas.
OIL AND GAS INSPECTOR: That person, firm or corporation employed or appointed
by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or by his/her authorized
representative.
PERMITTEE: The person to whom is issued a permit or permits under the terms of
this chapter.
PERSON: Includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, cooperative, or other type of organization.
POLLUTION: The contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or
biological properties of any natural waters of the city, or such discharge of
any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water of the city that will or
is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful or detrimental or
injurious to public health, safety, or welfare; to domestic, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other beneficial uses; or to
livestock, animals or aquatic life.
PRESSURE MAINTENANCE: An operation by which gas, water or other fluids are
injected into a supply of oil to maintain pressure or retard pressure decline
therein for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom, and which has been
approved by the corporation commission after notice and hearing.
SALTWATER: Any water containing more than five hundred milligrams per liter
(500 mg/l) chlorides.
STATE: The state of Oklahoma, its branches, departments, agencies, boards or
the officers thereof.
TREATABLE WATER: Surface and subsurface water in its natural state which may or
may not require treatment to be useful for human consumption, and contains less
than ten thousand (10,000) ppm total dissolved solids and/or five thousand
(5,000) ppm chlorides.
WATER, WATERS OF THE CITY, OR CITY WATER: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems,
and all other bodies or accumulations or water, surface and underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the city or any portion thereof.
WELL: Unless specifically qualified, any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any
depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquefied
petroleum matter or deleterious substances, or for the injection or disposal of
any of the foregoing.
All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not
specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable
thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.030: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person acting for himself or acting as
agent, servant, employee, subcontractor, or independent contractor of any other
person, to commence to drill an original well or to reenter any abandoned well
within this city, or to work upon or assist in any way in the production or
operation of any such well, without a permit having first been issued by the
authority of the oil and gas inspector in accordance with this chapter. (Ord.
528 §1, 1982)
5.32.035: PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person acting for himself or acting as an
agent, servant, employee, subcontractor, or independent contractor of any other
person to:
A.   Drill or cause to be drilled an original oil or gas well, or drill an
original well to be used for enhanced recovery or disposal of saltwater or
other deleterious substances except in a C-3 or C-4 zoning district; and/or
B.   Drill or cause to be drilled an original oil or gas well, or drill an
original well to be used for enhanced recovery or disposal of saltwater or
other deleterious substances within three hundred feet (300') of any church,
school, business or dwelling. The distance shall be measured from the wellhead
to the nearest property line of the tract which is being used for dwelling,
church, school or business. (Ord. 847 §1, 1998)
5.32.040: APPLICATION, FEE FOR A PERMIT:
A.   Every application for a permit to drill an original well or to reenter an
abandoned well shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person
duly authorized to sign same on his behalf, and in which case such
authorization shall be attached, shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector
and be accompanied by a filing fee of three thousand five hundred dollars
($3,500.00). No application shall request a permit to drill more than one well.
The application shall contain full information required by the oil and gas
inspector, including the following:
   1.   Name and address of applicant and date of application;
   2.   Where applying for a proposed original well:
      a.   A block map of the ten (10) acres surrounding the drill site,
including thereon the location of the proposed well, and distance therefrom to
all existing dwelling houses, buildings, or other structures, designed for the
occupancy of human beings or animals, within three hundred feet (300') of any
such well, and the location of all existing oil, gas or freshwater wells within
the ten (10) acre tract,
      b.   The names of the mineral, surface and lease owners;
   3.   A drilling prognosis, to specify in detail the amount, weight, and size
of conductor pipe and surface pipe and the procedures to be used for cementing
such. Plugging procedures to be used in the event production is not established
shall also be specified;
   4.   A statement of the provisions for water for the drilling rig;
   5.   A written plan for disposal of deleterious substances produced during
the drilling operations and any deleterious substances produced as a result of
production from the well. This plan shall include the method of transportation
and name of transporter or transport contractor for the deleterious substances
and the name and location of the permitted disposal site, including a copy of
the permit for the disposal site and a contract with the owner of the permitted
site for the disposal of said deleterious substances, or in the alternative,
provide proof of ownership of the permitted disposal site. The permittee shall
provide monthly reports to the city of the amount of saltwater and other
deleterious substances produced, along with receipts for disposal of same;
   6.   The name and address of the person within the state of Oklahoma upon
whom service of process upon applicant may be made within this state; and in
the case of any nonresident person who has no such service agent within this
state, there shall be attached to the application the designation of such a
service agent resident in Oklahoma County, Oklahoma, and a consent that service
of summons may be made upon such person in any action to enforce any of the
obligations of the applicant hereunder;
   7.   A verification of the above information by the applicant hereunder.
B.   A copy of the approved drilling permit from the corporation commission and
a copy of the staking plat shall be filed with the city prior to issuance of
the municipal permit.
C.   Where the application is one for the reentry of an abandoned well, said
application shall contain all the information required by subsection A of this
section with the exception that the oil and gas inspector may vary the
requirements thereof to suit the application before him. Provided, that such an
application for a permit to reenter an abandoned well shall provide the
following information in every case:
   1.   A statement of:
      a.   The then condition of the well,
      b.   The depth to which it is proposed such well shall be deepened,
      c.   The proposed casing program to be used in connection with the
proposed deepening; and
   2.   Evidence of adequate current tests showing that the casing strings
currently passed the same tests that are required in the case of the drilling
of an original well. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.050: ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT:
A.   The oil and gas inspector's office within thirty (30) business days after
the filing of an application for a permit under this chapter shall determine
whether or not said application complies in all respects with the provisions of
this chapter and applicable federal and state law, and, if it does, shall
recommend to the mayor and city council that the permit be issued.
B.   1. A notice of a public hearing before the city council shall be given by
publication in a legal newspaper having general circulation within the city and
by mailing a notice to all owners of property within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the proposed well site. A copy of the published notice may be
mailed to the owners of property in lieu of a written notice; however, the
notice by publication and written notice shall take place at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain:
      a.   The street address or approximate location of the proposed well
site;
      b.   The type of well proposed; and
      c.   The date, time and place of the hearing.
   2.   Each permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall:
      a.   By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this
chapter with the same force and effect as if this chapter were copied verbatim
therein;
      b.   By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of
applicable state law and the rules, regulations and standards adopted in
accordance therewith relating to the protection of human beings, animals, and
natural resources;
      c.   Specify that the term of said permit shall be for a period of one
year from the date of issuance thereof, and for like periods thereafter upon
the successful inspection of the permittee's well and operations, as is
provided for elsewhere herein;
      d.   Specify such conditions imposed by the oil and gas inspector as are
by this chapter authorized;
      e.   Specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the
permittee shall file and have approved the required bonds and certificate of
insurance in the appropriate amounts as provided for elsewhere herein.
C.   If the permit be issued, it shall, in two (2) originals, signed by the oil
and gas inspector and the permittee, and when so signed shall constitute the
permittee's license to drill and operate in the city and the contractual
obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, such bonds
as are required, and applicable state law, rules, regulations, standards and
directives. One executed original copy of said permit shall be retained by the
oil and gas inspector; the other shall be retained by the permittee and shall
be kept available for inspection by any city or state law enforcement official
who shall demand to see same.
D.   If the permit be refused, or if the applicant notifies the oil and gas
inspector in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered
and wishes to withdraw his application, or if the bonds of the applicant be not
approved, then upon the happening of any of said events the cash fee filed with
the application shall be refunded to the applicant, except that there shall be
retained therefrom by the city the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) as a
processing fee. (Ord. 840 §1, 1998: Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.060: INSURANCE AND BOND:
In the event a permit shall be issued by the oil and gas inspector, no actual
operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file with the city
bonds or irrevocable letters of credit and certificates of insurance as
follows:
A.   A bond or irrevocable letter of credit in the principal sum of at least
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Said bond shall be executed by a
reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, as surety,
and with the applicant as principal, running to the city for the benefit of the
city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee shall comply
with the terms and conditions of this chapter in the operation of the well for
either natural or artificial production, injection or disposal. Said
irrevocable letter of credit shall be issued by a bank authorized to do
business in the state, as surety, and the applicant as principal, running to
the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned
that the permittee shall comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter
in the operation of the well for either natural or artificial production,
injection or disposal. Said bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall become
effective on or before the date the same is filed with the city and remain in
force and effect for at least twelve (12) months subsequent to the expiration
of the permit term, and in addition the bond or irrevocable letter of credit
will be conditioned that the permittee shall promptly pay fines, penalties and
other assessments imposed upon the permittee by reason of his breach of any of
the terms, provisions and conditions of this chapter, and that the permittee
will promptly restore the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the
city which may be disturbed or damaged in permittee's operations, to their
former condition; and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of
all litter, trash, waste, and other substances, and will, after abandonment,
grade, level and restore said property to the same surface condition, as
practicable as possible, as existed prior to commencing operation and further
that the permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from any and all
liability attributable to granting the permit; and that the applicant/permittee
shall promptly pay all sums with respect to deductibles on covered losses under
insurance policies required by this chapter.
B.   In addition to the bond or irrevocable letter of credit required in
subsection A of this section, the permittee shall obtain a pollution insurance
policy which meets the following requirements:
   1.   Said insurance policy shall be a standard pollution liability insurance
policy to include coverage for contamination or pollution of surface or
subterranean streams, watercourses, lakes or public or private water supplies
providing for a minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   2.   Said insurance policy shall be issued by a reliable insurance company
licensed to do business in this state, with the applicant/permittee and the
city named as coinsureds.
   3.   Said insurance policy shall be maintained in full force and effect from
commencement of drilling operations until the well is plugged and abandoned in
accordance with this chapter, including the entire period during which
production activities are conducted. The legal description of the well location
and the city permit number, if any, shall be specified in the insurance policy,
or any endorsement thereto, with respect to each well covered by such
insurance.
   4.   All insurance policy or policies shall provide that they may not be
canceled without written notice of the oil and gas inspector at least thirty
(30) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event said
policy or policies are canceled, the permit granted shall immediately terminate
without any action on the part of the oil and gas inspector, and the applicant/
permittee's rights to operate under said permit shall cease until the
applicant/permittee files additional insurance as required herein.
   5.   The deductible for any pollution insurance policy shall not exceed
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
C.   In addition to the bond or irrevocable letter of credit and insurance
required in subsections A and B of this section, the permittee shall carry a
policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance,
including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage,
naming the permittee and the city as coinsureds, issued by an insurer
authorized to do business within the state, said policy or policies in the
aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverage:
   1.   Bodily injuries, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person,
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident;
   2.   Property damage, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00);
   3.   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any number of claims arising
out of a single occurrence or accident.
Permittee shall file with the city certificates of said insurance as above
stated, and shall obtain the written approval thereof of the oil and gas
inspector who shall act thereon promptly after the date of such filing.
Said insurance policy or policies shall not be canceled without written notice
to the oil and gas inspector at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date
of such cancellation. In the event said policy or policies are canceled, the
permit granted shall immediately thereupon terminate without any action on the
part of the oil and gas inspector, and the permittee's rights to operation
under said permit shall cease until permittee files additional insurance as
provided herein. (Ord. 807 §1, 1996: Ord. 709 §1, 1991: Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.080: ENHANCED RECOVERY AND SALTWATER DISPOSAL WELLS; PERMITS REQUIRED:
A.   No person shall reenter any well or drill an original well to be used for
enhanced recovery or disposal of saltwater or other deleterious substances
without first obtaining the necessary permit therefor. Such permit shall
consist of two (2) separate parts, i.e.:
   1.   Permit to drill or reenter and construct; and
   2.   Permit to operate.
B.   An application for the permit to drill and reenter a well for enhanced
recovery or substance disposal shall be in the same form as that required for a
permit to drill an original well, and shall contain complete information
required by the oil and gas inspector, including the following:
   1.   A block map of the well site, showing all equipment to be used thereat,
location of pipelines, access road, and distances from the well to any and all
fences, public roadways, and buildings within a radius of three hundred thirty
feet (330');
   2.   A block map of the project, showing the location of:
      a.   All water supply wells within a one-fourth (1/4) mile radius of each
injection or disposal well,
      b.   All public water supply wells, disposal wells, injection wells,
producing wells and plugged and abandoned wells within the project area and
those sections immediately adjacent,
      c.   All conduits, and
      d.   Tank battery, pumping station and appurtenant equipment;
   3.   All wells within the project area and those sections immediately
adjacent shall be indicated by status (e.g., plugged and abandoned, injection,
saltwater, oil, etc.), and show the following additional information:
      a.   Footage location (surface casing),
      b.   Derrick floor and ground level elevation,
      c.   Drilled total depth,
      d.   Packer body total depth,
      e.   Size, depth and quality of surface and production casing, including
zones from which casing has been removed,
      f.   Location of all plugs, packers, cement plugs, tubing anchors, etc.,
with the well bore,
      g.   Depth and nature of all cement squeeze jobs,
      h.   Formation name and depth of all open perforations in a producing
open hole,
      i.   Volume and type of cement used on surface and production strings,
      j.   Top of cement;
   4.   One copy of all electric, mechanical, sample and driller's logs, if
available;
   5.   Fee and operation name for each well;
   6.   One copy of all cement bond logs and production logs;
   7.   One copy of all work performed on the well;
   8.   Copies of all information supplied to the corporation commission, and
said commission's approval of the project.
C.   Upon the completion of the application required hereunder, the oil and gas
inspector shall have thirty (30) business days to review same and make a
recommendation of approval or disapproval to the mayor and city council. A
notice of a public hearing before the city council shall be given by
publication in a legal newspaper having general circulation within the city and
by mailing a notice to all owners of property within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the proposed well site. A copy of the published notice may be
mailed to the owners of property in lieu of a written notice; however, the
notice by publication and written notice shall take place at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain:
   1.   The street address or approximate location of the proposed well site;
   2.   The type of well proposed; and
   3.   The date, time and place of the hearing.
D.   Prior to placing any enhanced recovery or substance disposal well into
service, a permit to operate such well shall be obtained from the oil and gas
inspector. Every application for a permit to operate such well shall contain
the following information:
   1.   Depth to static water level (hydrostatic head). Such depth shall be
obtained by means of a method approved by the oil and gas inspector. Such depth
shall be obtained not less than forty eight (48) hours after openings have been
made through the casing into the injection disposal zone or zones.
   2.   Based on the static water level identified in subsection D1 of this
section, maximum operating pressures and rates of injection shall be
established and maintained so as to prevent the hydraulic pressure level at a
radius to ten feet (10') from the injection or disposal wells from rising above
the base elevation of treatable water. Such maximum operating pressures and
injection rates shall be noted on the permit. No injection or disposal well
will be permitted to operate if the well's zone of influence will exceed the
above referenced limits.
E.   A fee in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be submitted
along with every application for a permit to operate an injection or substance
disposal well.
F.   Copies of corporation commission form no. 1015, indicating successful
pressure testing of each injection well at a pressure greater than the maximum
proposed for the project, or if no such form no. 1015 has been filed and
approved, then sufficient evidence of the successful pressure testing of each
injection well shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector.
G.   Every such injection or disposal well shall be constructed so as to seal
the injection zone from the upper portion of the casing. The annulus between
the injection tubing and the casing shall be filled with a noncorrosive fluid,
then sealed and a one-fourth inch (1/4") female fitting with cutoff valve shall
be attached so that the pressure in the annulus may be measured by the oil and
gas inspector by attaching a gauge having a one-fourth inch (1/4") male
fitting. A pressure shall be maintained in the annulus sufficient to monitor
the fluids in the annulus. Any significant deviation from the established
pressure shall be cause to shut down the well, and may result in cancellation
of the operating permit, until such time as the established pressure can once
again be maintained.
H.   Injection lines shall be buried in a trench of a depth no less than four
feet (4'), and shall be pressure tested (static) annually at a minimum of one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the pressure normally encountered at the
injection pump discharge for a period of hours to be fixed by the oil and gas
inspector. Said oil and gas inspector shall be notified five (5) days in
advance of such test and may supervise same. Test results shall be filed with
the city upon completion.
I.   Domestic and public water supply wells located within a radius of one-
fourth (1/4) mile of any enhanced recovery or disposal well shall be tested
prior to beginning injection or disposal and thereafter semiannually for the
presence of deleterious substances, such as chlorides, sulphates and dissolved
solids. Such testing is the responsibility of the permittee and at permittee's
expense, to be conducted by a person approved by the oil and gas inspector.
Said oil and gas inspector shall be notified five (5) days in advance of such
testing and may be present therefor. Test results shall be filed with the city
upon completion. (Ord. 840 §1, 1998: Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.090: ANNUAL FEE TO OPERATE:
An annual inspection fee is levied upon each well operated or maintained under
a permit issued by the city; such fee shall be in the amount of two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), payable to the city on or before the annual
anniversary date of the issuance of any permit under this chapter. No permit
for any well shall be considered valid for any year for which the annual fee
has not been paid. Failure to pay any required permit fee within thirty (30)
days of a delinquent notice sent to the latest address provided by the
permittee will result in cancellation of said permit. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.100: DISPOSAL OF SALTWATER:
A.   Every permittee under this chapter shall be responsible for the safe
disposal of saltwater or other deleterious substances which he may bring to the
surface of the earth and shall provide a plan for such disposal as required in
subsection
5.32.040A5 of this chapter. Such disposal shall not result in pollution of the
waters of the city and shall not result in any other environmental hazard, and
shall incorporate the best available techniques and equipment.
B.   In the event of any leakage or spillage of any pollutant or deleterious
substance, whatever the cause thereof, the permittee shall cause the oil and
gas inspector to be notified thereof promptly. If, in the judgment of the oil
and gas inspector, such leakage or spillage represents a potential
environmental hazard, he may issue whatever corrective orders he deems
appropriate, and additionally may require the appropriate testing of the
surface and subsurface for pollutant incursion, the cost of such test or tests
to be borne by the permittee.
C.   No person shall dispose of saltwater or other deleterious substance in any
lined or unlined earthen pit within the city limits.
D.   No person shall inject any saltwater or other deleterious substance into
the annulus between the inside of the surface casing string and the next inside
casing string, except when the bottom of the properly cemented surface casing
extends two hundred feet (200') or more through or into a continuous
impermeable clay barrier below the base of treatable water. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.110: COMPLIANCE:
No person shall drill an original well or reenter an abandoned well for any
purpose, or permit to exist any well, structure, equipment, pipeline,
machinery, tank or other appurtenance, in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or other city ordinances as may be applicable, or the laws, rules,
regulations, operative standards or directives of the state. (Ord. 528 §1,
1982)
5.32.120: SURFACE CASING:
A.   1. Surface casing shall be set a minimum of two hundred feet (200') below
the deepest encounter of treatable water found in eight (8) sections adjacent
to the section in which the well is located. Logs which identify the base of
treatable water, shall be run in the surface hole before the surface pipe is
set. A copy of such logs shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector, or
   2.   Surface casing may be set without the above required logging, provided
the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the oil and gas inspector
that the bottom of the surface casing will extend through or into at least two
hundred feet (200') of continuous impermeable clay barrier below the base of
treatable water, is properly cemented and cement bond logs run with the quality
of the cement bond approved by the oil and gas inspector. Surface pipe shall
have a centralizer on the shoe joint, and centralizers within fifty feet (50')
of the shoe joint, and a centralizer no more than two hundred feet (200') apart
above the second centralizer.
B.   Surface pipe shall be cemented by attempting to circulate good cement to
surface by normal displacement practices. If cement cannot be circulated to
surface due to washed out hole or lost circulation, the existing cement shall
not be overdisplaced and a plug shall be left in the bottom of the casing
string to be drilled out once the surface is set. The remaining open hole
behind the surface pipe shall be cemented by running a tubing string between
the conductor string and the surface pipe until the top of the cement is
tagged. The remaining uncemented annular space will then be cemented until good
cement is circulated to surface. No further drilling shall be accomplished
until the cement has set for at least twenty four (24) hours, or in the
alternative, until samples of the cement have passed independent laboratory
tests satisfactory to the oil and gas inspector.
C.   Where an existing well is to be used as an injection or disposal site, the
existing casing and cement shall be of such integrity and depth as to
adequately and safely isolate freshwater producing zones from the seepage or
bleeding of injection fluids or disposants. Where additional protective
operations are undertaken to comply with this subsection, the oil and gas
inspector shall be notified thereof sufficiently in advance in order for him to
be present for such operations. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.140: ABANDONMENT AND PLUGGING:
Whenever any well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the permittee and
the operator of the well to set a two hundred foot (200') cement plug in the
bottom of the surface casing, with the bottom of the plug one hundred feet
(100') below the surface casing section; and to set a fifty foot (50') cement
plug in the top of the surface casing. No surface or conductor string of casing
may be pulled or removed from a well. During initial abandonment operations it
will be the obligation of the permittee and operator to flood the well with mud
laden fluid weighing not less than nine (9) pounds per gallon, and to circulate
this mud until stabilized, and the well shall be kept filled to the top with
mud laden fluid of the weight herein specified, at all times; mud laden fluid
of the above specifications will be left in the well bore below and between
cement plugs. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by
the state or the corporation commission of the state in connection with the
abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the permittee.
(Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.160: WELL LOCATION:
No permit shall be issued for the drilling of an original well or the reentry
of an abandoned well at any location which is nearer than two hundred feet
(200') of any permanent residence or commercial building, or which is closer
than three hundred feet (300') to a producing freshwater well. (Ord. 528 §1,
1982)
5.32.170: FENCES:
Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to
enclose said well, together with its surface facilities, by a fence
sufficiently high and properly built so as to ordinarily keep persons and
animals out of the enclosure with all gates thereto to be kept locked when the
permittee or his employees are not within the enclosure. Provided, that in
nonplatted areas the oil and gas inspector, at his discretion, may waive the
requirement of any fence or may designate the type of fence to be erected.
Fences must be kept locked at all times workers of the permittee are not
present; a duplicate set of keys to said lock shall be filed with the oil and
gas inspector. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.180: NOISE AND OTHER NUISANCES:
All oil operations, drilling and production operations shall be conducted in
such a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or
noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices
incident to exploration for, drilling for and production of oil, gas and other
hydrocarbon substances. Proven technological improvements in exploration,
drilling and production methods shall be adopted as they become, from time to
time, available, if capable of reducing factors of nuisance and annoyance.
(Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.190: EQUIPMENT MAINTAINED; SIGN POSTED:
All lease equipment shall be painted and maintained in a good state of
appearance, and shall have posted in a prominent place a metal sign no less
than two feet (2') square in area upon which the following information shall be
conspicuous: permittee's name; lease name; location of the drill site by
reference to the United States survey; identifying number of the permit issued
by the city. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.200: STORAGE TANKS AND SEPARATORS:
A.   Crude oil storage tanks shall not be constructed, operated or used except
to the extent of two (2) steel tanks for oil storage, not exceeding five
hundred (500) barrels' capacity each and so constructed and maintained as to be
vaportight. Provided, that additional tankage may be approved by the oil and
gas inspector.
B.   A permittee may use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator
and such other steel tanks and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil
with each of such facilities to be so constructed and maintained as to be
vaportight. Each oil, gas separator shall be equipped with both a regulation
pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.210: FIRE PREVENTION:
Adequate firefighting apparatus and supplies approved by the city fire
department shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during
drilling and production operations. All machinery, equipment and installations
on all drilling sites within the city limits shall conform with such
requirements as may from time to time be issued by the fire department. (Ord.
528 §1, 1982)
5.32.220: PITS:
Steel mud or circulating pits shall be used. Such pits and contents shall be
removed from the premises and the drilling site within fifteen (15) days after
completion of the well. Earthen pits will be allowed only as temporary
emergency pits grid/or as catch basins. Catch basin pits shall be used only for
the purpose of catching any deleterious substance runoff and shall be no
greater than three hundred twenty (320) cubic feet. Such catch basin will be
equipped with a liquid level activated pump designed to keep fluids pumped out
of such catch basin pit. All such earthen pits must be lined and approved in
writing by the oil and gas inspector. Emergency pits shall be emptied as soon
as the emergency is over and all such pits shall be emptied and then leveled
within fifteen (15) days after completion of the well. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.225: RETAINING WALLS:
An earthen retaining wall of adequate size for the terrain involved will be
constructed on the low side of the well site in the event the well site is
located on sloping or unlevel ground. The top of the retaining wall shall be at
least level with the top of the base of the Christmas tree or other wellhead
connections on any completed well, or at least level with the ground at the
point where surface casing is set in the well when drilling.
An earthen diversion wall of adequate size for the terrain involved shall be
constructed on the high side of the well site in the event the well site is
located on sloping or unlevel ground. The diversion wall will be of sufficient
height and strength so as to divert runoff waters around the well site. (Ord.
528 §1, 1982)
5.32.230: MOTIVE POWER:
Motive power for all well pumping equipment shall be electricity unless
otherwise approved by the oil and gas inspector. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.240: DERRICK OR DRILLING RIG:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection
with the drilling, reentry or reworking of any well within the city, any wooden
derrick or any steam powered rig, and all engines shall be equipped with
adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector. Permitting any
drilling rig or derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period
of longer than sixty (60) days after completion or abandonment of a well is
prohibited. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.260: DRILLING OPERATIONS:
All drilling, reentry and operations at any well performed under this chapter
shall be conducted in accordance with the best practices of the reasonably
prudent operator. All casing, valves, and blowout preventers, drilling fluid,
tubing, tradenhead, Christmas tree and wellhead connections shall be of a type
and quality consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent
operator. Setting and cementing casing and running drill stem tests shall be
performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the best practices of such
reasonably prudent operator. Any permittee under this chapter shall observe and
follow the recommendations or regulations of the American Petroleum Institute
and the corporation commission, except in those instances that are specifically
addressed by this chapter. A copy of all logs associated with the surface
casing shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.265: HOLE TO BE CASED OR PLUGGED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to move or cause to be moved the
drilling rig from a well until the hole has been cased or properly plugged,
unless written permission to do so is obtained from the oil and gas inspector.
(Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.270: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
No well shall be drilled, and no permit shall be issued for any well to be
drilled at any location which is within any of the streets or alleys of the
city; and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed in any
drilling or production operation except with the written approval of the oil
and gas inspector, and then only temporarily. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.280: PRODUCED GAS:
All produced gas shall either be sold or flared with the flaring procedures
being approved by the oil and gas inspector and the fire marshal. (Ord. 528 §1,
1982)
5.32.290: ACIDIZING OR FRACTURING PROCESSES:
In the completion of oil and gas, injection, disposal or service well, where
acidizing or fracturing processes are used, no oil, gas or other deleterious
substances or pollutants shall be permitted to pollute any surface or
subsurface freshwaters. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.300: SWABBING, BAILING OR PURGING:
In swabbing, bailing or purging a well, all deleterious substances removed from
the bore hold shall be placed in appropriate tanks and no substances shall be
permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface freshwaters. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.310: RUPTURE IN SURFACE CASING:
In the event a rupture, break or opening occurs in the surface or production
casing, the permittee or the operator or drilling contractor shall take
immediate action to repair it, and shall report the incident to the oil and gas
inspector promptly. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.320: POLLUTION PROHIBITED:
No person shall deposit, drain or divert into or upon any public highway,
street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek,
river, lake or lagoon, any oil or oily liquid with petroleum content or any
mud, rotary mud, sand, water or saltwater or in any manner permit by seepage,
overflow, deliberate release or otherwise, any of such substances to escape
from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person and flow or be
carried into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm
drain, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon, within the city.
(Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.330: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
Persons drilling, operating or maintaining any well shall use all necessary
care and take all precautions which shall be reasonably necessary under the
circumstances to protect the public. The provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be the minimum requirements for the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare, and compliance with the terms hereof shall not be
deemed to relieve any persons of any additional duty imposed by law. (Ord. 528
§1, 1982)
5.32.350: WATER FOR MUDS:
In the event a freshwater supply well is drilled to provide water for drilling
muds, upon the completion of operations for which such well is required, such
well shall be plugged by cementing top to bottom, after notice of intention to
so plug is provided the oil and gas inspector, who may supervise the operation.
(Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.360: OIL AND GAS INSPECTOR:
A.   The mayor is authorized to employ a person, persons, firm or corporation
as an oil and gas inspector, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, or in absence of such employment, the building inspector is
designated to perform such duties as are imposed on the oil and gas inspector
by this chapter. In addition, the mayor may from time to time employ qualified
persons to assist and advise the building inspector when assistance is
requested by the inspector.
B.   The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue such orders,
or directives as are required to carry out the intent and purpose of this
chapter and its particular provisions. Failure to abide by any such order or
directive shall be a violation of this chapter.
C.   The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to go upon and inspect
any premises covered by the terms of this chapter to ascertain whether this
chapter and the applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of
the state are being complied with. Failure to permit access to the oil and gas
inspector shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
D.   The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive
any records, specified in this chapter relating to the status or condition of
any well or project or the appurtenances thereof within the city. Failure to
provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.370: FILING OF REPORTS AND RECORDS:
Upon request of the oil and gas inspector, service companies or other persons
shall furnish and file reports and records showing perforating, hydraulic
fracturing, cementing, shooting, chemical treatment and all other service
operations on any site covered by this chapter. Such furnished material shall
remain confidential where such confidentiality is usually granted by the state.
Failure to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.380: SHUTTING IN OR CLOSING OF ANY WELL:
The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to require the immediate
shutting in or closing of any well if he finds that there exists, within a one
hundred foot (100') radius of any well, any gas or gasoline vapor in a quantity
sufficient to constitute, in his judgment, or in the judgment of the city fire
marshal, a fire hazard. The well shall remain shut in or closed until the
hazard and its cause are removed. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.390: PRESSURE LINES INSPECTED:
The oil and gas inspector shall inspect all pressure lines in use at any well
or at any project to assure that tubing, fittings, equipment or connections are
reasonably tight, safe and free from leaks. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.400: INGRESS AND EGRESS:
Lease roads shall be maintained in such a manner as to safely and comfortably
allow for ingress and egress of city or state personnel traveling in a common
passenger motor vehicle. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.410: ORDER TO CEASE OPERATIONS:
A.   If the oil and gas inspector finds that, in his judgment, a hazard to life
or natural resources exists, he shall order immediate rectification of the
cause. If the permittee takes no immediate measure to reduce the hazard, or if
the situation be so perilous as to constitute an imminent threat to safety,
then in either of these events he may order the prompt cessation of activity,
and if necessary, the clearance of the premises.
B.   The oil and gas inspector shall apply to the mayor for a hearing upon such
order, which hearing shall be held not longer than twenty four (24) hours after
the issuance of said order by the oil and gas inspector. The mayor shall
determine if proper cause existed, and, if not, shall authorize the permittee's
activity to resume without delay. If the mayor determines that proper cause did
exist for the order to cease activity to issue, then he shall make whatever
ruling is proper to assure rectification of the cause of the peril. Such ruling
and compliance with it by the permittee shall not be construed to absolve the
permittee of any liability for any violation of this chapter or for any damage
or injury caused thereby. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.420: APPEALS:
Any permittee aggrieved by any order, directive or ruling issued by the oil and
gas inspector, or by any ruling by the mayor may appeal the same to the city
council which shall hear the matter at its next regularly scheduled or special
meeting. The lodging of such appeal shall not stay the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter. The council, upon hearing the matter, may issue
whatever ruling or order is appropriate, provided that such ruling or order be
in keeping with the spirit and purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.425: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF PERMIT RECOMMENDATION:
Upon the consideration of any application for a permit required by the terms of
this chapter, the oil and gas inspector shall recommend approval or disapproval
thereof to the mayor and city council, who shall review the matter at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting, and thereupon uphold or reverse the
recommendation with or without the addition of any conditions thereto. (Ord.
528 §1, 1982)
5.32.430: EXCAVATION OR CONSTRUCTION, PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   No permittee shall make any excavations or construct any lines for the
conveyance of fuel, water or minerals, on, under or through the streets and
alleys of the city without first having obtained a permit therefor upon
application to the building inspector.
B.   The building inspector shall prescribe the forms to be used for such
application and the information to accompany it.
C.   Each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
D.   The building inspector shall, within twenty (20) days of receipt of the
properly executed application, recommend to the council either to grant or deny
the request. The council shall then approve or deny the permit and issue any
conditions thereon.
E.   The granting of any such permit shall not be construed to be the granting
of a franchise, and at all times shall be revocable by the city upon reasonable
notice to the permittee. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.440: ANNUAL FEE FOR CONDUITS:
A.   The permittee under section
5.32.430 of this chapter shall pay to the city annual renewal and inspection
fee being the total of one dollar ($1.00) per rod of conduit multiplied by the
number of rods in the conduit for which the permit was issued.
B.   The building inspector shall inspect such conduits to assure the public
safety. No permit issued under section
5.32.430 of this chapter shall be renewed if the conduit or any part thereof
covered by such permit is in an unsafe condition. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.450: APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING CONDITIONS:
This chapter shall apply to any person drilling an original well, reentering an
abandoned well, conducting natural or artificial production projects or
operations, or maintaining a disposal well within the city of Warr Acres on the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and every such person
shall have no longer than ninety (90) days to come into compliance with this
chapter. Provided, that:
A.   No initial permit fees shall be charged such person as would otherwise
apply;
B.   No penalties shall be sought against any activity violative of this
chapter where such activity preexisted the adoption of this chapter and was
otherwise in compliance with the applicable state law, rules, regulations,
standards or directives. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
5.32.455: VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER:
If, upon information or inspection, it is found that a permittee is violating
any portion of this chapter or causing damage or pollution to any surface or
underground treatable water, the oil and gas inspector shall file a written
administrative complaint with the mayor, a copy of which shall be delivered or
mailed to the permittee or his agent. If upon subsequent inspection, it is
determined that the permittee has taken the corrective actions specified, the
complaint may be dismissed; otherwise, formal application will be made to the
city council for an order revoking the permit, and for any other appropriate
remedy; pending the outcome of the final determination of the city council on
the formal application, the oil and gas inspector shall, after an on site
inspection, have the authority to shut down those operations where conditions
appear obvious that surface or underground pollution is occurring. (Ord. 528
§1, 1982)
5.32.460: PENALTIES:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply
with any provisions hereof irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each
section hereof contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is
unlawful and is an offense. Any person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter, or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit
issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee
pursuant to this chapter, or who neglects to comply with the terms hereof,
shall be fined in a sum not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the
violation of each separate provision of this chapter, and of said permit, and
of said bond, shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's violation
of each separate provision thereof shall be considered a separate offense. In
addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further provided that the city
council at any regular or special sessions or meeting thereof, may, provided
ten (10) days' notice has been given to the permittee that revocation is to be
considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this
chapter and under which drilling or producing operations are being conducted in
the event the permittee thereof has violated any provision of said permit, said
bond, or this chapter. In the event the permit is revoked, the permittee may
make application to the oil and gas inspector for reissuance of such permit,
and the action of the city of Warr Acres thereon shall be final. Any continuing
offense shall be considered a public nuisance, the remedies for which under law
shall be in addition to those hereinbefore enumerated. (Ord. 528 §1, 1982)
CHAPTER 5.34
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
5.34.010: Definitions
5.34.020: License Required
5.34.030: Application And Bond For License
5.34.040: Property Registration Procedures
5.34.050: Merger Of Goods
5.34.060: Inspection Of Registers
5.34.080: Transactions With Minors
5.34.090: Lost Property
5.34.100: Soliciting Business
5.34.110: Forfeiture Of License
5.34.120: Penalty
5.34.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall apply:
PAWNBROKER: Any person, firm, corporation, joint venture or other legal entity,
however organized, engaged in the business of lending money on the security of
pledged goods or purchasing of tangible personal property on the condition that
it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a
fixed period of time.
PLEDGED GOODS: Tangible personal property, securities or printed evidences of
indebtedness, which is deposited with or otherwise actually delivered into the
possession of the pawnbroker in the course of his business. (Ord. 519 §2, 1981)
5.34.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate as a pawnbroker without having first secured a valid
state license as required by 59 Oklahoma Statutes section 1501 et seq., and an
annual license from the city, and making payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) as a
license and regulatory fee. (Ord. 519 §3, 1981)
5.34.030: APPLICATION AND BOND FOR LICENSE:
A.   Information And Form: Each applicant for a city pawnshop license shall
file an application therefor. Such application shall be in the same form and
contain the same information as required for a state pawnbroker's license;
provided, however, in addition thereto, the applicant shall further be required
to state the name and address of all owners, officers and stockholders, and
shall notify the city of any changes of such persons during the term of or
renewal of a license.
B.   Amount Of Bond: Every person applying for a license to engage in or carry
on the business of pawnbroker shall, before the license is issued to him, enter
into a bond with the city, with approved sureties, in the penal sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned that the applicant will strictly
observe all laws, regulations and requirements in relation to pawnbrokers or
their business, and will pay all costs, fines and penalties incurred on account
of his failure or neglect in that regard and will pay all damages to any person
by reason of the pawnbroker wrongfully taking, purchasing or receiving in
pledge or on deposit any stolen property, or the property of any minor.
C.   Filing Of Bond: The bond shall be filed with the city clerk and may be
sued upon by any person damaged as aforesaid in the name of the city for the
benefit of such person, but in no event shall the city be liable for the costs
of such suit. (Ord. 519 §4, 1981)
5.34.040: PROPERTY REGISTRATION PROCEDURES:
A.   Registers Required; Contents: Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of
business required registers in which he shall enter in writing the following:
   1.   A minute description of all property taken, purchased or received by
him;
   2.   Any serial or other identification number that may be in or upon any
article, if reasonably available;
   3.   The name, address, sex, social security, driver's license or other
identification number, race, age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, the
signature of the person pawning, selling, mortgaging, hypothecating, or leaving
the goods, chattels or merchandise, date, and time of transaction;
   4.   The amount loaned, the finance charges, and the time when the loan
falls due.
B.   Entry Procedure: The pawnbroker shall make such entry within one hour
after the receipt of purchase of such property. Every entry shall be made in
ink and shall not in any manner be obliterated or erased. Separate registers
shall be maintained for pawned and purchased property.
C.   Receipt Of Property: The pawnbroker shall give a receipt to the person
negotiating or leaving the property; the receipt shall, in numerical sequence,
be legible, and shall contain a full and perfect copy of all the entries
required by law to be kept in the registers. No charge shall be made for the
receipt.
D.   Police Report:
   1.   Any pawnbroker shall make available a copy or report within three (3)
days of any pawn/buy transaction to the local law enforcement agency of the
municipality in which the pawnshop is located. The copy or report shall
include: a) name and address of the pawnshop; b) name, address, weight, height,
date of birth and identification number of the seller as verified by either a
state issued identification card, driver's license or federal government issued
identification card or by readable fingerprint of right or left index finger on
the back of the pawn or buy transaction copy to be retained for the
pawnbroker's record; c) pawn/buy transaction number; d) date of transaction; e)
manufacturer of item; f) description of item; and g) serial number and model
number and any other identifying markings.
   2.   The pawnbroker shall obtain a written declaration of ownership from the
seller or pledgor on all buy and pawn transactions. The seller or pledgor shall
be required to state how long he has owned the property described in the
transaction. The declaration of ownership shall appear on the bill of sale or
pawn ticket to be completed by the seller or pledgor at the time of
transaction.
E.   Purchases From Wholesalers And Manufacturers: No person shall be required
to furnish a description of any property purchased from manufacturers or
wholesale dealers having an established place of business, or of any goods
purchased from any bankrupt stock, or from any other person having an
established place of business. Such goods shall be accompanied by a bill of
sale or other evidence of open and legitimate purchase; the bill shall be shown
to any officer upon demand. (Ord. 693 §1, 1990: Ord. 660 §1, 1987: Ord. 519 §5,
1981)
5.34.050: MERGER OF GOODS:
All persons, firms or corporations engaged in the business of pawnbrokers are
hereby required to hold separate and apart for a period of ten (10) days, all
goods or chattels purchased (except as provided in section
5.34.040 of this chapter) before mixing with other goods already in stock in
such establishment. (Ord. 519 §6, 1981)
5.34.060: INSPECTION OF REGISTERS:
The registers required by this chapter shall at all times be kept open to the
inspection of the chief of police and the sheriff of the county or the deputy
of either, to any officer of the police department, to the municipal counselor
and to the district attorney, and to anyone authorized in writing for that
purpose by the chief of the police department, exhibiting that authority to the
pawnbroker. The pawnbroker shall, upon request, show and exhibit any article or
articles purchased, taken or received by him to the authorized person or
officer for inspection. (Ord. 519 §7, 1981)
5.34.080: TRANSACTIONS WITH MINORS:
No person in charge of any pawnshop shall knowingly purchase from or advance
money to any minor upon articles of value, or have any dealings respecting the
title of property in the possession of a minor, under the age of eighteen (18)
years of age, without the written consent of the parent or guardian of such
minor. (Ord. 519 §9, 1981)
5.34.090: LOST PROPERTY:
No person operating a pawnshop shall attempt to conceal any stray or lost
goods, found or taken up by him, or shall efface any marks or brands thereon,
or carry the same beyond the limits of the city or knowingly permit the same to
be done, or wilfully fail to cause the same to be advertised, sold or otherwise
dealt with as provided by this code in respect to lost goods. (Ord. 519 §10,
1981)
5.34.100: SOLICITING BUSINESS:
No person shall solicit business for any pawnshop from any person on the
streets or other public place, or call to or in any manner attract the
attention of any person on the streets or other public place for the purpose of
asking the person to patronize any pawnshop. (Ord. 519 §12, 1981)
5.34.110: FORFEITURE OF LICENSE:
Any pawnbroker or any other person who may be engaged in any calling or
occupation requiring a license or permit under this or any other chapter, who
shall be guilty of the violation of any provision of said chapter or who shall
permit any employee in the course of employment to be guilty of the violation
of any provision hereof shall, upon conviction, in addition to the fine or
imprisonment otherwise provided as a penalty therefor, be deprived of the
license or permit, by order of the municipal judge. (Ord. 519 §11, 1981)
5.34.120: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not exceeding thirty
five dollars ($35.00) for each violation. Each day of such violations shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 519 §13, 1981)
CHAPTER 5.35
TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5.35.010: Definitions
5.35.020: License
5.35.030: Tattooing And Body Piercing; When Prohibited
5.35.040: Disposal Of Hazardous Substances
5.35.050: Inspections
5.35.060: Penalties
5.35.010: DEFINITIONS:
Certain terms and words contained in this chapter are to be used and
interpreted as defined below:
ARTIST: A person who actually performs the body piercing or tattooing
procedure.
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT: A place of business on whose premises an
individual may, in exchange for consideration, engage in a procedure in which
an opening is created in a human body solely for the purpose of inserting
jewelry or other decoration (excluding ear piercing), whether or not for a fee
or other compensation.
BODY PIERCING OPERATOR: Any person who owns, controls, operates, conducts, or
manages any permanent body piercing establishment, whether actually performing
the work of body piercing or not. A mobile unit, including, but not limited to,
a mobile home, recreational vehicle, or other nonpermanent facility, shall not
be used as a permanent body piercing establishment.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT: A place of business on whose premises an individual may
engage in the practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the human
body by scarring or inserting under the skin using needles, scalpels, or other
related equipment, whether or not for a fee or other compensation; provided,
however, that medical micropigmentation, performed pursuant to the provisions
of the Oklahoma medical micropigmentation regulation act shall not be construed
as tattooing.
TATTOO OPERATOR: Any person who owns, controls, operates, conducts, or manages
any permanent tattooing establishment whether performing the work of tattooing
or not, or a temporary location that is a fixed location at which an individual
tattoo operator performs tattooing for a specified period of not more than
seven (7) days in conjunction with a single event or celebration, where the
primary function of the event or celebration is tattooing. (Ord. 1103, 2011)
5.35.020: LICENSE:
A.   Tattoo and/or body piercing establishments are subject to the general
business licensure requirements contained in this title. In addition to the
general requirements of this title, all applications for a business license
submitted by a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be accompanied
by:
   1.   A state department of health license issued in the appropriate
category;
   2.   A copy of any and all state required surety bonds approved by the
attorney general and filed within the office of the secretary of state;
   3.   A complete list of the names and residence address of all artists
employed or operating out of the business and the name and residence address of
the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation;
   4.   A copy of the establishment's written plan for disposal of hazardous
substances.
B.   A separate business license shall be required for each location. No
establishment or operator shall permit any individual to engage in the
performance of a tattoo or body piercing procedure without an artist license
issued by the city of Warr Acres.
C.   No artist shall engage in the act of body piercing or tattooing in the
city of Warr Acres unless such person has obtained an annual body piercing or
tattoo artist license from the city and paid the fifty dollar ($50.00) annual
fee. Licenses must be renewed annually and will be deemed to have expired after
one year. All applicants for the annual body piercing or tattoo artist permit
shall be required to show proof of their license with the Oklahoma department
of health. Application for a body piercing or tattoo artist license or renewal
shall be made to the city clerk's office, on forms provided by the city.
Additionally, a licensed body piercing or tattoo artist may only practice in a
body piercing or tattoo establishment that is licensed by the city of Warr
Acres. Every artist licensed under this chapter shall display such license in a
prominent place on the licensed premises.
D.   No license issued under the provisions of this section or this title shall
be transferable to another person, or to any other establishment or location.
In the event an artist should transfer from one body piercing or tattoo
establishment to another, the transfer shall not be approved until such time as
the artist has notified the city and paid the ten dollar ($10.00) transfer fee.
However, a licensed body piercing or tattoo establishment may change its name
upon notification and approval of the city clerk, if its location remains the
same.
E.   Artist licenses are subject to revocation through the revocation and
cancellation procedures established by section
5.04.040 of this title. If for any reason the state suspends or revokes the
state license, the city's license shall also be considered suspended or
revoked. Upon reinstatement, a fee shall be levied in the amount equal to the
annual renewal fee. (Ord. 1103, 2011)
5.35.030: TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING; WHEN PROHIBITED:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or offer to perform body
piercing or tattooing on a child under eighteen (18) years of age. No person
under eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to receive a tattoo. No
person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to receive a body
piercing procedure unless the parent or legal guardian of such child gives
written consent for the procedure, and the parent or legal guardian of the
child is present during the procedure. No person shall be allowed to purchase
or possess tattoo equipment or supplies without being licensed either as an
Oklahoma medical micropigmentologist or as an Oklahoma tattoo artist.
B.   Tattooing shall not be performed upon a person impaired by drugs or
alcohol. A person impaired by drugs or alcohol is considered incapable of
consenting to tattooing and incapable of understanding tattooing procedures and
aftercare suggestions.
C.   All body piercing and/or tattoo establishments and artists shall be
prohibited from performing body piercing or tattooing unless licensed in the
appropriate category by the state department of health. (Ord. 1103, 2011)
5.35.040: DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES:
Any tattooing and/or body piercing establishment must have a written plan for
disposal of hazardous substances, including, but not limited to, enzymatic
cleaners, solvents, tattoo inks, and items exposed to blood and other body
fluids. In no case are these substances to be disposed of in such a way that
they will be introduced to the municipal sewer system. Any tattooing and body
piercing establishment whose facility includes a floor drain must ensure that
such a drain is connected to an appropriate dilution tank, interceptor, holding
tank, or similar apparatus and that such arrangement is approved by the
building inspector. (Ord. 1103, 2011)
5.35.050: INSPECTIONS:
Any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be open to inspection by
city officials, so long as inspections are made during reasonable hours of the
establishment's operation. (Ord. 1103, 2011)
5.35.060: PENALTIES:
Any artist, establishment, operator, person, firm, association, corporation or
individual found guilty of a violation of any provisions of this chapter is
guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed
the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs. (Ord. 1103, 2011)
CHAPTER 5.36
PRESCHOOLS 1
SECTION:
5.36.010: Definition
5.36.020: License Required
5.36.030: Staff
5.36.040: Inspection; Revocation Or Suspension Of License; Appeal
5.36.050: Facility Requirements
5.36.060: Lighting
5.36.070: Heating
5.36.080: Floor Space; Telephones
5.36.090: Off Street Loading Space
5.36.100: Daycare Activities To Be Separate; Supervision
5.36.110: Inspection
5.36.120: Zoning Restrictions; Exceptions
5.36.130: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. See also
  chapter 5.16 of this title.
5.36.010: DEFINITION:
"Preschool" is defined as:
A.   Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or more children
under school age, when received for periods of less than three (3) hours,
whether for compensation or not;
B.   A facility which has as its purpose instruction and training of preschool
children as opposed to primarily being recreational;
C.   A facility which does not offer feeding or napping. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970:
prior code §6-31)
5.36.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A valid license shall be required for each preschool operator as set forth in
section
5.16.020 of this title. No other type of childcare operation shall be carried
on by a licensee except that which is specified on the license. The number of
children accepted shall be governed by the available space and the number of
children permitted shall be endorsed on each license issued. (Ord. 405 §1,
1976: prior code §6-32)
5.36.030: STAFF:
A.   One staff supervisor is required for each fifteen (15) students enrolled.
Thereafter, one additional staff supervisor is required for each fifteen (15)
students or any fraction thereof per session.
B.   All staff members must be of good moral character.
C.   Each child shall be under the supervision and observation of an adult at
all times.
D.   No licensee shall operate alone. At least one adult assistant is required
on duty at all times. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970: prior code §6-32A)
5.36.040: INSPECTION; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; APPEAL:
The provisions for preschool inspection, revocation or suspension of a license
to operate a preschool, and appeal to the city council shall be the same as
outlined in
chapter 5.16 of this title. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970: prior code §6-33)
5.36.050: FACILITY REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Floors Utilized: Only ground floor or first floor facilities shall be
utilized.
B.   Play Area: An outdoor play area, fenced and under constant supervision of
a staff member, shall be provided. The play space shall be no less than fifty
(50) square feet per child. There shall be a means of safe, enclosed and/or
fenced access to the outdoor play area.
C.   Bathroom: One stool and one basin, of proper proportions, shall be
provided for every fifteen (15) children. The bathroom door shall not be
equipped with a lock. (A spring type closing is acceptable.) (Ord. 321 §1,
1970: prior code §6-35)
5.36.060: LIGHTING:
A.   Each classroom shall be an outside room with windows easily opened and
closed.
B.   All work and study surfaces shall have sufficient lighting to provide
sixty (60) to eighty (80) foot-candles of diffused lighting. Uncovered bulbs
are not permissible. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970: prior code §6-36)
5.36.070: HEATING:
A.   The heating plant shall be adequate to provide a constant temperature of
seventy two degrees Fahrenheit (72°F), twenty four inches (24") from the floor,
in each room used by the children.
B.   Heating facilities shall present no hazard to the health and safety of the
children. Appropriate guards shall be placed around radiators and floor
furnaces. Open face heaters and unguarded fires in fireplaces are not
permitted. The preschool shall comply with local fire ordinances and
regulations. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970: prior code §6-37)
5.36.080: FLOOR SPACE; TELEPHONES:
A.   A minimum of twenty (20) square feet of floor space per child shall be
required.
B.   There shall be a telephone located in an area easily accessible to all
staff members. Pay telephones are not acceptable. A list of emergency numbers
shall be posted. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970: prior code §6-38)
5.36.090: OFF STREET LOADING SPACE:
There must be provided safe conduct to and from all cars. Safe off street
loading space (so that children will be protected from traffic at all times) is
required. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970: prior code §6-39)
5.36.100: DAYCARE ACTIVITIES TO BE SEPARATE; SUPERVISION:
When there is a daycare or other childcare center being operated in the same
area as the preschool, the two (2) activities shall be completely separated,
either through the use of an individual classroom, or through partitioning off
of an area for use of preschool only. They shall at all times have one hundred
percent (100%) supervision by a member of the staff. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970: prior
code §6-40)
5.36.110: INSPECTION:
Each preschool will be inspected annually by county-city health officials.
(Ord. 321 §1, 1970: prior code §6-41)
5.36.120: ZONING RESTRICTIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
A.   Preschools shall be permitted and operated only in C-1 restricted
commercial districts or C-2 commercial districts.
B.   Preschools shall be permitted in any zoning district other than a C-
1 restricted commercial district or a C-2 commercial district if operated and
conducted by a recognized and duly organized religious or charitable
organization, subject to the approval of the city council. (Ord. 321 §1, 1970:
prior code §6-42)
5.36.130: PENALTIES:
Any person or persons who violate, omit or neglect any of the provisions of
this chapter, or who fail to comply with this chapter or with any of the
requirements of this chapter is guilty of an offense and shall be liable to a
fine of not more than thirty five dollars ($35.00), including fine and costs.
Each day such violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
Upon default of the payment of any such fine and costs, any person or persons
who violate, omit or neglect any of the provisions of this chapter, or who fail
to comply with this chapter or with any of the requirements of this chapter may
be ordered held and incarcerated until he or she has served out the same at the
rate of one dollar ($1.00) per day for each day of fines and costs. (Ord. 321
§1, 1970: prior code §6-43)
CHAPTER 5.40
MIXED ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5.40.010: Defined
5.40.020: Certificate Of Compliance
5.40.030: Compliance
5.40.040: Location Limitations
5.40.050: Entrances, Exits, Lighting Requirements
5.40.060: Right Of Entry; Inspection
5.40.070: Restaurant And Kitchen Facilities Required
5.40.080: Food Handling Requirements
5.40.090: Sanitary And Toilet Requirements
5.40.100: Minors Prohibited
5.40.110: City Occupation Tax Permit And State License
5.40.120: Display Of Permit And License; Days And Hours Of Operation
5.40.130: Fee Schedule For Occupation Tax Permit
5.40.140: Application For Occupation Tax Permit
5.40.150: Zoning Restrictions
5.40.160: Penalty
5.40.010: DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, a "mixed alcoholic beverage establishment"
means any place or premises which serves or sells beverages composed, in whole
or in part, of alcoholic beverages, in a sealed or unsealed container of any
legal size, where such beverages contain more than three and two-tenths percent
(32/10%) of alcohol, measured by weight, for consumption on the premises where
served or sold. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.020: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
No association, person, firm or corporation shall maintain or operate a mixed
beverage establishment in the city without first having applied for and been
issued a certificate of compliance from the city certifying that the premises
from which the mixed beverage establishment will be operated has complied with
all applicable zoning, fire, safety and health requirements prescribed in this
code, and after having been issued a mixed beverage license from the state. No
certificate of compliance shall be issued from the city until after an annual
occupational tax permit, prescribed in section
5.08.020 of this title, has been procured from the city. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.030: COMPLIANCE:
No mixed beverage establishment nor any officer, director, stockholder, owner,
manager, agent or employee thereof operating within the city shall violate any
of the provisions of this code, nor any state or federal alcoholic beverage or
gambling laws, nor knowingly permit the violation thereof on any premises
subject to the control of the mixed beverage establishment. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.040: LOCATION LIMITATIONS:
A mixed beverage establishment, as defined in this chapter, shall be prohibited
from being located within three hundred feet (300') from any church property
primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities, or
within three hundred feet (300') of any public school. The distance indicated
in this section shall be measured from the nearest property line of such church
or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of such mixed
beverage establishment along the street right of way line providing the nearest
direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points. For purposes
of determining measured distance, a property situated on the opposite side of
the street from a church or school shall be considered as if it were located on
the same side of the street with the church or school. Furthermore, it shall be
prohibited for any mixed beverage establishment to be located on any city block
where a church or school is located. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.050: ENTRANCES, EXITS, LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS:
No certificate of compliance shall be issued by the city for any location for
use as a mixed beverage establishment within the city unless there are a
minimum of two (2) available and accessible entrances and exits in use at all
times during business hours. All locations being so used for such purpose shall
have adequate lighting, with no less than thirty five (35) candlepower in all
interior areas of the business at all times during business hours. (Ord. 647
§1, 1986)
5.40.060: RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION:
The right of entry and inspection of any premises under the direct or indirect
control of any mixed alcoholic beverage establishment located within the city
shall be possessed by any duly authorized city, county or state officer or
agent of any department or agency charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and of this code, and the state alcoholic beverage
control laws. The right of entry and inspection shall be a condition under
which every certificate of compliance shall be issued by the city, and the
application for said certificate shall be conclusively deemed to be consent of
the applicant and licensee for such right of entry and inspection. (Ord. 647
§1, 1986)
5.40.070: RESTAURANT AND KITCHEN FACILITIES REQUIRED:
Any mixed alcoholic beverage establishment to be operated within the city which
is applying for a certificate of compliance pursuant to this chapter shall be
required to be operated with a minimum of restaurant and kitchen facilities as
follows: adequate capacity refrigeration units, county health department
approved dishwashing equipment and sinks, a sanitary disposal system, an oven,
and a range with at least four (4) burners. These minimum requirements shall
apply whether the mixed beverage establishment is operated from a place of
business where sales are primarily in food service or where food service is a
secondary or limited activity to the dispensing and sale of alcoholic
beverages. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.080: FOOD HANDLING REQUIREMENTS:
Every place of business operating a mixed alcoholic beverage establishment
within the city shall be subject to all ordinances regulating food handling
establishments, and health and sanitation requirements relating to food as
prescribed by the Oklahoma city-county health department, and every such
business, as a prerequisite to being issued a certificate of compliance from
the city, shall be required to have a minimum of one full time employee
certified by the Oklahoma city-county health department as a food service
operator. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.090: SANITARY AND TOILET REQUIREMENTS:
Places of business which apply for a certificate of compliance to operate a
mixed alcoholic beverage establishment within the city shall be required to
provide minimum sanitary and toilet facilities as follows:
A.   Places of business in which a mixed alcoholic beverage establishment will
be operated where the serving of food is a primary activity in which food sales
account for fifty percent (50%) or more of total receipts of food and alcoholic
beverage sales, such as restaurants with bar service, shall be required to
provide the following minimum sanitary and toilet facilities: Separate
facilities for male and female patrons with a minimum of one lavatory per two
hundred (200) occupants for each sex, with each lavatory having one water
closet (toilet) per seventy five (75) occupants; included in the male
facilities must be at least one urinal per required lavatory with urinals being
permitted as a substitute for not more than fifty percent (50%) of the required
water closets; and at least one sink per required lavatory.
B.   Places of business in which a mixed alcoholic beverage establishment will
be operated where the serving of food is a secondary or limited activity, in
which food sales account for less than fifty percent (50%) of total receipts of
food and alcoholic beverage sales, such as nightclubs and taverns, shall be
required to provide the following minimum sanitary and toilet facilities:
Separate facilities for male and female patrons with a minimum of one lavatory
per seventy five (75) occupants for each sex, with each lavatory to have one
water closet (toilet) per forty (40) occupants; included in the male facilities
must be at least one urinal per required lavatory with urinals being permitted
as a substitute for not more than fifty percent (50%) of the required water
closets; and at least one sink per required lavatory. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.100: MINORS PROHIBITED:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be permitted in or on
that part of the premises of the place of business which has been licensed by
the state for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.110: CITY OCCUPATION TAX PERMIT AND STATE LICENSE:
A separate occupation tax permit from the city and a license from the state
must be obtained and kept current for each year for each branch, unit or
separate place of business in which a mixed alcoholic beverage establishment is
located within the city, and each such permit and license shall authorize the
operation of a mixed beverage establishment only at the location described in
such permit and license, and in conformity with the ordinances of the city and
the laws of the state and the United States, and no permit or license shall be
transferable to another person, firm, association or corporation, or to any
other location. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.120: DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND LICENSE; DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
Every place of business operating a mixed alcoholic beverage establishment
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall place and exhibit a current
occupation tax permit issued from the city and a state issued alcoholic
beverage license, including employee alcoholic beverage service licenses, in a
conspicuous place in the premises licensed by the state. Duly licensed mixed
alcoholic beverage establishments shall be permitted to sell alcoholic
beverages on all days of the week, except on the day of any national, state,
county or city election, including primary elections, during the hours the
polls are open. No sales of alcoholic beverages may occur between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on any day of the week.
(Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.130: FEE SCHEDULE FOR OCCUPATION TAX PERMIT:
See section
5.08.020 of this title for the occupation tax permit fee schedule. (Ord. 647
§1, 1986)
5.40.140: APPLICATION FOR OCCUPATION TAX PERMIT:
See section
5.08.030 of this title regarding an application for an occupation tax permit.
(Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.150: ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
Places of business located within the city from which a mixed beverage
establishment shall be operated shall be permitted only in C-3 neighborhood
shopping and C-4 general business districts, as prescribed in sections
19.36.020 (eating, drinking, and recreation establishments),
19.36.030 (eating or drinking establishments), 19.37.020 (eating, drinking, and
recreation establishments), 19.37.030 (eating or drinking establishments) of
this code. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
5.40.160: PENALTY:
Any person, individual, partnership, corporation or association, or officer,
director, stockholder, owner, manager, agent or employee of any establishment
operating within the city which sells or dispenses beverages containing more
than 3.2 percent of alcohol, measured by weight, for consumption on the
premises where served or sold, who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to paying a fine to the city in an amount not to exceed the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court costs, with each day of violation
constituting a separate offense. Furthermore, in addition to any penalty
provided for in this chapter, any violation of the provisions of this chapter
and applicable provisions of county and state laws shall make the offender
subject to having a complaint filed by the city with the appropriate county and
state agencies and in any court of competent jurisdiction to remedy such
noncompliance. (Ord. 647 §1, 1986)
CHAPTER 5.44
TAXICABS AND LIVERY CARS 1
SECTION:
5.44.010: Applicability
5.44.020: Definitions
5.44.030: License Required; Fee
5.44.040: Application For License
5.44.050: Contents Of License
5.44.060: Doors
5.44.070: Lettering On Vehicle
5.44.080: Unlicensed Vehicles
5.44.090: Immoral Or Unlawful Use Of Vehicle
5.44.100: Safety Inspection
5.44.110: Transfer Of License By Misrepresentation
5.44.120: Fixed Or Regular Route And/Or Time Schedule
5.44.130: Records; Inspection
5.44.140: Carrying Capacity
5.44.150: Driver Responsibility
5.44.160: Insurance, Bond Or Indemnity Deposit Required
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 1391 et seq.; 47 OS 8-101 et seq.
5.44.010: APPLICABILITY:
No section of this chapter shall be applicable to any operator of any taxicab
or livery car operating under the certificate of convenience and necessity or
permit from the corporation commission of the state; provided, however, that
any such person desiring to operate a taxicab or livery car business within the
city limits files application as provided in this chapter and pays the fees and
performs all the acts and things required in this chapter, then such operator
shall be granted a taxicab license by the city. (Prior code §19-16)
5.44.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
LIVERY CAR: All motor vehicles propelled and operated for transportation of
passengers for hire or rates based on an hourly charge, whether directly or
indirectly by donation, prescription, contract or otherwise (except taxicabs
operated without drivers, motorbuses operating on established routes,
sightseeing buses, funeral vehicles and ambulance vehicles).
PERSON: Includes both the singular and plural and also means and includes
person, individual, firm, corporation, copartnership, association, club,
society or any other organization.
TAXICAB: All motor vehicles propelled and operated for transportation of
passengers for hire, subject for call from any garage, office, taxistand or
otherwise, operating for hire, whether directly or indirectly by donation,
prescription, contract or otherwise (except the rental of cars without drivers,
and except motorbuses running and operating on established routes, livery cars,
sightseeing buses, funeral vehicles and ambulance vehicles). (Prior code §19-1)
5.44.030: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A.   No person, firm or corporation, or owner, agent, employee or driver, shall
operate or permit to be operated a motor vehicle operated as a taxicab or
livery car unless the proper license has been issued to the owner thereof and/
or the person using the vehicle in carrying on the taxicab or livery car
business, and said license is in force.
B.   Every license shall expire on April 30 next following the date of issue
and the cost of the same shall not be prorated for a part of the year, nor
shall the same be assignable or transferable from one person to another.
C.   License fees for each taxicab and/or livery car shall be payable to the
city treasurer in the following amount per year or fraction thereof: Twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per car where there are ten (10) or fewer vehicles in the
owner's fleet and a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fleet license fee where
there are more than ten (10) vehicles in the owner's fleet. Said fee shall be
paid to the city treasurer before the license is issued and the fees required
herein shall be in addition to any fee required by the laws of this state.
D.   No license shall be issued until there has been filed with the city clerk
the liability bond or policy as provided in section
5.44.160 of this chapter.
E.   The license fee required by subsection C of this section shall be in
addition to any fee required by the state.
F.   A license can be applied for by owners of the vehicles sought to be
licensed and/or persons using the vehicles in carrying on a taxicab or livery
car business but it shall be the owner, who will be the holder of the license,
who shall be responsible for all business authorized by and under said license,
including the responsibility to provide sufficient, permitted drivers and
dispatch personnel, proper maintenance and current state license tags,
registration and safety inspection of the vehicles to be operated within the
city, and sufficient insurance liability coverage necessary to operate the
taxicab or livery car service safety and in accordance with the requirements of
the license, provisions of this chapter and with the laws of this state.
G.   No refunds shall be made for any reason. (Ord. 627 §1, 1985: prior code
§19-2)
5.44.040: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A.   An application for a license to operate a taxicab or taxicabs, livery car
or livery cars shall be in writing, verified by the applicant or his duly
authorized agent, and shall be filed with the city clerk. Such application can
be made only by the owner of the vehicle for which the license is sought or by
his duly authorized agent, or by the person using the vehicle in carrying on
the livery car or taxicab business. Such application shall state the following
facts:
   1.   The name of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the names
and addresses of all the partners; if a corporation, the names and addresses of
the officers and directors thereof;
   2.   The address of the principal place of business of such applicant;
   3.   The resident address of such applicant;
   4.   The seating capacity of each livery car according to the manufacturer's
rating; the type or types of motor cars to be used, and the number of doors
thereof;
   5.   The name of the manufacturer, the state license number of each livery
car and/or taxicab, the length of time such livery car and/or taxicab have been
in use, and the automobile serial engine and body numbers;
   6.   A statement of the names, addresses and license identification card
numbers of all drivers driving livery cars and/or taxicabs in the operation of
such business;
   7.   The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do
business;
   8.   Where the proposed stands and garages are to be located.
B.   The state certificates of title shall be exhibited when making such
application. (Prior code §19-3)
5.44.050: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
When issued, the license shall contain the name and address of the applicant.
It shall describe the vehicle by make, year, model, serial number, motor
number, state tag number, serial number assigned to such vehicle by the city
clerk, the date of the issuance thereof and the expiration date. (Prior code
§19-4)
5.44.060: DOORS:
No license shall be issued for any vehicle whose doors do not open into the
seats to be employed by the passengers or occupants of the taxicab or livery
car.
No vehicle having less than four (4) doors shall be used as a taxicab or livery
car on the streets of the city. (Prior code §19-5)
5.44.070: LETTERING ON VEHICLE:
A.   Every person owning and operating a taxicab or taxicabs under license of
the city may adopt any trade name, design, color scheme, or other method of
painting or lettering such taxicabs as he may desire. Such trade name, design,
color scheme or method of painting shall include the name of the owner or the
trade name under which he does business painted on each side of the taxicab.
B.   Whenever the name of the owner or the trade name under which he does
business does not include any of the words "taxicab", "taxi", or "cab", then
the word "taxicab" shall be painted on each side of the taxicab immediately
beneath the name or trade name.
C.   Whenever any person owning or operating a taxicab does not adopt and use a
trade name, design, color scheme, or method of painting and lettering as
mentioned in this section, it shall be mandatory for said person to paint on
this taxicab the name of the owner and/or operator, the word "taxicab", and the
serial number assigned to the taxicab by the city clerk. This matter shall be
painted on each side of the taxicab and shall cover no less than ten inches by
twelve inches (10" x 12"). The form of the painting shall be substantially as
follows:
   JOHN T. SMITH
   TAXICAB 31
   WARR ACRES PHONE WH 9-3024
   (Prior code §19-6)
5.44.080: UNLICENSED VEHICLES:
The acceptance of passengers for compensation by any other vehicle than a
taxicab and/or livery car duly licensed under and operating in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, or by other than those vehicles excepted in the
definitions of "livery car" and "taxicab" in section
5.44.020 of this chapter, is prohibited. (Prior code §19-7)
5.44.090: IMMORAL OR UNLAWFUL USE OF VEHICLE:
Any person who uses a taxicab or livery car for any unlawful or immoral purpose
is guilty of an offense. When such unlawful or immoral use has occurred with
the knowledge of the owner and/or operator of such taxicab or livery car, the
chief of police, upon proof thereof, shall revoke the license for the vehicle
involved. (Prior code §19-8)
5.44.100: SAFETY INSPECTION:
A.   Prior to the use and operation of any taxicab or livery car under the
provisions of this chapter and before any license for such vehicles are issued
by the city, the vehicle shall have been thoroughly examined and inspected by a
duly authorized state motor vehicle inspection station and documentation
showing such current inspection for the year in which a city license is being
sought must be presented to the city clerk for each vehicle which will be
operated within the city for the purpose of conducting taxicab or livery car
service;
B.   All taxicabs and livery cars for which a license has been issued to
operate within the city must be maintained in a safe and clean condition,
including clean interiors with upholstery of seats in good repair, and shall be
subject to being periodically inspected by city police department personnel
and/or the city garage superintendent at such intervals as may be established
by the chief of police to ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating
conditions. Upon such inspection, if it is found that the vehicle operating
under the provisions of this chapter does not meet the requirements established
herein, including the requirement that the vehicle bear a current state
inspection sticker, the chief of police or a designee thereof shall cause the
vehicle license to be suspended until such time as the vehicle has been made to
comply with the provisions of this chapter;
C.   All vehicles to be licensed and used as taxicabs or livery cars shall have
the following as standard equipment:
   1.   Four (4) wheel brakes in good operating condition;
   2.   Parking brake in good operating condition;
   3.   Front and rear bumpers;
   4.   Heater, defroster and air conditioner in good operating condition;
   5.   Right and left side and interior rearview mirrors;
   6.   Speedometer, exposed to view, and maintained in accurate operating
condition;
   7.   Windshield wipers in good operating condition;
   8.   Tires with a minimum of two thirty seconds inch (2/32") tread;
   9.   Factory recommended shock absorbers;
   10.   Properly operating turn indicators;
   11.   Properly operating brake lights;
   12.   In the case of taxicabs only, a taximeter maintained in accurate
operating condition and exposed to view of the passenger;
   13.   All door and window glass shall be safety glazed glass equal to
manufacturer standard specifications and without cracks;
   14.   Seat belts and seat restraints for both the driver and passengers.
If upon an inspection conducted by personnel of the Warr Acres police
department or the city garage superintendent it is found that a vehicle
operating under a city taxicab or livery car license within the city does not
possess any of the above described items of standard equipment or such standard
equipment is not found to be in proper operating condition, then the chief of
police shall cause said license to be suspended until such time as the vehicle
has been made to comply with said requirements;
D.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or any driver of any taxicab or livery
car operated within the city to interfere with or to prohibit any police
officer of the city, the city garage superintendent or any person designated by
the chief of police from at any time inspecting or thoroughly examining any
taxicab, any taximeter used in any taxicab or any livery car. Any person who
interferes with such inspections shall, upon conviction thereof in the
municipal court of the city, be subject to a fine not to exceed seventy dollars
($70.00), including costs.
E.   Any inspections of taxicabs or livery cars licensed to operate within the
city which are conducted by police department or garage personnel of the city,
pursuant to police department or garage personnel of the city, pursuant to
police as established by the chief of police, and costs for the same shall be
included in the license fees as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 621 §2, 1985)
5.44.110: TRANSFER OF LICENSE BY MISREPRESENTATION:
Whenever it appears upon investigation that a license issued under this chapter
has been obtained, on a transfer from one vehicle to another owned by the same
licensee, by misrepresentation, the chief of police shall revoke such license.
(Prior code §19-10)
5.44.120: FIXED OR REGULAR ROUTE AND/OR TIME SCHEDULE:
No person, firm or corporation, or any agent, employee or driver of a taxicab
or livery car shall:
A.   Operate over any fixed or regular route; or
B.   Pass any specified point on a fixed or regular time schedule for the
purpose of picking up passengers. (Prior code §19-11)
5.44.130: RECORDS; INSPECTION:
The owner or person in charge of one or more taxicabs shall keep a record of
all such taxicabs, showing the body number, the city license number, the motor
number, the state highway tax number, and such data as may be necessary to
identify the driver of such vehicle or vehicles at any and all times. This
record shall be available for inspection of the city inspector and police
department at all times. (Prior code §19-12)
5.44.140: CARRYING CAPACITY:
No taxicab or livery car shall carry more passengers than the number designated
as its seating capacity in the application on which such license was issued or
transfer made. (Prior code §19-13)
5.44.150: DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY: 
A.   It shall be the duty of every person driving or operating a taxicab to be
courteous and gentlemanly, to refrain from smoking while actually carrying
passengers in his taxicab, to refrain from swearing, loud talking or boisterous
conduct, to drive his motor vehicle carefully and in full compliance with all
traffic laws, ordinances and regulations, and to keep his motor vehicle in a
clean sanitary condition.
B.   Every driver of a taxicab or livery car shall have the right to demand
payment of the legal fare in advance, and may refuse employment unless so
prepaid, and no driver of a taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey
any orderly person or persons upon request anywhere in the city unless
previously engaged or unable to do so. No driver of a licensed taxicab shall
carry any other person than the person first employing the taxicab without the
consent of the passenger. (Prior code §19-14)
5.44.160: INSURANCE, BOND OR INDEMNITY DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
Before any license is issued for any taxicab or livery car, the owner shall
file with the city clerk, to be approved by the city council, either an
insurance policy or bond as specified in subsection A of this section, or shall
make an indemnity deposit as set forth in subsection B of this section.
A.   Insurance Policy And Bond:
   1.   An insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed and
admitted to do business in the state shall be filed, providing liability
insurance for each and every taxicab or livery car owner, operated and/or
leased by the applicant with a liability coverage of no less than the minimum
limits prescribed in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 8-104 and any duly enacted
amendment thereto exclusive of interest and cost with respect to each motor
vehicle, said insurance coverage to be effective whether the taxicab or livery
car was, at the time of the accident, being driven by the owner, his agent, his
employee, lessee or licensee. The policy shall further provide that it cannot
be canceled until ten (10) days' written notice of such cancellation has been
filed with the city clerk. If the policy is canceled and the owner and/or
operator of the taxicab or livery car fails to provide, within ten (10) days,
another policy of insurance complying with the provisions of this subsection,
or fails to furnish the bond provided for in subsection A2 of this section,
then the license for such taxicab or livery car shall automatically become void
and of no effect. The cancellation of any policy shall in no way effect or
terminate any liability arising prior to the effective date of such
cancellation. The policy of insurance shall carry the name of the maker of such
taxicab and the numbers of the engine and body thereof. No cancellation notice
shall be recalled by a letter of reinstatement. There shall be attached to all
liability insurance policies issued pursuant to the requirements of this
section the following endorsement:
In consideration of the premium stated in the policy to which this endorsement
is attached, the company hereby waives a description of the motor vehicle to be
insured hereunder and agrees to pay a final judgment for personal injury,
including death, resulting therefrom, or damage to property, caused by any and
all motor vehicles operated by the assured pursuant to the taxicab license
issued by the City of Warr Acres, within the limits set forth in the schedule
shown herein, and further agrees that upon its failure to pay any such final
judgment, the judgment creditor may maintain any action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to compel such payment. Nothing contained in the policy
or any endorsement thereon, by the assured, shall relieve the company from
liability hereunder or from the payment of such judgment. The policy to which
this endorsement is attached shall not expire, nor shall cancellation take
effect, until after ten (10) day's notice in writing by the company shall have
been given to the City Clerk at his office in the City Hall. Said ten (10)
day's notice is to commence to run from the date the notice is actually
received at the office of the City Clerk. Attached to and forming a part of the
policy number           , issued by                        company to          
                        .
License holders licensed prior to the effective date hereof shall have thirty
(30) days from the effective date to obtain the mandatory insurance in the
required amount under penalty of forfeiting their license.
   2.   A bond is to be maintained throughout the term of the license, executed
by some surety company or indemnity company authorized to do business in the
state in the sum of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each
and every taxicab or livery car to be licensed. The bond is to run to the city
and is to be conditioned that the applicant will pay or cause to be paid any
and all damages of every kind or character, either to property or persons,
including the death of such persons, arising out of or proximately caused by
the negligence of the applicant and/or owner, his or their agents, employees,
lessees or licensees in the operation and/or maintenance of the taxicab or
livery car covered by the bond. The bond shall carry the name of the maker of
the taxicab and the numbers of the engine and the body thereof. The bond shall
further provide that it cannot be canceled until ten (10) days' written notice
of cancellation is filed with the city clerk. If the bond is canceled and the
owner and/or operator of taxicab or livery car covered thereby fails to
provide, within ten (10) days, another bond complying with the provisions of
this subsection B2, then the license issued for such taxicab or livery car
shall automatically become void and of no effect. Such cancellation, however,
shall in no way affect or terminate any liability arising prior to the
effective date of such cancellation.
   3.   The policy of insurance or bond shall contain a provision for a
continuing liability to the full amount thereof notwithstanding any recovery
thereon, and shall provide that, until the policy or bond is revoked as
provided in subsections A1 and A2 of this section, the insurance company,
surety or indemnity company will not be relieved from liability on account of
nonpayment of premium.
   4.   The bond and policy of insurance shall further provide that insolvency
or bankruptcy of the insured or principal shall not release the insurance
company or bonding company from any payment due under the policy or guaranteed
by the bond.
B.   Indemnity Deposit:
   1.   In lieu of the policy or bond as provided in subsection A of this
section, the owner or operator of a taxicab or taxicabs, or a livery car or
livery cars may, at his or its option, make an indemnity deposit with the city
treasurer in an amount to be determined according to the following schedule to
cover liability, hereinafter referred to, incurred in connection with the
operation of such taxicab or taxicabs or livery car or livery cars: a) one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first five (5) taxicabs or livery cars or
fraction thereof, b) two hundred dollars ($200.00) additional for each
additional taxicab or livery car. The operator shall thereafter, on the last
day of each calendar month, add to the deposit in the sum of ten dollars
($10.00) per car per month until the deposit is equal to the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) per taxicab or livery car.
   2.   Such indemnity deposit shall consist of cash or bonds of the United
States government, of the city, or of the state. The city treasurer shall place
the deposit in a separate and distinct trust fund to be used for the purposes
set forth in this subsection. At the time of making the deposit, a sum
sufficient to pay the premium on a surety bond shall be paid by the depositor,
or in lieu thereof, the depositor and the city treasurer may agree upon some
national bank as a depository, and in such event the city treasurer and the
depositor shall turn over and deliver to such national bank so selected all of
the cash or bonds so deposited for safekeeping and shall take a joint custody
receipt in favor of the city treasurer and the depositor, which receipt shall
state that the cash or bonds so placed in custody shall be delivered only upon
the joint written request of the city treasurer and the depositor, their
successors and assigns, or upon the happening of any one or more of the things
provided for in subsections B3, B4 and B5 of this section. Such cash or bonds
may be delivered to the city treasurer upon his individual official receipt;
and in the event it becomes necessary to so deliver the cash bonds back to the
city treasurer for any reason whatsoever, then the city treasurer shall
purchase and pay for, out of the cash or bonds, a surety bond to cover such
deposit; further, the depositor shall expressly agree in writing that the
deposit so made shall be used to cover the liabilities provided for in this
subsection.
   3.   When any judgment of any court in the state rendered at the suit of any
plaintiff against such owner, operator or lessee for death, personal injury or
property damage arising out of or proximately caused by the negligence of the
owner, operator, lessee or licensees in the operation and/or maintenance of the
taxicab, taxicabs, livery car or livery cars covered by the deposit becomes
final and has not been paid by such owner, operator or lessee making such
deposit within ten (10) days after such judgment becomes final, the city
treasurer shall have authority to pay such judgment from such deposit upon
presentation of a duly authenticated copy of the judgment properly certified by
the court clerk or magistrate having custody of the record thereof. For each
time the city treasurer is called upon to pay any such judgment, a fee or
charge of five dollars ($5.00) shall be made by the city treasurer and deducted
from the special fund and credited to the general fund of the city, which fee
or charge is levied to cover the expense of the city in such respect. The
deposit, however, shall cover only damages or injuries occurring after the date
of making such deposit.
   4.   When the city treasurer has paid any judgment authorized to be paid by
the foregoing provision, he shall forthwith notify such operator, owner or
lessee making such deposit of such payment. Immediately upon any such deposit
becoming impaired by any such payment, the taxicab or livery car license or
licenses of the owner, operator or lessee making such deposit shall be
suspended and shall remain so suspended until the deposit is restored to the
amount required under this section. If such deposit is not restored within ten
(10) days from the service of notice of its impairment by the city treasurer,
the taxicab or livery car license or licenses of the owner, operator or lessee
shall be revoked.
   5.   In the event it becomes necessary to dispose of any of the bonds of the
United States government, of the city, or of the state which are put up in any
such deposit, the same shall be sold by the city treasurer on the open market
for the current market price, or for the nearest thereto obtainable; and the
owner, operator or lessee making such deposit shall make such deposit complete
in the event the bonds sell for less than par. Upon receiving notice requiring
the same to be done from the city treasurer, if the deposit is not made
complete within ten (10) days from the service of notice, the taxicab or livery
car license or licenses of such owner or operator shall be revoked. All
interest or any cash or bonds placed in any such deposit shall be placed along
with any deposit and held by the city treasurer in the same way that the
deposits are held. (Ord. 627 §3, 1985: Ord. 541 §1, 1982: prior code §19-15)
CHAPTER 5.48
RESIDENTIAL SALES AND GARAGE SALES
SECTION:
5.48.010: Definition
5.48.020: Sales Intervals
5.48.030: Signs
5.48.040: Display Of Goods
5.48.050: Exemptions
5.48.060: Permit Required
5.48.070: Permit Fee
5.48.080: Application For Permit
5.48.090: Issuance Of Permit
5.48.100: Refusal To Issue; Revocation Of License
5.48.101: Penalty
5.48.010: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the term "residential sales" means any sale of what is
held out to be or is commonly known as a garage, porch, backyard, front yard,
or patio sale or any other type of general sale conducted from or on any
premises not located in a zoning district which permits such sales, where goods
or articles of any type are held out to the public. This definition shall not
include a situation where specific items are held out for sale and all
advertisement of such sale specifically names the items to be sold or as
otherwise exempted as provided herein. (Ord. 711 §1, 1991)
5.48.020: SALES INTERVALS:
No person shall hold, conduct, engage in, or participate in any manner or allow
a residential sale to be held or conducted on premises under his control or
ownership more than one time during any three (3) month period, subject to the
provisions of section
5.48.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 711 §1, 1991)
5.48.030: SIGNS:
Not more than two (2) signs or other devices shall be allowed for the purpose
of advertising or otherwise calling attention to the residential sale. One sign
may be located not further than the nearest traffic intersection from the sale
site and both signs must be located on private property. The display surface
shall not exceed four (4) square feet. All signs shall be posted no sooner than
twenty four (24) hours prior to the residential sale and must be removed within
twenty four (24) hours of the completion of the residential sale. (Ord. 711 §1,
1991)
5.48.040: DISPLAY OF GOODS:
The sale area of any residential sale shall be confined to the premises for
which the sale permit has been issued. (Ord. 711 §1, 1991)
5.48.050: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
A.   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction;
B.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials;
C.   Auctions conducted pursuant to state or local laws;
D.   Registered nonprofit charitable organizations, when the proceeds from the
sale are used directly for charitable purposes and the goods or articles are
not sold on a consignment basis;
E.   One sale per year conducted by a bona fide neighborhood association. (Ord.
711 §1, 1991)
5.48.060: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall hold, conduct, engage in, or participate in any manner, in a
residential sale without a permit for same. A separate permit shall be required
for each location at which a residential sale is to be held. A copy of the
permit shall be maintained at the site of the residential sale. (Ord. 711 §1,
1991)
5.48.070: PERMIT FEE:
No fee shall be charged for the first two (2) residential sale permits issued
to an individual or for a sale site per calendar year. Thereafter a fee of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) per permit shall be paid to the city clerk at the time
of filing the application. (Ord. 711 §1, 1991)
5.48.080: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
An applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this chapter shall
furnish the city clerk with the following information:
A.   Full name and address of applicant;
B.   The location at which the proposed residential sale is to be held;
C.   The date, or dates upon which the sale shall be held;
D.   An affidavit from the applicant and to the effect that all goods to be
sold at the residential sale are owned by the applicant and have not been
obtained for the purpose of reselling them at the sale. Further, the affidavit
shall state the number of residential sales held at the proposed sale location
during the previous twelve (12) months and the dates thereof. (Ord. 711 §1,
1991)
5.48.090: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A.   The city clerk is hereby authorized to grant a permit for a residential
sale for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days to any person
applying who otherwise complies with the requirements of this code.
B.   If a residential sale is not held on the dates for which the permit is
issued or is terminated during the first day of the sale because of inclement
weather conditions, and an affidavit by the permittee to this effect is
submitted, the city clerk may issue another permit to the applicant for a
residential sale to be conducted at the same location within thirty (30) days
from the date when the first sale was to be held.
C.   Before issuing a permit, the city clerk may conduct such investigation as
may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this code.
(Ord. 711 §1, 1991)
5.48.100: REFUSAL TO ISSUE; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A.   Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or any application for
issuance of a license may be refused by the city clerk if the application
submitted by the applicant or license holder contains any false, fraudulent or
misleading statement.
B.   If any person is convicted of an offense under this chapter, the person
may have their existing residential sale permit canceled and not be issued
another residential sale permit for a period of two (2) years from the date of
conviction. (Ord. 711 §1, 1991)
5.48.101: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof be deemed guilty of an offense and shall pay a fine not to exceed fifty
dollars ($50.00) for a first offense, and shall pay a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for second or subsequent offenses. Every article sold
and every day a residential sale is conducted in violation of this chapter
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 711 §1, 1991)
CHAPTER 5.52
WRECKER VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES
SECTION:
Article A. Operation Of Wrecker; Requirements
5.52.010: Definitions
5.52.020: License And Permit Required
5.52.030: Application For Permit
5.52.040: Approval And Issuance Of Permit
5.52.050: Term And Fee
5.52.060: Insurance
5.52.070: Vehicle And Equipment
5.52.080: Inspection
5.52.090: Rotation List
5.52.100: Dispatching Procedure
5.52.110: Operating Rules And Regulations
5.52.120: Written Reports
5.52.130: Revocation Or Suspension Of Wrecker Permit
Article B. Attendant Licensing
5.52.140: Attendant License Required
5.52.150: Application For Attendant's License
5.52.160: Police Investigation
5.52.170: Issuance Of Attendant's License
5.52.180: Nature Of License
5.52.190: Revocation Of Attendant's License
ARTICLE A.  OPERATION OF WRECKER; REQUIREMENTS
5.52.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ATTENDANT: Any person who drives or operates a wrecker whether as owner or
agent, servant or employee of such owner.
OPERATOR: Any person owning or operating a wrecker service in the city of Warr
Acres.
WRECKER: Any truck or motor vehicle designed, equipped or used for the purpose
of towing or removing wrecked, damaged, disabled or impounded vehicles.
WRECKER SERVICE: The business of offering the service of a wrecker for hire.
(Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.020: LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   No wrecker shall be operated within Warr Acres unless licensed by the
state of Oklahoma.
B.   No person or operator shall be eligible to receive calls for wrecker
service from the police department nor shall he dispatch or permit the dispatch
of any wrecker he owns or controls to the scene of an accident, or in response
to other actions of the city, unless a permit shall have first been obtained as
required by this chapter. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.030: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for permits required by this chapter shall be filed with the city
clerk on forms to be provided by the city and shall contain the following
information:
A.   The name, home address and actual business address of the applicant;
B.   If the applicant is a partnership, the name, residence address and
telephone number of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the same
information on each director, officer and the general manager;
C.   A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant or on form
based on generally accepted accounting principles;
D.   List of any unpaid judgments against the applicant or its principals;
E.   A statement of the experience of the applicant and its principals in
providing wrecker service;
F.   The location, number, description and hourly availability of the wreckers
owned or operated by the applicant;
G.   A description for the applicants enclosed facility to be used for the
storage and protection of vehicles which are impounded;
H.   The names and addresses of all proposed attendants;
I.   A copy of the current class A wrecker operations license issued to the
applicant by the state of Oklahoma;
J.   A certificate of insurance establishing insurance requirements of this
chapter;
K.   Such other information as the city clerk, police chief or city council
shall deem necessary. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.040: APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A.   When an application is received by the city clerk it shall be forwarded to
the police chief for review and inspection to assure full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B.   Upon completion of review and inspection, the police chief shall forward
the application and recommendations to the city council for public hearing. If
the city council finds that the applicant is fully qualified, the council shall
authorize a wrecker permit to be issued at the next council meeting to the
applicant to engage in wrecker service for answering official police and city
requests.
C.   No application shall be forwarded to the council unless all requirements
have been met. The police chief shall notify an applicant of any deficiencies
who shall have twenty (20) days thereafter to correct the defect. If the
deficiencies are not corrected within such time, the application shall be
deemed withdrawn. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.050: TERM AND FEE:
Each application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
to be paid to the city clerk. The permit shall be effective until June 30
following the date of issue. Such fee shall not be prorated nor is it
refundable. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.060: INSURANCE:
A.   Every permittee shall secure and maintain, with an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, general liability insurance and
workers' compensation coverage in the following amounts:
   1.   Workers' Compensation: Coverage in accordance with state law.
   2.   Property Damage Liability: Coverage limits of not less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any claim or number of claims arising out of
a single accident or occurrence.
   3.   Bodily Injury And Other Claims: Coverage limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for claims of personal injury and all other
claims, including accidental death for any claim or any number of claims
arising out of a single occurrence or accident.
B.   Each insurance policy must contain an endorsement providing that such
insurance may not be changed or canceled without fifteen (15) days' written
notice to the city of Warr Acres. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.070: VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT:
A.   Every permittee or operator shall have at least two (2) wreckers available
twenty four (24) hours a day. Of the two (2) vehicles, one must be winch
equipped and one must be a flatbed. Each wrecker shall bear the name of the
wrecker service on each side of the vehicle in letters not less than two inches
(2") in height and one-half inch (1/2") width and colored so as to be easily
readable.
B.   Each vehicle to be used as a wrecker must be designed for such purpose and
shall be maintained in first class mechanical and operating condition, ready
for use.
C.   Each vehicle shall have at least one amber rotating or flashing beacon
visible for three hundred sixty degrees (360°). In addition, each vehicle shall
have an emergency flasher system capable of emitting two (2) amber lights to
the front and two (2) red lights to the rear of the vehicle which shall flash
simultaneously. All lighting systems shall be visible from a minimum of five
hundred feet (500').
D.   Each wrecker shall also include the following equipment:
   1.   A set of highway lights for attachment to a towed vehicle where
necessary;
   2.   All truck warning devices required by 47 Oklahoma Statutes to protect
the scene of an accident, day or night;
   3.   Two (2) "scotch" blocks or similar type device capable of adding
stability to the wrecker in preparing the disabled vehicle for towing except
for roll backs or flatbed;
   4.   "Dollies" for the purpose of providing a method of towing disabled
vehicle; or equipment capable of adequately and safely loading an impounded
vehicle. The provisions of this requirement shall not apply to the loading of
impounded vehicles of ten thousand (10,000) pounds' or more gross weight except
for roll backs or flatbed;
   5.   At least one easily accessible fire extinguisher with an NFPA rating of
ten (10) BC or higher;
   6.   Two (2) chains for pulling or towing;
   7.   A nylon towing strap at least two and one-half inches (21/2") in width
and at least twelve feet (12') in length;
   8.   One push type broom and other supplies to clean accident debris;
   9.   One shovel suitable for clearing debris from the roadway;
   10.   One axe;
   11.   One set of tire chains or mud tires;
   12.   One pry bar or wrecker bar capable of prying open vehicle doors;
   13.   One "sling" or "stay bar" or other type of device capable of
protecting an impounded or disabled vehicle while being towed or transported;
   14.   A wheel lift device;
   15.   Warning devices (flares or triangles);
   16.   Dual rear wheels. At least one set of dual rear wheels for stability
in towing another vehicle;
   17.   Absorbent. An adequate supply of an absorbent capable of absorbing
liquid spills from vehicles (not including cargo spills); provided, the wrecker
service or wrecker operator shall not be required to pick up or dispose of the
used absorbent. The department recommends keeping at least four (4) gallons of
absorbent on each wrecker vehicle.
E.   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a radio receiver and transmitter
capable of communicating with the wrecker company dispatcher who shall have
base station equipment capable of such communication. (Ord. 1158, 2015)
5.52.080: INSPECTION:
A.   Each wrecker vehicle and all required equipment shall be subject to
periodic inspection by the police chief or his designee to ensure continued
maintenance and compliance. If, upon inspection, a wrecker vehicle or equipment
is found not to meet the requirements of this chapter, the chief of police
shall cause the vehicle to be removed from service. The permittee will not
return vehicle to service until authorized by the police chief.
B.   The permittee offices and storage facilities shall also be open and
subject to periodic compliance by the police department inspection. Lack of
compliance shall be grounds for revocation. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.090: ROTATION LIST:
Each permittee shall be placed on a wrecker call list to be maintained by the
police department. Calls for wrecker service to accidents or in response to
other actions by the city shall be directed only to permit holders appearing on
the call list. Calls for wrecker service shall be made only in accordance with
the dispatching procedure as herein set out. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.100: DISPATCHING PROCEDURE:
Wrecker service calls shall be made according to the following procedure:
A.   The police department dispatcher shall notify the permittee currently at
the top of the rotation list.
B.   The permittee shall not accept a call from the police dispatcher unless a
wrecker and attendant are immediately available for dispatch at the time the
service call is received.
C.   Every wrecker service call accepted shall be answered promptly. In the
event an attendant will be delayed more than fifteen (15) minutes from the time
of dispatch to arrival at the scene, the attendant shall notify his dispatcher
who will, in turn, inform the police dispatcher that the permittee is unable to
provide immediate service.
D.   In the event the permittee is unable to provide immediate service, the
police dispatcher shall be advised of the reason therefor and shall notify the
next permittee on the rotation list. If all permit holders are unable to
provide immediate service, the dispatcher shall call the nearest permitted
state licensed operator until service is obtained.
E.   No permittee shall proceed to the scene of impoundment until and unless it
has been directed to do so by the police dispatcher.
F.   If the permittee arriving at the scene feels that he is not properly
equipped or capable of performing required service, he shall immediately notify
the police dispatcher for additional instructions or directions. (Ord. 740 §1,
1993)
5.52.110: OPERATING RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A licensee shall provide wrecker service in compliance with the following rules
and regulations:
A.   Repealed.
B.   The storage facility for each permit holder shall be screened by a six
foot (6') high sightproof fence in a properly zoned area. The facility must be
adequate for the protection of vehicles stored and must have an all weather
surface.
C.   The operator shall release any towed vehicle upon the following criteria:
   1.   Payment of all towing and storage liens; or
   2.   An order of the chief of police or his designee authorizing the release
of the vehicle at no cost to the owner or citizen;
   3.   An order of the chief of police or his designee that a bond has been
posted securing all towing and storage liens.
D.   The permit holder shall provide immediate service twenty four (24) hours
per day each and every day.
E.   Every permittee shall have available for immediate service at least one
attendant on duty between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. daily; and one dispatcher and attendant on duty between the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. daily.
F.   The permittee shall maintain a direct telephone line to the Warr Acres
police department dispatcher, which line shall be personally answered twenty
four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
G.   Each attendant dispatched to the scene of an accident shall be responsible
for clearing from the street all debris existing as a result of such accident.
H.   The steering wheel of all impounded vehicles be secured with a tie down
before towing.
I.   An inventory of all visible personal possessions and/or equipment in each
impounded vehicle shall be prepared by the attendant before the vehicle is
removed, and such inventory shall be verified by the police officer at the
scene by signature. Any erasures on such inventory shall be initialed by both
the attendant and the police officer.
J.   Any other rule or regulation which the police chief deems necessary to
ensure effective service and proper impoundment of vehicles. (Ord. 993 §3,
2003: Ord. 992 §1, 2003: Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.120: WRITTEN REPORTS:
A.   Every permittee shall keep records in which he will log each police call
received, the time such call was received, the time the wrecker reached the
scene, and the time the wrecker returned. Such records shall be kept on a daily
basis and shall be open to inspection by the police department or the city
council upon request. The report shall include the following:
   1.   The day and time the operator was contacted and requested to perform
the service.
   2.   The name of the person requesting this service.
   3.   The location of the vehicle.
   4.   A description of the towed vehicle, including license tag and vehicle
identification number.
   5.   The owner or driver of the vehicle when known.
   6.   The service charge and fees.
B.   A licensee shall make a written report with all pertinent information to
the police department within twenty four (24) hours of the following events:
   1.   Upon refusal to accept a referral because of equipment failure or the
lack of available attendant;
   2.   Unusual delay in arriving at the scene;
   3.   Damage or alleged damage to the impounded vehicle caused by the wrecker
or attendant;
   4.   Loss or alleged loss of personal property and/or equipment from the
impounded vehicle during the time it was in possession of the licensee or its
employees. (Ord. 1158, 2015)
5.52.130: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF WRECKER PERMIT:
A.   The city council shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a permit
issued under this article on any of the following grounds:
   1.   The permit was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a
material fact, or a fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the time
of this application, and such fact would have constituted just cause for
refusal to issue the permit;
   2.   The permittee illegally employs a shortwave radio to intercept police
communications;
   3.   The permittee has failed to respond to two (2) referrals, without
justification, during the license year;
   4.   The permittee has failed to respond to five (5) referrals, regardless
of reason, during the license year;
   5.   The permittee has failed to maintain adequate and properly operating
equipment as required by this article;
   6.   The permittee has made improper or excessive charges to a vehicle owner
or operator;
   7.   The permittee or his agents and/or employees have violated any
provisions of this code or have committed any other acts the violation of which
reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the permittee to offer public services.
B.   The police chief shall bring to the attention of the city council the
existence of any of the above grounds for revocation or suspension.
C.   Prior to suspension or revocation, the permittee shall be given notice of
the proposed action to be taken, including the reason or reasons therefor, and
shall have an opportunity to be heard before the city council. At least ten
(10) days' notice of hearing shall be given to the permittee. Upon completion
of said hearing, the city council, based on its findings, shall:
   1.   Decline to revoke or suspend the license; or
   2.   Revoke the license; or
   3.   Suspend the license for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. (Ord.
1158, 2015)
ARTICLE B.  ATTENDANT LICENSING
5.52.140: ATTENDANT LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or be permitted to operate a wrecker vehicle regulated
by this chapter without having a current valid driver's license issued by the
state and without having first obtained an attendant's license from the police
chief as set forth herein. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.150: APPLICATION FOR ATTENDANT'S LICENSE:
A.   An application for an attendant's license shall be made upon blank forms
furnished by the city and shall contain:
   1.   The applicant's full name, present resident address and any other
residence address during the past year;
   2.   Age, date of birth, weight, height, color of eyes and hair, and
driver's license number;
   3.   a. A statement of all felonies and misdemeanors (including moving
traffic violations and excluding parking violations) for which the applicant
has been convicted within the last five (5) years immediately preceding
application for the license,
      b.   The applicant applying for the position of wrecker driver shall
provide a copy of his/her driving record from the Oklahoma state department of
public safety, and a copy of his/her criminal record from the Oklahoma state
bureau of investigation (OSBI);
   4.   A statement of past experience as a wrecker attendant, including the
name and address of each employment as a wrecker attendant within the five (5)
years immediately preceding application for the license;
   5.   All applications shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of
perjury.
B.   Applications for an attendant's license shall be submitted to the city
clerk together with the payment of three dollars ($3.00) for a processing fee
for each application. (Ord. 870 §1, 1998: Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.160: POLICE INVESTIGATION:
The city clerk shall forward the application to the police chief for
investigation. The police chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of
such application. Said investigation shall be a check by the police department
on the applicant for warrants. (Ord. 870 §1, 1998: Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.170: ISSUANCE OF ATTENDANT'S LICENSE:
A.   The police chief, upon consideration of an application for an attendant's
license and the investigation reports and documents attached thereto, shall
approve or reject the application in accordance with this section.
B.   The police chief shall authorize the city clerk to issue an attendant's
license if he finds the applicant:
   1.   Is of the age of eighteen (18) years or over;
   2.   Is able to speak, read and write the English language;
   3.   Has a current, valid license issued by the state of Oklahoma, and is
not currently under revocation or suspension by the Oklahoma department of
public safety;
   4.   Has a safe driving record;
   5.   Has not been convicted within the five (5) years immediately preceding
application for a license of any of the following offenses:
      a.   Any offense involving honesty, veracity, violence, or involving
dangerous or deadly weapons,
      b.   Use or possession of controlled dangerous substances as defined in
the Oklahoma uniform controlled dangerous substance act,
      c.   Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or
other intoxicants as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 11-902,
      d.   Operating a motor vehicle while the operator's privilege to drive
has been suspended or revoked;
   6.   Has met all the requirements of this article and all other applicable
laws and regulations. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.180: NATURE OF LICENSE:
The attendant's license shall be in the form of a card which shall bear the
signature, photograph, fingerprints of the applicant. Such card shall be issued
in duplicate. One copy with fingerprints, photograph and signature of the
applicant shall be placed on file with the police chief. The other card shall
be carried on the person of the permittee or in the wrecker driven by said
permittee at all times while operating a wrecker. (Ord. 740 §1, 1993)
5.52.190: REVOCATION OF ATTENDANT'S LICENSE:
A.   The police chief may suspend or revoke any attendant's license issued
under this article for any of the following reasons:
   1.   Upon conviction of the following offenses:
      a.   Use or possession of controlled dangerous substances as defined in
the Oklahoma uniform controlled dangerous substance act,
      b.   Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or
other intoxicants as defined in 47 Oklahoma Statutes section 11-902,
      c.   Operating a motor vehicle while the operator's privilege to drive
has not been suspended or revoked;
   2.   For leaving the scene of an accident in which the wrecker is involved;
   3.   For failure to make a full report of an accident to the police
department within twenty four (24) hours of the time of the occurrence;
   4.   For permitting any other person to use his license;
   5.   For obliterating or erasing any official entry on his license
identification card;
   6.   Upon conviction of a third traffic violation while operating a wrecker
during any one license year;
   7.   Misrepresentation of any material facts by an attendant in his
application for license;
   8.   Upon revocation or suspension of the attendant's license by the
Oklahoma department of public safety.
B.   Whenever an attendant's license is revoked or suspended, the police chief
shall take up the license and license identification card and forward same to
the mayor together with a full report on reasons for revocation.
C.   No person whose license has been revoked shall be eligible to receive a
new license until one year from the date of such revocation.
D.   Any licensee whose wrecker attendant's license is revoked or suspended
under this section may request an appeal hearing before the city council by
filing a written request therefor with the city clerk within ten (10) days of
notification of the suspension or revocation. After the hearing the city
council may:
   1.   Reverse the order of suspension or revocation by the police chief.
   2.   Affirm the action of the police chief and sustain the revocation or
suspension.
   3.   Modify the revocation or suspension as circumstances warrant, and
impose any conditions upon the modification as may be appropriate.
   4.   Suspend the license for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days.
E.   The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final. An appeal
or request for hearing hereunder shall not stay or supersede the order of
suspension or revocation issued by the police chief pending hearing thereon.
(Ord. 744 §1, 1993)
CHAPTER 5.53
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
5.53.010: Purpose
5.53.020: Definitions
5.53.030: State Licenses Required
5.53.040: Owner Or User Permit
5.53.050: Revocation, Denial Of Permit; Appeals
5.53.060: Excessive False Alarms
5.53.070: Costs For Excessive False Alarms
5.53.080: Administration And Enforcement; Inspection
5.53.090: Operation Of Systems
5.53.100: Emergency Notification
5.53.110: Minimal System Requirements
5.53.120: Sensory Mechanisms
5.53.130: System Out Of Service
5.53.140: Automatic Dialing Devices And Prerecorded Or Programmed Message
5.53.150: Notice Of Disruption In Service
5.53.160: Change Of Permit Or License Information
5.53.170: Notice Requirements
5.53.180: Existing Alarm Permits
5.53.190: Violation And Penalties
5.53.200: Alarm Permit Reinstatement Cost
5.53.210: Excessive False Alarm Administrative Fees
5.53.010: PURPOSE:
While recognizing the value of effective alarm systems in deterring crime and
preventing fire losses and while encouraging the use of such alarm systems, it
is the purpose of this chapter to require minimum standards for alarm systems
and services therefor and to license users thereof to improve system
effectiveness and to minimize, insofar as possible, the unnecessary and/or
prolonged involvement of emergency public service resources and personnel in or
at nonemergency calls. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ALARM BUSINESS: Any person or firm engaged in the business of installing,
assisting in the installation, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing,
moving, or removing alarm systems in the city.
ALARM COORDINATOR: A person at city hall who issues permits.
ALARM REVIEW BOARD: Shall consist of the police chief and the fire chief.
ALARM SITE: A single premises or location served by an alarm system or systems.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed to detect
the presence of a fire, or an unauthorized entry or activity in any building or
on any property, or to direct attention to a fire, robbery, burglary, or other
emergency in progress, and to signal the above occurrences either by a local or
audible alarm or by a silent or remote alarm, directly or indirectly to the
police or fire department.
The following devices shall not constitute alarm systems within the meaning of
this chapter:
A.   Devices which do not activate alarms that are audible, visible, or
perceptible outside the protected premises;
B.   Devices which are not installed, operated or used for the purpose of
reporting an emergency, either directly or by third party, to the police or
fire department;
C.   Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles;
D.   Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police or fire
department and alarm devices installed in or on premises owned or leased by the
city.
ANSWERING SERVICE: A telephone answering service providing, among its services,
the receiving, on a continuous basis through trained employees, of emergency
signals from alarm systems and the subsequent relaying of said messages to the
police or fire department on a person to person basis.
APPLICANT: Any person who has requested or is requesting an owner or user
permit to install, operate or maintain an alarm system at a particular
location.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, any type of
communication or message indicating the existence of an emergency situation
that the alarm system is designed to detect.
CENTRAL STATION: An office to which alarm systems are connected, where
operators supervise the circuits, and where guards and/or servicemen are
maintained continuously to investigate signals. For purposes of fire alarms,
informational relay systems shall be in compliance with the National Fire
Protection Association (hereinafter "NFPA") standards as set forth in NFPA 71,
central station signaling systems, NFPA 72A, local protective signaling
systems, NFPA 72B, auxiliary protective signaling systems, or NFPA 72C, remote
station protective signaling systems.
DIRECT LINE: A telephone line leading directly from a central station to the
police or fire department, where such line is used only to report emergency
signals on a person to person basis.
EMERGENCY: The existence of a fire, the commission or attempted commission of a
robbery, burglary or other criminal action.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by an alarm business and who installs,
services, maintains, repairs or replaces alarm systems in the city.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, the negligence of the alarm business operator or his employees or
agents, or the negligence of the owner, user or lessee of an alarm or his
employees or agents, or which otherwise elicits a response by a law enforcement
agency or the fire department when a situation requiring such response does not
in fact exist. A false alarm shall also mean the activation of an alarm, the
purpose of which is to communicate or indicate a specific emergency situation,
when in fact that specific emergency situation does not exist. Such terminology
does not include, for example, alarms activated by utility line mishaps,
tornados, earthquakes, or other violent conditions of nature, or other
conditions clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer,
owner or user.
MODIFIED CENTRAL STATION: An office to which alarm systems are connected, where
operators supervise the circuits but where guards are not maintained to
investigate alarm signals.
PERMITTEE: Any person or designated persons to whom an alarm system owner or
user permit is issued.
PERSON OR DESIGNATED PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, trust
and/or association, joint venture and their respective agents or any other
person or entity who has real or apparent interest, responsibility and/or
control over the alarm premises. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.030: STATE LICENSES REQUIRED:
A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, manage,
conduct or carry on an alarm business within the city unless there exists a
valid license issued thereto pursuant to the state's alarm industry act 1 .
B.   Employees: It shall be unlawful for any person who is employed for the
purpose of engaging in the installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing,
moving, or removing, in or on any building or other property within the city,
fire, burglary, robbery or other emergency alarm system, to engage in such
activities unless such person has a valid license issued thereto pursuant to
the state's alarm industry act 2 . (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 59 OS § 1800.1 et seq.
2 1. 59 OS § 1800.1 et seq.
5.53.040: OWNER OR USER PERMIT:
A.   Required: No person shall operate, connect or maintain an alarm system at
a particular location without obtaining an alarm system permit from the city.
Such permit shall be maintained on the premises with the alarm system and shall
be visible from the exterior and shall be located on or immediately adjacent to
the front or main entrance of the premises. Such permit shall be obtained and
posted on the premises as required within fifteen (15) days of the alarm system
becoming operational, activated and/or otherwise working.
   1.   The designated person in addition to any person identified as
responsible for an alarm system shall be held responsible for obtaining and
posting the permit and complying to the provisions regarding alarms.
   2.   Alarm systems in apartment and/or business complexes shall be
designated and subject to the following:
      a.   The owner or property manager of an apartment and/or business
complex shall obtain a master alarm permit from the designated authority for
all alarm systems that are operated in any residential and/or business unit on
the premises, whether the alarm system is furnished by the apartment and/or
business complex owner as an amenity or contracted by an individual tenant.
      b.   A tenant of an apartment and landlord in any business complex shall
also obtain an alarm permit from the designated authority within fifteen (15)
days of operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential and/or
business unit.
      c.   For purposes of enforcing this section against an individual
residential and/or business unit, the alarm permit of the tenant supersedes the
master alarm permit of the apartment and/or business complex; and the tenant is
responsible for false alarm notifications emitted from the alarm system in the
tenant's residential and/or business units.
      d.   The owner or property manager of an apartment and/or business
complex shall obtain a separate alarm permit for any alarm system operated in a
nonresidential area of the apartment and/or business complex, including, but
not limited to, common tenant areas and offices, storage, and equipment areas.
   3.   The required permit for the operation of any "alarm system" as defined
in this chapter is in addition to any other provisions and/or required
inspections, permits or licenses as may be required by this code, state or
federal law and/or any other legal authority.
B.   Application: The application shall set forth the full name, address and
telephone number of both the owner and/or lessee on whose premises the system
will be operated or maintained and the name of the person or state licensed
alarm system business installing, maintaining or servicing the system, as well
as the type (fire, burglar, etc.) of system operated or maintained. The
applicant will identify by name and telephone number (for day and night) two
(2) contact individuals or representatives that are able to physically respond
to any such alarm location in a reasonable time except in unusual circumstances
where a single contact is allowed by the alarm coordinator. Such application
shall also contain such additional information as the chief of police or fire
chief shall reasonably deem necessary for the evaluation and proper processing
of the application.
   1.   Each application shall state the name, address and telephone number of
an individual who is designated as responsible for the alarm who is also able
to physically respond to such alarm location in a reasonable time.
   2.   An applicant may be denied a permit for any reason stated in section
5.53.050 of this chapter concerning revocation or denial of permit.
   3.   An alarm permit is not transferable to any other person. Mere changes
of the required information not involving a change in ownership, lease or
operation shall not be considered a transfer.
C.   Permit Term: An alarm permit issued by the city of Warr Acres shall be
valid for one calendar year from the last day of the month in which it is
issued and shall expire at the end of that period.
D.   Violation: Any person operating a nonpermitted alarm system and/or who
operates an alarm system after revocation will be deemed to be in violation
hereof and shall be subject to the penalty set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.050: REVOCATION, DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEALS:
A.   Grounds For Revocation: In addition to any penalties which may be imposed
for the violation of certain provisions of this chapter, the city by and
through the chief of police or fire chief may, pursuant to the provisions of
this section, revoke an alarm system owner or user permit on any of the
following grounds:
   1.   Fraud or wilful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement made
in an application for a permit.
   2.   Failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment or operation within
fourteen (14) days after receipt of notice from the chief of police or fire
chief.
   3.   Failure to comply with any order or notice issued by the chief of
police or fire chief after the permittee's rights to hearing and appeal have
been exhausted, or failure to comply with the standards imposed by this chapter
within fourteen (14) days after notice or order from the chief of police or
fire chief.
   4.   Failure to comply with the regulations and requirements of this chapter
or as otherwise established in this code.
   5.   Failure to take corrective action to remedy excessive false alarms.
   6.   Twelve (12) false alarms in three hundred sixty five (365) days.
B.   Appeal: Any appeal from a denial of a permit, revocation of a permit and/
or the assessment of administrative fees for excessive false alarms shall be as
provided as follows:
   1.   If the designated authority denies the issuance or renewal of a permit,
revokes a permit or assesses an administrative fee for excessive false alarms,
they shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an
appeal, by mail, to the applicant or permit holder.
      a.   The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the
designated authority to the alarm coordinator, by filing a written request for
a review, setting forth the reasons for the appeal within fifteen (15) days,
after the day notice is mailed from the designated authority. Refusal to accept
service of notice by mail shall be deemed a waiver of any notice and/or the
appeal.
      b.   Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the
designated authority of revoking a permit or collecting an administrative fee
until the alarm coordinator has completed a review. If a request for appeal is
not made within the fifteen (15) day period, the action of the designated
authority is final.
   2.   Permit holders or persons assessed an administrative fee for excessive
false alarms shall be entitled to a hearing, if requested within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of notice of sustained denial, revocation of permit or
assessment of a fee by the alarm coordinator. The hearing shall be conducted by
the city council at their next scheduled meeting.
   3.   The alarm review board shall conduct a hearing and consider the
evidence by any interested person(s). The board shall make their decision on
the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The
board must render a decision to affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the
designated authority within ten (10) days after the hearing is conducted. The
decision of the board shall be in writing and mailed to the appellee. (Ord.
1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.060: EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS:
A.   Number Of False Alarms: An excessive number of false alarms shall be
deemed to be more than twelve (12) false alarms within any three hundred sixty
five (365) day period.
B.   Violation: Any person designated as defined in this chapter who exerts
control and/or any other legal entity or person who has control over the
property protected by an alarm system who allows, continues, or causes
excessive false alarms, as defined herein, to be made or continued any
excessive "false alarm" as defined herein shall be subject to an administrative
fee for each and every excessive false alarm. Each and every violation of the
excessive false alarm provisions shall constitute a separate action that may be
remedied by revocation of permit and/or an administrative fee assessment as a
means to regulate the alarm systems within the city of Warr Acres and
accomplish the stated purpose of this chapter.
C.   Notice: If an excessive number of false alarms occur at any alarm
location, the police/fire chief shall give written notice to the alarm system
permittee and/or to the alarm business responsible for maintaining and
servicing the systems, as shown on the permit and application to take
corrective action within fourteen (14) days to prevent future false alarms.
D.   Revocation After Notice: If the corrective action is not accomplished and
communicated in writing to the alarm coordinator giving notice within fourteen
(14) days to the permittee or the alarm business, written notice of revocation
of the alarm system permit shall be served upon the permittee by the police or
fire department by mail.
E.   Reinstatement: After an alarm permit has been revoked, the permit shall
not be reinstated until the permittee submits a written request to the alarm
coordinator revoking the permit, accompanied by a statement that corrective
action has taken place. The alarm coordinator acting hereunder shall charge the
permittee a reinstatement fee as established herein. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.070: COSTS FOR EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS:
A.   The permittee and/or other designated person shall be assessed fines/court
costs as set forth in this chapter, to reimburse the city for the costs and
expenses incurred for responding to excessive false alarms to any one alarm
site.
   1.   The notice shall be made by mail. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.080: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTION:
A.   Administration: The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the chief of police and the fire chief. The fire chief, or his
designee, is authorized to make inspections of fire and other emergency alarm
systems and of the premises wherein said device or system is located, or as
otherwise provided herein.
B.   Inspection: Any inspection of an alarm location or premises shall be the
same as provided in this code. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.090: OPERATION OF SYSTEMS:
A.   Duty: The person owning an alarm business or an employee of such business
shall instruct the alarm system permittee in the proper operation of the system
when it is installed. It shall also be the responsibility of the alarm business
to see that all employees at the location at which said system is installed are
instructed in proper operating procedures to avoid false alarm signals. It
shall be the responsibility of the alarm system permittee to cause the system
to be maintained in reliable operating condition. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.100: EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION:
A.   Permit Visible: Every person maintaining an audible fire, burglary,
robbery or other emergency alarm system shall make readily visible, either on
or immediately adjacent to the front or main entrance of the building housing
the alarm, the permit assigned to that particular alarm system.
B.   Records: The alarm business shall maintain records of at least two (2)
personnel who are designated to respond in case of emergencies.
C.   Designated Personnel: Upon proper notification of any emergency condition
the owner's or user's designated personnel, which may by agreement be assumed
by the alarm business, shall proceed immediately to the location of the
activated alarm and render all necessary service and assistance to restore the
alarm to normal condition. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.110: MINIMAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Fire, burglary, robbery or other emergency alarm systems which use a local
audible or visual alarm device to attract the attention of the public shall be
equipped so as to automatically discontinue the alarm within thirty (30)
minutes, unless the system is maintained by an alarm business with twenty four
(24) hour service employees who can respond within thirty (30) minutes after
notification.
B.   Every alarm system shall have an uninterruptable power supply which will
sustain the operation of the alarm system for a minimum period of four (4)
hours.
C.   All alarm systems and fire detection systems must also comply with NFPA
71, central station signaling systems, NFPA 72A, local protective signaling
systems, NFPA 72B, auxiliary protective signaling systems, or NFPA 72C, remote
station protective signaling systems, adopted hereby and incorporated herein by
reference. If any inconsistency or conflict exists in this code and the
aforementioned NFPA provisions the more strict standard shall apply. (Ord. 1069
§1, 2009)
5.53.120: SENSORY MECHANISMS:
The sensory mechanisms used in connection with the fire, robbery, burglary or
other emergency alarm systems shall be adjusted to suppress false alarms so
that the device will not be actuated by impulses due to transient pressure
changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such as the
rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to the
installation, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.130: SYSTEM OUT OF SERVICE:
Alarm businesses and permittees shall notify the police dispatcher prior to any
service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation of
any alarm system which would directly or indirectly result in an emergency
services response. Any alarm received after such notification while the system
is out of service shall not constitute a false alarm. Alarm businesses and
permittees shall notify the police dispatcher when said system is back in
service. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.140: AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES AND PRERECORDED OR PROGRAMMED MESSAGE:
A.   Automatic dialing devices with prerecorded or programmed messages shall be
programmed or coded to dial the phone number designated by the police and fire
departments, and to dial a third party whose name appears on the permit
application.
B.   The prerecorded or programmed message shall contain the following
information:
   1.   The address and phone number at the location where the emergency
exists.
   2.   The permit number issued and assigned by the city to this system.
   3.   The type of emergency the system is designed to detect, for example, a
fire, a break-in while the premises is unattended, or a life threatening
situation.
C.   The prerecorded or programmed message shall not last longer than twenty
five (25) seconds and shall not be repeated more than twice, and if repeated
shall have a ten (10) second pause between the repeated message. In no case
shall said messages or recordings transmit said information for a period longer
than sixty (60) seconds. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.150: NOTICE OF DISRUPTION IN SERVICE:
When an alarm business's service to its subscribers is disrupted for any reason
by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such disruption,
it shall promptly notify its subscribers that protection is no longer being
provided. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.160: CHANGE OF PERMIT OR LICENSE INFORMATION:
A.   Whenever a change occurs relating to the written information required on
the permit application, listing requirements or other documents filed with the
city pursuant to this chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give written
notice of said change to the police and fire departments within ten (10) days
thereof.
B.   Any changes of ownership at a location formerly or currently utilizing an
alarm system shall be construed as a new installation and shall require the
necessary permit and fees.
C.   The replacing, modifying or altering of an existing permitted system shall
not constitute a new installation. Such replacement shall be subject to the
existing permit. However, any change of permit or license information caused by
such action shall be given in writing to the police department within ten (10)
days.
D.   The information required by this chapter shall be maintained as
confidential and shall only be used for law enforcement purposes, and
statistical studies in which information on individuals could not be
discovered. Any unauthorized disclosure is punishable as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.170: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever a written notice of revocation, correction, suspension, etc., is
required of the city under this chapter, service shall be deemed complete upon
deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.180: EXISTING ALARM PERMITS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all alarm systems, alarm
businesses, alarm business employees and owners or users of alarm systems which
are operated and/or maintained within the corporate city limits of the city of
Warr Acres. All alarm permits now existing and valid purchased prior to the
effective date hereof shall expire on the last day of the sixth month
thereafter. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.190: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
A.   Violations: Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed in violation hereof and shall be subject to the penalty
provided herein.
B.   Penalty:
   1.   Every day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation
and shall be subject to the full penalty contained herein.
   2.   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
day plus court costs. (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.200: ALARM PERMIT REINSTATEMENT COST:
A.   After first suspension: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
B.   Second suspension within a twelve (12) month period: One hundred dollars
($100.00).
C.   Third suspension within a twelve (12) month period: One hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00).
D.   Each additional suspension within a twelve (12) month period: Two hundred
dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
5.53.210: EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARM ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
A.   Fee for every excessive false security alarm call: Sixty five dollars
($65.00).
B.   Fee for every excessive false fire alarm call: One hundred seven dollars
($107.00). (Ord. 1069 §1, 2009)
CHAPTER 5.54
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5.54.010: Policy
5.54.020: Definitions
5.54.030: Unlawful Practices
5.54.040: Discrimination In The Sale Or Rental Of Housing
5.54.050: Discrimination In Financing Or Housing
5.54.060: Discrimination In The Provision Of Brokerage Services
5.54.070: Exemption
5.54.080: Administration
5.54.090: Education And Conciliation
5.54.100: Enforcement
5.54.110: Investigations, Subpoenas, Giving Of Evidence
5.54.120: Enforcement By Private Persons
5.54.130: Interference, Coercion Or Intimidation
5.54.140: Separability Of Provisions
5.54.150: Prevention Of Intimidation In Fair Housing Cases
5.54.010: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city of Warr Acres to provide, within constitutional
limitations, for fair housing throughout the city of Warr Acres. (Ord. 1119,
2012)
5.54.020: DEFINITIONS:
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES: An act that is unlawful under sections
5.54.040,
5.54.050, and
5.54.060 of this chapter.
DWELLING: Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or
designed or intended for occupation as a residence by one or more families and
any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
FAMILY: Includes a single individual.
PERSON: Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
TO RENT: Includes to lease, to sublease, to let or otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant. (Ord. 1119,
2012)
5.54.030: UNLAWFUL PRACTICES:
Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section and section
5.54.070 of this chapter, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale
or rental of housing set forth in section
5.54.040 of this chapter shall apply to:
A.   All dwellings except as exempted by subsection B of this section.
B.   Nothing in section
5.54.040 of this chapter shall apply to:
   1.   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such
private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further that, in the case of the sale of any
such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such
house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply
only with respect to one such sale within any twenty four (24) month period;
provided further that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any
interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds
from the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from
the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented:
      a.   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman or of
such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting
dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such facilities or services of any
person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and
      b.   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection
5.54.040C of this chapter. However, nothing in this provision shall prohibit
the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other
such professional assistance as is necessary to perfect or transfer the title;
or
   2.   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently
of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one such living
quarters as his residence.
C.   For the purposes of subsection B of this section, a person shall be deemed
to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
   1.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as
principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
   2.   He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as an
agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein;
   3.   He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by,
or occupied by, five (5) or more families. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.040: DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING:
As made applicable by section
5.54.030 of this chapter and except as exempted by subsection
5.54.030B and section
5.54.070 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:
A.   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or
deny a dwelling to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, national
origin, disability or familial status.
B.   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities
in connection therewith because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin,
disability or familial status.
C.   To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published
notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, sex, color, religion, national origin, disability or familial status or
an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
D.   To represent to any person because of race, sex, color, religion, national
origin, disability or familial status that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is, in fact, so available.
E.   To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling,
for profit, by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, sex, color,
religion, national origin, disability or familial status. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.050: DISCRIMINATION IN FINANCING OR HOUSING:
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to
deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the
purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a
dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest
rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial
assistance because of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, disability
or familial status of such person or of any person associated with him in
connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such
loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners,
lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given, provided that
nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of
the exception contained in subsection
5.54.030B of this chapter. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.060: DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, rental or facility relating to
the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against him in
the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on account
of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, disability or familial status.
(Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.070: EXEMPTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association or
society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or
society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns
or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion
or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion
is restricted on account of race, sex, color, national origin, disability or
familial status. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club,
not, in fact, open to the public which, as an incident to its primary purpose
or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to
its members or from giving preference to its members. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.080: ADMINISTRATION:
A.   The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall be
in the chief executive officer of the city of Warr Acres.
B.   The chief executive officer may delegate any of these functions, duties
and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees, including
functions, duties and powers, with respect to investigating, conciliating,
hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to
any work, business or matter under this chapter. The chief executive officer
shall, by rule, prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of his
hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other officers in the city,
to boards of officers or to himself, as shall be appropriate and in accordance
with law.
C.   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs and
activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner to
affirmatively further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with the
chief executive officer to further such purposes. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.090: EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION:
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the chief executive officer
shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He shall call conferences of persons in the housing
industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the provisions of
this chapter and his suggested means of implementing it and shall endeavor,
with their advice, to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of
enforcement. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.100: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter "person
aggrieved") may file a complaint with the chief executive officer. Complaints
shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as
the chief executive officer requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the
chief executive officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or
persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a
complaint or within thirty (30) days after the expiration of any period of
reference under subsection C of this section, the chief executive officer shall
investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved
whether he intends to resolve it. If the chief executive officer decides to try
to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal
methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion, nothing said or done in
the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in
a subsequent proceeding under this chapter without the written consent of the
persons concerned. Any employee of the chief executive officer who shall make
public any information in violation of this provision shall, upon conviction,
be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not more
than ten (10) days.
B.   A complaint under subsection A of this section shall be filed within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice
occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which
the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may
be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer
to the complaint against him and, with the leave of the chief executive officer
which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may
amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
C.   If, within thirty (30) days after a complaint is filed with the chief
executive officer, the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain
voluntary compliance with this chapter, the person aggrieved may, within thirty
(30) days thereafter, file a complaint with the secretary of the department of
housing and urban development. The chief executive officer will assist in this
filing.
D.   If the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within thirty (30) days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may,
within thirty (30) days thereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate
court against the respondent named in the complaint to enforce the rights
granted or protected by this chapter insofar as such rights relate to the
subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing
practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent
from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be
appropriate.
E.   In any proceedings brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof
shall be on the complainant.
F.   Whenever an action by an individual shall come to trial, the chief
executive officer shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary
compliance. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.110: INVESTIGATIONS, SUBPOENAS, GIVING OF EVIDENCE:
A.   In conducting an investigation, the chief executive officer shall have
access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals and
other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy
such materials and take and record the testimony or statement of such persons
as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided,
however, that the chief executive officer first complies with the provisions of
the fourth amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The chief
executive officer may issue subpoenas to compel his access to or the production
of such materials or the appearance of such persons and may issue
interrogatories to a respondent to the same extent and subject to the same
limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or
served in aid of a civil action in the United States district court for the
district in which the investigation is taking place. The chief executive
officer may administer oaths.
B.   Upon written application to the chief executive officer, a respondent
shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in
the name of the chief executive officer to the same extent and subject to the
same limitations as subpoenas issued by the chief executive officer himself.
Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the
name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at
his request.
C.   Witnesses summoned by subpoenas of the chief executive officer shall be
entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings
in United States district courts. Fee payable to a witness summoned by a
subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him. Within
five (5) days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may
petition the chief executive officer to revoke or modify the subpoena. The
chief executive officer shall grant the petition if he finds that the subpoena
requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it
requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under
investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the
evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous or for other
good reason.
D.   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the chief executive
officer or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its
enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which the
person to who the subpoena was addressed resides, was served or transacts
business.
E.   Any person who wilfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to
answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other evidence,
if in his power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the
chief executive officer shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or imprisoned not more than ten (10) days, or both. Any person who,
with intent to mislead the chief executive officer, shall make or cause to be
made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record or
other document submitted to the chief executive officer pursuant to his
subpoena or other order or shall wilfully neglect or fail to make or cause to
be made full, true and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records or
other documents or shall wilfully mutilate, alter or by any other means falsify
any documentary evidence shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) or imprisoned not more than ten (10) days, or both.
F.   The city's attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the chief
executive officer participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.120: ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS:
A.   The rights granted herein by sections
5.54.030,
5.54.040,
5.54.050 and
5.54.060 of this chapter may be enforced by civil actions in state or local
courts of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice
occurred; provided, however, that the court shall continue such civil case
brought pursuant to this section or subsection
5.54.100D of this chapter from time to time before bringing it to trial if the
court believes that the conciliation efforts of the chief executive officer are
likely to result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing
practice complained of in the complaint made to the chief executive officer and
which practice forms the basis for the action in court; and provided, however,
that any sale, encumbrance or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any
court order issued under the authority of this chapter and involving a bona
fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant, without actual notice of the existence
of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this
chapter, shall not be affected.
B.   The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or
temporary injunction, temporary restraining order or other order and may award
to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney
fees in the case of a prevailing plaintiff, provided that the said plaintiff,
in the opinion of the court, is not financially able to assume said attorney
fees. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.130: INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION:
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of or on account of his having exercised or
enjoyed or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the
exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by section
5.54.030,
5.54.040,
5.54.050 or
5.54.060 of this chapter. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil
action. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.140: SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application
of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to other
circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
5.54.150: PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES:
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force,
wilfully injures, intimidates or interferes with or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
A.   Any person because of his race, sex, color, religion, national origin,
disability or familial status and because he is or has been selling,
purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or negotiating for the
sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling or applying for
or participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings; or
B.   Any person because he is or has been or in order to intimidate such person
or any other person or class of persons from:
   1.   Participating without discrimination on account of race, sex, color,
religion, national origin, disability or familial status in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of
this section; or
   2.   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection
so to participate.
C.   Any citizen because he is or has been or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons
to participate, without discrimination on account of race, sex, color,
religion, national origin, disability or familial status, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection A of
this section or from participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate shall be fined not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not more than ten (10)
days, or both; and if bodily injury results, shall be fined not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not more than ten (10) days, or both;
and if death results, shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or
for life. (Ord. 1119, 2012)
CHAPTER 5.55
MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5.55.010: Policy
5.55.020: Definitions
5.55.030: Scope
5.55.040: Mobile Food Service Establishment Committee
5.55.050: Mobile Food Service Establishment License Required
5.55.060: Application For A Mobile Food Service Establishment License
5.55.070: Limitation On The Application Of Licenses
5.55.080: License Renewal
5.55.090: Rules And Regulations
5.55.100: License Fees
5.55.110: Prohibition Of The Transfer Of A License
5.55.120: Operation Of A Mobile Food Service Establishment
5.55.130: Enforcement
5.55.010: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city of Warr Acres to safeguard public health and
provide to consumers food that is safe, unadulterated, and honestly presented.
This chapter establishes definitions; sets standards for management and
personnel, food operations, equipment and facilities; and provides for food
service establishment plan review, license issuance, licensing fees,
inspection, restriction, and license suspension. This chapter is created in
conjunction with state health department and OKC-County health department
codes. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.020: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
COMMISSIONER: The public works director of the city of Warr Acres or his or her
designee.
DEPARTMENTS: The inspection services (city inspector), the code enforcement
services (code enforcer), police department, the fire department, and/or any
departments of the city of Warr Acres.
FESTIVALS: One to three (3) consecutive day occasion held by a business entity,
school, church, or municipality, including a religious or charitable
organization, for the purpose of charity, music, art, renaissance, cultural,
national or state holidays, or health festivals. Festivals are not restricted
to one physical address. This festival definition is only for the purpose of
the issuance of food service establishment licensing by the city of Warr Acres.
MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A vehicle or trailer that prepares food, is
readily movable, and remains at one physical address for no more than twelve
(12) hours at a one time single event unless in conjunction with a festival.
Such vehicle or trailer shall be Oklahoma department of transportation road
approved, including wheel and axle (OAC 310:257-17-3). Also includes retail
establishments, which shall mean a unit which sells packaged foods from a
temporary, stationary display or from a vehicle or trailer, and remains at one
physical address for no more than twelve (12) hours at a one time single event
unless in conjunction with a festival. For additional information go to http://
www.occhd.org. Food sales for a retail establishment are limited to
commercially manufactured, prepackaged products or products that are prepared
and packaged at a licensed food service establishment.
MOBILE PUSHCART: A nonself-propelled food unit that can be manually moved.
Pushcarts are classified as either indoor or outdoor depending on where they
are operated and type of food sold. Mobile pushcarts shall not be allowed in
the city of Warr Acres.
OAC: The Oklahoma administrative code. The OAC is published by the customer
protection department within the Oklahoma state department of health.
OCCHD: The Oklahoma City-County health department. The OCCHD mobile food
service program ensures proper licensing, and education of mobile food vendors
throughout Oklahoma County. The program also serves as a guide by providing
potential vendors with all the steps required for operation in Oklahoma County,
as well as proper construction of a mobile food vehicle. For additional
information go to http://www.occhd.org. The OCCHD publishes "Steps For Opening
A Mobile Food Establishment In Oklahoma County" CP-11-2014, which can be
downloaded from the OCCHD website. Steps include Oklahoma state sales tax
permit; copy of mobile food service establishment guidelines; food service
operator's training/certificate; inspections, state and county licenses, and
food handler certificates.
OSDH: Oklahoma state department of health. OAC 310-257 can be found at http://
www.ok.gov/health/.
SPECIAL EVENT/EVENTS: One to three (3) consecutive day occasion held by a
business entity, school, church, municipality, religious or charitable
organizations for the purpose of customer appreciation, charitable events,
opening ceremonies, special sales, product launches, and national or state
holidays. Events are restricted to be held at one physical address. This
special event definition is only for the purpose of the issuance of food
service establishment licensing by the city of Warr Acres.
THE COMMITTEE: The commissioner and the departments. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.030: SCOPE:
A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to mobile food operations
engaged in the business of cooking, preparing, and distributing food or
beverage with or without charge from mobile food service establishment on or in
public, private or restricted spaces. This section shall not apply to canteen,
coffee, or ice cream trucks that move from place to place and are stationary in
the same location for no more than thirty (30) minutes at a time.
B.   The provisions of this section shall apply to mobile food service
establishments that receive special event or festival licenses issued by the
city of Warr Acres. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.040: MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT COMMITTEE:
A.   There shall be within the city of Warr Acres a mobile food service
establishment committee consisting of the public works director (commissioner),
the inspection services (city inspector), the code enforcement services (code
enforcer), the police department, the fire department, and the city planner for
the purpose of annually reviewing mobile food service establishment licenses
and updating rules and regulations of this chapter as appropriate.
B.   The committee may be required to work with applicants for mobile food
service establishment licenses and renewals when engaged with a festival. (Ord.
1157, 2015)
5.55.050: MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE REQUIRED:
A.   No person, business entity, school, including a religious or charitable
organization, shall allow operations of a mobile food service establishment in
any public, private or restricted space without a license issued by the city
inspector.
B.   A mobile food service establishment license is required for a single
special event, six (6) special events, or annual. Licenses shall not be issued
for any other purpose except as stated in this chapter. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.060: APPLICATION FOR A MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE:
A.   Application: Single event or multiple event application forms shall be
made available by the city inspector to apply for each mobile food service
establishment license. The applicant shall provide the following:
   1.   Photocopies of current Oklahoma state and Oklahoma County inspections
and certificates.
   2.   Photocopy of Oklahoma state sales tax permit.
   3.   Photocopy of food service operator's certificate.
   4.   Photocopy of vehicle owner driver's license for identity purposes.
   5.   Photocopy of the affidavit that was provided to the county health
department affirming that you are a U.S. citizen or legal resident of the
United States.
   6.   Photocopy of Oklahoma state department of health license that must be
posted on the outside of the unit.
   7.   A description of area of the city where the special event will be held,
and remains at one physical address for no more than twelve (12) hours at one
time unless in conjunction with a festival (OAC 310:257-17-3).
   8.   A description of areas of the city where the festival will be held, and
vendors may remain at one physical address overnight should the festival run
over a one to three (3) day period.
B.   Submission Of Materials: Each application shall indicate on its face, in
addition to other requirements as may be determined by the committee, that the
following materials must be submitted by the applicant:
   1.   The name of the business and its owner or owners and the mailing
address of the business. A letter from the owner of the property granting
permission to businesses to hold a special event.
   2.   A description of the proposed location for the mobile food service
establishment operation, and name of the special event or festival coordinator.
   3.   A proposed service hours of operation with a detailed schedule of times
and locations where the mobile food establishment will be stationary and
serving food (time should match the times the business is open and be no longer
than 12 hours or in case of a festival daily hours).
   4.   OCCHD certificate of inspection. It shall be a requirement where the
event organizer of special events or festivals shall contact the supervisor of
the customer protection department (CPD) of the OKC-County health department,
within ten (10) days of the event with a complete list of vendors. This will
allow the customer protection department to make sure they have all the proper
licenses and if not, the CPD can coordinate inspectors to go to the location
and issue the proper licenses. The CPD is responsible to ensure food is
delivered in a safe manner with proper licenses. Additional inspections of the
food service establishment may be required by the city of Warr Acres fire
department and city inspector prior to granting any license.
   5.   Proof of access to restroom facilities with flushable toilets and
access to hand washing facilities for the use of the mobile food service
establishment employees within three hundred feet (300') of each location where
the establishment will be in operation for more than one hour in any single
day.
   6.   A certificate of insurance providing general liability insurance
listing the city as additionally insured. A food service establishment license
shall be issued only for the explicit time period covered by the effective
dates of the general liability insurance policy.
C.   Approval Process: An application must be submitted to the city inspector,
who shall review all application documents for completion, based on duly
published criteria established by this chapter and the Oklahoma City-County
health department, prior to its final approval and the issuance of a license by
the city inspector.
   1.   The committee, at the request of the commissioner, may work with the
applicant or license holder to modify a service location at any time: a) before
the issue of a license or b) after the issue of a license, if the grant of a
license or approval of a service location has led to the creation of a nuisance
or otherwise endanger the public health, safety, or order or by request of the
license holder.
   2.   Completed applications shall be submitted thirty (30) days before the
special event or festival to the city inspector, who will either issue or deny
the application for a license.
   3.   If the application is denied in whole or in part, the city inspector
shall state the specific reasons for the denial. Any applicant who has been
denied a license may appeal such denial by submitting a written request for a
hearing to the commissioner within ten (10) days of denial. Such hearing shall
be conducted by the commissioner or his or her designee or committee within
thirty (30) days of receipt of said appeal. The decision resulting therefor
shall be final and subject only to judicial review. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.070: LIMITATION ON THE APPLICATION OF LICENSES:
A.   License applications shall be accepted for review by the city inspector/
committee under the following conditions:
   1.   Multi-tenant properties, freestanding businesses, churches or schools
may request, up to four (4) times a year, a maximum of two (2) mobile food
service establishments at their location, for special events. Limited to three
(3) continuous day events. City inspector shall determine whether there is
adequate parking so as not to interfere with surrounding businesses.
   2.   Multiple vendor applications may be requested for festivals. The
committee shall work with festival coordinator to determine number of vendors
which shall be permitted.
   3.   Multi-tenant property may apply up to four (4) times a year for special
events. No individual tenant may request food service establishments, it must
be a decision of all tenants occupying a physical property. Multi-tenant
property shall provide the city inspector with written permission from the
property owner to hold special event.
B.   The committee may from time to time set a limit on the number of total
licenses that may be issued or renewed per year. Upon receipt of application,
the commissioner or his or her designee shall advise the applicant whether or
not the limitation has been met.
C.   No mobile food service establishment shall be issued a license should the
special event be held within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the closest
exterior wall of a restaurant. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.080: LICENSE RENEWAL:
A.   Every mobile food service establishment license, unless suspended or
revoked by the committee for a violation of any provision of this chapter or
other rule or regulation promulgated for the implementation of this chapter,
shall be renewed annually given that a renewal fee is paid within thirty (30)
days after its one year expiration, at which time the license holder shall
forfeit the right to renew and the license may be made available to another
applicant for new license if the limitation on the number of licenses has not
been reached.
B.   The committee reserves the right to add, remove, and reapportion available
locations among mobile food truck operations at renewal. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.090: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A.   The committee members are hereby authorized to promulgate additional rules
and regulations appropriate for the implementation of this chapter, and, if
necessary, work with other agencies and departments of the county and state
health department to establish a streamlined process for the licensing of
mobile food service establishments; provided, however, that such rules and
regulations are not inconsistent with the following limitations and
restrictions:
   1.   No operator of a mobile food service establishment shall park, stand,
or move a vehicle and conduct business within areas of the city where the
license holder has not been authorized to operate;
   2.   The issuance of a license does not grant or entitle the exclusive use
of the service location, in whole or in part, to the mobile food service
establishment license holder, other than the time and place as approved for the
term of the license;
   3.   No mobile food service establishment shall provide or allow any dining
area, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, booths, bar stools,
benches, and standup counters, unless a proposal for such seating arrangements
is submitted with the license application for festivals, and approved by the
committee.
   4.   Consumers shall be provided with single service articles, such as
plastic forks and paper plates, and a waste container for their disposal. All
mobile food service establishments shall offer a waste container for public use
that the operator shall empty at his own expense (OAC 310:257-9-57, 60).
   5.   The permit holder must keep an accurate log indicating that the mobile
food service establishment is serviced for all cleaning and servicing
operations, including the emptying and cleaning of waste container, mounted
under the vehicle, at an off site facility.
   6.   No mobile food service establishment shall make or cause to be made any
unreasonable or excessive noise in violation of Warr Acres noise ordinance
(title 8,
chapter 8.24 of this code).
   7.   A mobile food service establishment may not operate on public property
unless the commissioner otherwise granted approval on the license application
for its operation at the particular location during specific times.
   8.   For mobile food service establishments on public property, the city
reserves the right to move a mobile food service establishment to a nearby
location if the approved location needs to be used for emergency purposes, snow
removal, construction, or other public benefit.
   9.   City inspector and fire department shall be responsible for inspections
of food service establishments prior to and during the licensing period, to
ensure compliance with provisions of the license, promulgate rules, and all
applicable federal, state, county, and local fire safety statutes, regulations,
ordinances, and city codes. Failure of any compliance shall result in an order
to cease operations. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.100: LICENSE FEES:
Single event fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
Six (6) event fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
Annual fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.110: PROHIBITION OF THE TRANSFER OF A LICENSE:
A.   Transfer For Value Prohibited: No person holding a license issued pursuant
to this chapter shall sell, lend, lease or in any manner transfer a mobile food
service establishment license. Any unauthorized transfer or attempt to transfer
a license shall automatically void such license. Whoever violates this
provision, including both the transferor and transferee, shall be subject to a
fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) pursuant to subsection
5.55.130A of this chapter. The unauthorized transfer or attempt to transfer of
each license shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.120: OPERATION OF A MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT:
A.   Operation Without A License: Any mobile food service establishment being
operated without a valid license issued by the city inspector shall be deemed a
public safety hazard and may be ticketed and impounded.
B.   Unattended Vehicles Prohibited: No mobile food service establishment shall
be parked on the street overnight, or left unattended and unsecured at any time
food is kept in the mobile food service establishment. Any vehicle which is
found unattended shall be considered a public safety hazard and may be ticketed
and impounded. An exception is allowed when the license is for continuous
multiple festival days.
C.   Outside Of Approved Location: A mobile food service establishment
operating outside of an approved location, at an unauthorized location, or
beyond the hours for which the operation has been permitted shall be deemed
operating without a license in violation of this section and may be subject to
enforcement under section
5.55.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 1157, 2015)
5.55.130: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Fine For Violation: Any person operating a mobile food service
establishment or service in violation of any provision of this chapter or any
rules and regulations promulgated by the committee may be subject to a fine of
up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) per day. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to a fine, any license
holder operating a mobile food service establishment or service in violation of
any provision of this chapter or any rules and regulation promulgated by the
committee may be subject to revocation, suspension and/or modification of their
license.
B.   Revocation, Suspension, Modification: Once a license has been issued it
may be revoked, suspended, modified, or not renewed by the city inspector for
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any rules and
regulations promulgated by the committee.
   1.   No license shall be revoked, suspended, modified, or not renewed
without a hearing before the commissioner or his or her designee, prior to
which hearing the commissioner or his or her designee shall give reasonable
notice of the time and place of the hearing and the specific grounds of the
proposed action. The decision resulting therefor shall be final and subject
only to judicial review.
   2.   The commissioner or his or her designee may suspend a license for no
more than three (3) days without a notice or hearing, pursuant to subsection B1
of this section, if the commissioner or his or her designee specifically
notifies the license holder in writing that there is a probability of violation
of public safety, health or order. In such a case, a hearing shall be held
before the commissioner or his or her designee within forty eight (48) hours of
the suspension in order to determine whether the public safety, health, or
order concern justified the suspension.
C.   Removal: Any person, including, but not limited to, any license holder,
found in violation of this chapter or any rules and regulations promulgated by
the committee may be issued a fine for violation and the mobile food vehicle
may be impounded.
D.   Enforcement: The provisions of this chapter or any rules and regulations
promulgated by the committee may be enforced jointly by the city of Warr Acres
inspection service and the Warr Acres police department. (Ord. 1159, 2015)
CHAPTER 5.56
DOCKLESS BICYCLES AND SCOOTERS
SECTION:
5.56.010: Definitions
5.56.020: License Required, Fee
5.56.030: Safety Regulations
5.56.040: Parking Of Bicycles, Impoundment, Fee
5.56.010: DEFINITIONS:
CUSTOMER: Means a person who rents and uses a bicycle from a bike share
operator.
DOCKLESS BICYCLE: Means a bicycle, including an electric bicycle or motorized
scooter, that is self-locking and that is not connected to a docking station.
LICENSE HOLDER: Means an operator that holds a current and valid business
license issued pursuant to this chapter.
MOTORIZED SCOOTER: Means any vehicle having not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, handlebars and a foot support or seat for the use of
the operator, and a power source that is capable of propelling the vehicle at a
maximum design speed of not more than twenty five (25) miles per hour on level
ground.
OPERATOR: Means a corporation, firm, joint venture, limited liability company,
partnership, person, or other organized entity which provides bicycles for
short-term rentals for point-to-point trips and which may be locked and
unlocked without the requirement of a bicycle rack or other docking station
within the City, whether for profit or not for profit.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription, deed or condemnation and intended to use by the public as a
street, alley, sidewalk or other public way. (Ord. 1184, 2018)
5.56.020: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEE:
No operator shall allow a dockless bicycle to be operated inside the City
limits without having obtained a business license from the City. Normal
business license fees shall apply. (Ord. 1184, 2018)
5.56.030: SAFETY REGULATIONS:
A.   All dockless bicycles used by operators issued a license under this
chapter shall meet the standards outlined in the Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) under title 16, chapter II, subchapter C, part 1512 - Regulations for
Bicycles, and all applicable State laws and City ordinances.
B.   All bicycles shall meet applicable State and Municipal requirements for
lights during nighttime.
C.   All license holders shall provide a mechanism for customers to notify the
operator that there is a safety or maintenance issue with the bicycle, to
include a telephone number, web address, and email address.
D.   All license holders shall notify users that:
   1.   Helmet use is encouraged while riding the bicycle.
   2.   Bicyclists shall yield to pedestrians on sidewalks.
   3.   When riding on a street, bicyclists must follow the rules of the road
as one would in a motor vehicle.
E.   License holders are solely responsible for educating its users regarding
laws applicable to riding, operating and parking of bicycles in the City limits
and on instructing users to comply with applicable laws. License holders bear
the sole risk associated with the unlawful use or parking of its bicycles
inside the City limits. (Ord. 1184, 2018)
5.56.040: PARKING OF BICYCLES, IMPOUNDMENT, FEE:
A.   The parking of dockless bicycles on public right-of-way is strictly
prohibited.
B.   Dockless bicycles may not be parked on any private property without the
consent of the owner.
C.   Dockless bicycles may not be parked on any private property in a location
that is visible to the general public from a public right-of-way except between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Dockless
bicycles parked between the hours may not be parked for a period of time
exceeding two (2) hours.
D.   Any dockless bicycle parked in violation of this section may be impounded
by the City. Impounded bicycles may only be released upon the paying of an
impound release fee or by the posting of an impound bond. No impounded bicycle
shall be released except upon presentation in person of proof of ownership of
the bicycle by the owner or by an agent authorized to act on behalf of the
owner.
E.   The impound release fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
F.   Any person wishing to challenge the impoundment may post an impound bond
in an amount equal to the impound release fee plus courts costs (see section
2.24.360 of this Code). Upon posting of said fee, the bicycle shall be released
and a hearing shall be set before the Warr Acres Municipal Judge. At said
hearing, the Judge shall determine, by preponderance of the evidence, whether
the bicycle was parked in violation of this Code. The operator bears the risk
that its customers may park the bicycle in violation of this Code, and an
unlawful parking by a customer shall be deemed a violation of this Code if not
remedied within two (2) hours of the parking. In the event that the court finds
the bicycle was lawfully impounded, the bond shall be forfeited. In the event
that the court fails to find that the City has proven that the bicycle was
lawfully impounded by preponderance of the evidence, the bond shall be
exonerated. (Ord. 1184, 2018)
CHAPTER 5.57
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
SECTION:
5.57.010: Policy
5.57.020: Definitions
5.57.030: Scope
5.57.040: Medical Marijuana Business License
5.57.050: License Fee
5.57.060: Revocation
5.57.070: Rules, Regulations And Inspections
5.57.080: Enforcement
5.57.010: POLICY:
The growth, processing, distribution and possession of marijuana (as defined in
section
9.38.010 of this Code) possess a risk to the public health and safety of the
citizens of the City of Warr Acres. In light of the enactment of State Question
788 by a majority of voters in the State of Oklahoma, the City of Warr Acres
will permit the commercial growth, processing and sale of medical marijuana
subject first to the terms of 63 Oklahoma Statutes sections 420A to 426 and
also subject to the restrictions established herein. It is the policy of the
City to authorize only that which is permissible at State law and nothing
contained herein shall be interpreted as expanding any right or privilege
related to the growth, processing or sale of medical marijuana beyond what is
authorized at State law. To the extent that any right or privilege established
by State law is modified or revoked through subsequent legislative enactment by
the State Legislature, the provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted as
incorporating in such subsequent enactment. (Ord. 1188, 2018)
5.57.020: DEFINITIONS:
All definitions contained in the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
title 63, section 2-101 et seq., as may be amended in the future, are hereby
incorporated by reference. References to retail establishments contained in
this chapter shall be a reference to those businesses or individuals that have
been issued a dispensary license pursuant to 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 421A.
References to commercial growers shall be a reference to those businesses or
individuals that have been issued a commercial grower license pursuant to 63
Oklahoma Statutes section 422A. References to processors shall be a reference
to those businesses or individuals that have been issued a processing license
pursuant to 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 423A. References to transporters shall
be a reference to those businesses or individuals that have been issued a
transportation license pursuant to 63 Oklahoma Statutes section 424A. Any
business operating with a State issued license or operating in a manner not in
compliance with said license shall be deemed out of compliance with this Code
and be subject to a criminal fine as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1188,
2018)
5.57.030: SCOPE:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed as expanding the rights of
retail establishments, commercial growers, processors or transporters to engage
in activities which would otherwise be deemed unlawful under State law. (Ord.
1188, 2018)
5.57.040: MEDICAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS LICENSE:
City of Warr Acres may issue a business license to any business wishing to
operate as a retail establishment, commercial grower, processor and/or
transporter subject to the following conditions:
A.   Possession of a City business license shall not authorize the license
holder to engage in activities that are not authorized for their license(s)
that the business has been issued by the State.
B.   Possession of a City business license authorizes the holder to engage in
said business only in a zoning district where the commercial activity is
explicitly authorized as a permitted use or use subject to review under the
Warr Acres Zoning Code.
C.   City issued licenses under this chapter are non-transferable.
D.   Applicants for a business license must provide evidence of a current State
license or proof that the applicant's application for a State issued license is
pending. City may issue conditional licenses to applicants if the State
requires proof of satisfaction of local requirements. Such conditional licenses
shall not authorize the holder to engage in any commercial activities related
to the growth, processing, transportation or retail sale of medical marijuana
until such time as the applicant has been issued a State license.
E.   City issued licenses are deemed revoked to the extent the license holder's
State issued license is invalidated or otherwise revoked due to any State
legislative enactment or as a result of any administrative process by the State
administrative agency tasked with enforcement of the State licenses. To the
extent a City-license holder's State-license is suspended or otherwise
invalidated for a temporary period of time, the City issued license shall also
be deemed suspended. City may suspend or revoke any City issued license as
provided herein.
F.   Applicants for a City business license for a medical marijuana business
shall submit the following to the City:
   1.   State-issued identification evidencing that the applicant is twenty
five (25) years of age or older;
   2.   Proof of residency in the State of Oklahoma;
   3.   A list of all members, managers, and board members with proof that all
are Oklahoma residents. Applicant may show ownership of non-Oklahoma residents,
but that percentage ownership may not exceed twenty five percent (25%). All
applicants must disclose all ownership;
   4.   Proof that the applicant is registered to conduct business in the State
of Oklahoma;
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be effective for one year.
Applications for renewal shall include all information which is required for
first time applicants. (Ord. 1188, 2018)
5.57.050: LICENSE FEE:
The application fee for all applications shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1188, 2018)
5.57.060: REVOCATION:
All City issued licenses issued to a medical marijuana business will be deemed
revoked if the business' State issued license is revoked. All City issued
licenses issued to a medical marijuana business will be deemed suspended if the
business' State issued license is suspended. City may revoke a City issued
license upon establishment by preponderance of the evidence that the license
holder has engaged in either a commercial transaction which is not authorized
under State law for the State-license the business holds and/or that a
violation of title 9 of this Code has occurred by an employee, member, manager
or board member of the entity at its place of business inside the City limits.
Such revocations shall be considered by the City Council at a public meeting
with the license holder being given at least seven (7) calendar days advance
notice that the hearing will occur and will be given an opportunity to be heard
before the City Council votes on revocation. Notice shall be deemed to have
been given if such notice is posted at the address where the business operates
in the City limits and/or by mailing to the address listed of record with the
City. A mailing to the license holder will be deemed delivered three (3) days
after the mailing is delivered to the United States Postal Service. (Ord. 1188,
2018)
5.57.070: RULES, REGULATIONS AND INSPECTIONS:
To protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Warr Acres, the
City shall have the right to enter onto a City-license holders' property to
engage in an inspection of the license holders' records for the purpose of
ensuring that the applicant is compliant with all State Statutes and
regulations as well as this Code. Such inspection shall occur during the hours
in which the business is legally authorized to operate under State law and
regulations. (Ord. 1188, 2018)
5.57.080: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Fine For Violation: Any person operating a business in violation of this
chapter may be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
day. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 1188, 2018)
TITLE 6
ANIMALS 1
Animal Control Department   6.04
Vicious And Dangerous Animals   6.05
Control Of Animals   6.08
Swine And Goats   6.10
Animal Adoption   6.12
Exotic Wildlife Abatement   6.13
 
Notes
1 1. 4 OS § 41 et seq.; 11 OS § 656.
CHAPTER 6.04
ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6.04.010: Appointment; Duties And Responsibilities
6.04.060: Qualifications
6.04.120: Incorporation Of Additional Provisions
6.04.150: Authority To Enforce Rules
6.04.170: Issuance Of Citations
6.04.180: Possession; Training Required For Equipment
6.04.190: Reports Of Shooting
6.04.010: APPOINTMENT; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A.   The city shall have an animal control officer who is an employee of the
city under the administrative supervision of the police department.
B.   The animal control officer shall have and possess such duties and
responsibilities and such powers as granted by this chapter, and such
additional powers and authority as may be otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 770
§1, 1995: Ord. 372, 1974)
6.04.060: QUALIFICATIONS:
The position of animal control officer shall be filled by any qualified
applicant, and the appointment shall be based on qualification, training and
experience in the handling of animals, and other essential qualifications
regarding supervisory ability, care and maintenance of records and equipment,
and such other guidelines established by the city council in the care, handling
and humane treatment of animals. (Ord. 372 §1(B), 1974)
6.04.120: INCORPORATION OF ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
All ordinances establishing the control of animals, fees, licensing,
vaccination, violation and penalty shall be established by separate ordinance,
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. (Ord. 372 §2(B), 1974)
6.04.150: AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE RULES:
The animal control officer is authorized to enforce rules and regulations as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and other laws and
policies approved by the council for the enforcement and administration of such
ordinances, law and policy. (Ord. 770 §2, 1995: Ord. 407 §1, 1976: Ord. 372 §
(B), 1974)
6.04.170: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS:
The animal control officer shall have the power to issue citations for
violations of ordinances relating to animal control. (Ord. 770 §3, 1995: Ord.
407 §1, 1976: Ord. 372 §3(D), 1974)
6.04.180: POSSESSION; TRAINING REQUIRED FOR EQUIPMENT:
The animal control officer may have in his possession for the uses and purposes
in carrying out the ordinances and laws of the city, the items set out in
subsections A through D of this section. It is required that all employees of
this department be fully trained and periodically tested in the use of all
authorized equipment consistent with current administrative policy.
A.   One 12-gauge shotgun and ammunition of a type approved by the police chief
and the police department range master.
B.   Tranquilizer guns with assorted darts and propellants.
C.   Tools essential to the humane treatment and control of offending animals,
such as traps, airtight containers, come-alongs, leashes, muzzles, shackles,
prods and other devices in this category of tools normally used to control
animals.
D.   One .22 caliber long rifle to be used as a varmint weapon. (Ord. 999 §1,
2004: Ord. 699 §§1, 2, 1990)
6.04.190: REPORTS OF SHOOTING:
The discharge of any device capable of inflicting injury or death to either
humans or animals, or capable of causing property damage, by the animal control
officer, will be documented in a report and placed on file in the office of the
mayor, with a copy of the report provided to the chief of police. (Ord. 699 §2,
1990)
CHAPTER 6.05
VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS
SECTION:
6.05.010: Definitions
6.05.020: Keeping Within The City
6.05.030: Procedure For Violation Of This Chapter
6.05.040: Impoundment
6.05.050: Hearing
6.05.060: Determination
6.05.070: Penalty
6.05.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
CONFINED ON THE PREMISES: That condition in which an animal is securely and
physically confined and restrained on and within the premises of the owner by
means of walls, fences, rope, chain, leash or other device of such strength and
size as to physically prevent the animal from leaving the premises, and to
physically prevent the animal from causing physical injury to persons or other
animals which are off the premises on which the confined animal is located.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: An animal that, without provocation, has chased or approached
in either a menacing fashion or in an apparent attitude of attack, or has
attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person or other animal while the
animal alleged to be dangerous is off the premises of the owner or while the
animal is not physically restrained or confined on the premises. Dangerous
animal does not include a police dog while the police dog is being used to
assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their duty.
DISEASED ANIMAL: An animal believed to be infected with a dangerous or
communicable disease.
MENACING FASHION: That an animal would cause any person observing the animal to
reasonably believe that the animal will cause physical injury to persons or
other animals.
OWNER: The owner of an animal and every other person having the care or custody
of or harboring, keeping or maintaining any animal.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: An animal that, without provocation, has killed or caused
physical injury to any person or has killed or caused physical injury to
another animal. Vicious animal does not include a police dog while the police
dog is being used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of
their official duties and where any injury inflicted by the police dog was
reasonably related to the duties being performed.
WITHOUT PROVOCATION: That an animal was not teased, tormented or abused; and
also means where the animal was not protecting its owner or owner's property
from criminal activity by a perpetrator of a crime. (Ord. 743, 1993)
6.05.020: KEEPING WITHIN THE CITY:
The keeping of vicious, dangerous or diseased animals within the city is
declared unlawful except as may be permitted in this chapter. (Ord. 743, 1993)
6.05.030: PROCEDURE FOR VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER:
A.   Any person who witnesses or has personal knowledge that an act or acts
made unlawful by this chapter have been committed may sign a complaint against
the alleged violator.
B.   Any police officer, animal control officer or code enforcement officer who
is employed by the city is authorized to issue a summons and complaint when the
officer personally observes a violation of this chapter.
C.   The complainant must provide a sworn complaint to the officer receiving
the complaint containing the following information:
   1.   Name, address and telephone number of the complainant and other
witnesses to the incident;
   2.   Date, time and location of the incident;
   3.   Description of the animal;
   4.   Name, address and telephone number (if known) of the animal owner;
   5.   A statement that the animal attacked the complainant or some other
person or animal as witnessed by the complainant, or such facts as warrant a
finding that the animal is vicious, dangerous or diseased;
   6.   Other facts and circumstances of the incident. (Ord. 743, 1993)
6.05.040: IMPOUNDMENT:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer upon receipt of a verified
complaint as outlined in section
6.05.030 of this chapter to cause the animal involved to be impounded pending a
determination as required by this chapter. Any and all expenses associated with
the impounding including shelter, food, handling and veterinary care shall be
borne by the owner of such animal during the period of impoundment. (Ord. 743,
1993)
6.05.050: HEARING:
The municipal judge, in addition to any hearings which may be required on
criminal charges, shall hold a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of
impoundment to determine if the animal is vicious, dangerous or diseased as
defined by this code. The hearing may be held in conjunction with any criminal
proceedings if so ordered by the judge, but in no event shall this delay the
hearing on determination of viciousness. (Ord. 743, 1993)
6.05.060: DETERMINATION:
The municipal judge shall be empowered to make one of the following
determinations as a result of the hearing:
A.   That the animal is in fact not vicious, dangerous or diseased, in which
event the animal control officer shall cause it to be surrendered to the owner
of the animal, upon payment by the owner of the expenses outlined in section
6.08.050 of this title, and upon compliance with sections
6.08.060 through
6.08.070 of this title;
B.   That the animal is in fact vicious, dangerous or diseased and should be
destroyed;
C.   That the animal is vicious, dangerous or diseased, but that for good cause
shown the animal should not be destroyed, in which event the judge shall order
one of the following:
   1.   That the animal be immediately removed from the corporate limits of
Warr Acres and not to ever again be allowed within the corporate limits of Warr
Acres, and that the owner pay all fees required by section
6.08.050 of this title,
   2.   That the owner be allowed to maintain the vicious animal within the
corporate limits of Warr Acres under the following conditions:
      a.   Fees; Compliance: Payment of all fees required by section
6.08.050 of this title and compliance with sections
6.08.060 through
6.08.070 of this title,
      b.   Leash And Muzzle: No person shall permit an animal covered by this
section to go outside its kennel or pen unless such animal is securely leashed
with a leash no longer than four feet (4') in length. No person shall permit
such animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its
kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such animal
may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc.
In addition, all animals on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled
by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such animal from biting persons or
other animals,
      c.   Confinement: All animals covered by this section shall be securely
confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except
when leashed and muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must
have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used
to confine such animal must be locked with a key or combination lock when such
animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or
floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded
in the ground no less than two feet (2'). All structures erected to house such
animals must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All
such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated, and kept in a clean
and sanitary condition,
      d.   Confinement Indoors: No animal covered by this section may be kept
on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the
animal to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal
may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen
doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure,
      e.   Signs: All owners, keepers or harborers of animals covered by this
section within the city shall display in a prominent place on their premises a
sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware Of Vicious Animal".
In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of
such animal;
D.   All owners whose animal is adjudged to be vicious at the hearing and
sentence is imposed by the municipal judge pursuant to this section, upon
written demand, may appeal the judge's decision within ten (10) days to the
district court of the county, where a trial in the district court shall be
accorded them de novo. (Ord. 743, 1993)
6.05.070: PENALTY:
Any person pleading no contest, guilty or found guilty by the municipal court
of an offense in violation of this chapter shall pay a fine which shall be an
amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court costs. (Ord.
743, 1993)
CHAPTER 6.08
CONTROL OF ANIMALS 1
SECTION:
6.08.010: Definitions
6.08.020: Enforcement Authority
6.08.030: License For Dogs And Cats; Payment Required
6.08.035: Persons Authorized To Dispense City Licenses
6.08.040: License; Expiration; Nontransferable
6.08.050: Fees And Charges Designated
6.08.060: Rabies Vaccination
6.08.070: Quarantine And Control Of Rabid Animals
6.08.080: Disposition Of Impounded Dogs, Cats And Other Animals
6.08.090: Animals Running At Large; Prohibited
6.08.095: Confinement Of Dogs Required
6.08.100: Animals Running At Large; Impoundment
6.08.110: Impoundment Fees; Euthanization Or Disposal
6.08.120: Vicious Or Noisy Animals
6.08.121: Number Of Dogs Or Cats Per Household
6.08.122: Interference With Animal Control Officer
6.08.130: Dead Animals
6.08.140: Cruelty To Animals, Herptiles And Fowl
6.08.150: Right Of Entry
6.08.160: Search Warrant
6.08.170: Probable Cause For Search Warrant
6.08.180: Application For Search Warrant; Issuance
6.08.190: Inspection
6.08.200: Unrelated Information To Be Confidential
6.08.210: Citation For Violations
6.08.220: Procedure For Citation
6.08.230: Service Of Citation
6.08.240: Penalty
 
Notes
  1. A copy of the "Rules And Regulations And Quarantine Of Animals Suspected
1 Of Having Rabies" and the Oklahoma anticruelty statutes may be found on file
  in the office of the city clerk.
6.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed herein:
LARGE ANIMALS: Classified as all such animals, wild or domestic, having hoofed
feet, and all large species of wild animals having pawed feet, not customarily
considered suitable household pets.
LICENSE: To have, to obtain and to hold a license issued by the city.
SMALL ANIMALS: Classified as cats, dogs, skunks, opossums, rats, rabbits,
chickens, geese, reptiles, and all other animals, wild or domestic, of a like
nature and description. (Ord. 382 §11, 1975)
6.08.020: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to
chapter 6.04 of this title, creating the animal control department for the city
and the duties and responsibilities imposed thereby, the animal control officer
or his representative for the city is directed and authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, as follows, and all applicable state laws made a
part of this chapter. (Ord. 382 §2, 1975)
6.08.030: LICENSE FOR DOGS AND CATS; PAYMENT REQUIRED:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person within the city to keep, own,
possess, harbor, or allow to remain in or upon the premises under his or her
control any dog or member of the canine family or any cat or member of the
feline family over four (4) months of age without having paid a license fee as
set forth in this chapter.
B.   All required vaccination and city tags will be attached to all dogs and
cats at all times.
C.   Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction in the municipal
court, be subject to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court
costs. (Ord. 999 §2, 2004: Ord. 692 §1, 1989)
6.08.035: PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO DISPENSE CITY LICENSES:
A city license shall be issued only by the animal control officer or his
designee, the Warr Acres licensed veterinarian or a veterinarian of the owner's
choice, provided such veterinarian is authorized by the city to dispense the
city license. (Ord. 999 §3, 2004)
6.08.040: LICENSE; EXPIRATION; NONTRANSFERABLE:
All licenses shall expire on January 1 of each year, and no license shall be
issued for a period of less than one year. No license shall in any case be
returned or transferred from one person to another person. No free license
shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, for any cause, nor any sum accepted less
than the amount provided in this chapter. (Ord. 382 §3, 1975)
6.08.050: FEES AND CHARGES DESIGNATED:
Fees and charges specifically set forth by this chapter are as follows:
A.   Annual dog or cat license fee, per animal, is five dollars ($5.00) for the
first registration and two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) for each successive and
consecutive annual registration for the same animal. Unless the annual
registration is continuous the charge shall be the same as an initial
registration.
B.   Charges allowed for taking animals into custody for any reason, except
euthanization, are as follows:
 
Type Of Charge                                                 Fee       
Owner releasing an unwanted dog/cat to the animal control     No charge
officer
Pick up; entry or return to pound per animal                  $15.00
Board:                                                         
   Dogs and cats, per day, including day of entry and      7.00
reclamation
   All other animals, per day, including day of entry and  At city's cost
reclamation
Veterinary health check per animal on entry, if required      At city's cost
 
(Ord. 999 §4, 2004: Ord. 836 §1, 1997: Ord. 692 §2, 1989)
6.08.060: RABIES VACCINATION:
No license shall be issued for any dog or cat owned, kept, possessed, harbored
or allowed to remain in and upon the premises of any person under his or her
control unless such dog or cat has first been vaccinated against rabies by a
qualified veterinarian or his designee. As a prerequisite to the issuance of a
dog or cat license, there shall be delivered to the animal control department
or an authorized licensing veterinarian a certificate showing that the animal
has been properly vaccinated against rabies and giving the date and place of
vaccination. Upon presentation of proper evidence and payment of the fee as
provided for in section
6.08.050 of this chapter the animal control department is authorized to issue a
license and metal tag, which tag shall be attached to the collar of the
licensed dog or cat and the removal of the tag shall be an offense and a
violation of this chapter if not immediately replaced with a current issue.
(Ord. 616 §1, 1985)
6.08.070: QUARANTINE AND CONTROL OF RABID ANIMALS:
Pursuant to the authority contained in title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes
annotated 1971, section 1-508, and the policy adopted by the Oklahoma state
board of health (a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein
and made a part of this chapter), the animal control officer or his
representative is directed and authorized to enforce the aforesaid policy in
conjunction and cooperation with the state board of health, and to do all acts
consistent therewith in the quarantine and control of rabid animals, or animals
suspected of being rabid.
A.   Report Of Animal Bite Required: Any person owning, harboring, or keeping
an animal that bites a person and any person bitten by an animal must report
that occurrence to the animal control officer within twenty four (24) hours.
B.   Notification Of Required Confinement And Observation: Upon receiving a
report that a person has been bitten by an animal, an animal control officer
shall issue a notice to the person owning, keeping or harboring the animal
which states that confinement and observation of the animal are required.
C.   Confinement And Observation Of Animal Required: Upon receiving the notice
required, the person owning, harboring, or keeping the animal which in the
preceding ten (10) days has bitten or is suspected of having bitten any person,
shall have the animal immediately placed in confinement for rabies observation.
D.   Method Of Confinement And Observation: Confinement and observation as
required by state law and this section shall be effected by placing the animal
under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days
from the date the person was bitten. In the event of the suspect animal's death
or illness, the person so designated as responsible for the animal shall
immediately make arrangements for the removal and shipment of the animal's head
to the laboratory of the state department of health for examination. In no
event shall the suspect animal be removed from the city limits until released
by the animal control officer or his specifically authorized representative.
E.   Seizure And Impoundment By Animal Control Officer: In the event the person
who owns, harbors or keeps the suspected animal cannot, with due diligence, be
located or notified, or, in the event the person who owns, harbors, or keeps
the suspected animal, refuses or fails to place the animal in confinement as
required by this section after notice to do so has been given, an animal
control officer shall seize and impound the animal and place it in confinement
for the required observation period. The animal control officer shall
thereafter notify the owner or keeper of the animal of the seizure, impoundment
and confinement. If, subsequent to the seizure and impoundment of the animal by
the animal control officer, the owner or keeper of the animal cannot be located
or notified and if the animal remains unclaimed at the expiration of the
confinement period, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter concerning the disposition of
unclaimed, impounded animals.
F.   Euthanasia: In special circumstances, the animal control officer or his
representative may order the euthanasia of an animal and may perform or order
the performance of tests for the diagnosis of rabies. Provided, however, that,
prior to disposing of the animal, the division shall attempt to locate and
notify the owner or keeper of the animal. For purposes of this section,
"special circumstances" shall be defined as those situations involving severe
animal bites upon the head, face, neck or upper extremities, or deep
lacerations, or multiple animal bite wounds inflicted by unimmunized animals.
(Ord. 999 §5, 2004: Ord. 386 §7, 1975)
6.08.080: DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS:
After reasonable efforts have been made to locate and notify the owners of
impounded animals or those persons having control or possession thereof, and
after the expiration of seventy two (72) hours, the animal control officer or
his representative shall be authorized to humanely dispose of the impounded
animals by any of the following measures:
A.   Euthanization in a euthanization chamber as maintained and operated by the
animal control officer or his representative;
B.   Injection of an approved lethal drug; or
C.   Any other humane means which is recommended and approved by the director
of the Oklahoma City Zoo.
D.   In any case, the provisions of the ordinances governing the adoption of
dogs and cats shall be available as an alternative to euthanization. (Ord. 999
§6, 2004: Ord. 458, 1977: Ord. 382 §8, 1975)
6.08.090: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to permit their dog or canine, or any
animal or fowl possessed, kept or harbored by such person, to run at large on
the streets, alleys or public places, or over, across or upon the private
property not under the control of the owner within the city, whether or not a
license fee has been paid. Any person who violates this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) plus
court costs. (Ord. 746 §1, 1994: Ord. 692 §3, 1989)
6.08.095: CONFINEMENT OF DOGS REQUIRED:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, harbors or possesses any dog
to fail to control such dog as required by the provisions of this section.
B.   Every person who owns, possesses or harbors any dog within the city shall
control the dog while on property owned or controlled by him or her. Control
may be accomplished by confinement by means of a substantial fence or similar
enclosure of sufficient strength and height to prevent the dog from escaping
therefrom, or from extending its head through the enclosure so as to constitute
a threat to any person or animal in the area adjoining the enclosure; or by
keeping the dog inside a house or other building. Dogs not confined in this
manner must be controlled by the owner. Control may be accomplished by means of
strict and immediate obedience by the dog to the owner's commands. Control may
also be accomplished by tether or leash which shall consist of a metal chain or
other material of sufficient strength to prevent the dog from escaping from the
property. If the tether or leash is not under the direct physical control of
the individual who owns, possesses or harbors the dog, then it shall be long
enough to permit the dog to have reasonable exercise, but shall not allow the
dog access to public property or to sidewalks or rights of way or to property
owned or leased by persons other than the owner of the animal. Owners choosing
to exert control by means of strict obedience of the dog to the owner's
commands must be present and in the immediate vicinity of the dog and shall be
deemed to have violated this provision if the dog fails to obey the owner's
command and runs at large on the property in defiance of the owner's commands.
C.   Any person who violates this provision shall, upon conviction, be punished
by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 1129,
2012)
6.08.100: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; IMPOUNDMENT:
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his representative to
take up any dog or animal found running at large and confine it in the city
pound or any other place so designated by the mayor for a period of seventy two
(72) hours, during which time the owner shall be notified or the person having
control or possession may redeem the animal upon payment of all required fees.
The animal control officer or his representative shall issue an official
receipt for the amount paid. (Ord. 999 §7, 2004: Ord. 382 §9, 1975)
6.08.110: IMPOUNDMENT FEES; EUTHANIZATION OR DISPOSAL:
The fees received as provided for in section
6.08.100 of this chapter shall be immediately delivered to the city treasurer
and the amount credited to the general fund of the city. In the event the fees
are assessed as a result of taking up any animal or the failure to procure a
license as required, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his
representative to euthanize or dispose of the animal after the expiration of
time as provided in section
6.08.100 of this chapter. If an animal is confined at the city pound or any
other place, the owner shall pay the fee and charges as provided in this
chapter, even though the owner does not repossess the animal. If an animal is
turned over to a licensed veterinarian or animal hospital for any obvious
reason, the owner shall pay all reasonable and necessary fees charged therefor.
(Ord. 382 §9, 1975)
6.08.120: VICIOUS OR NOISY ANIMALS:
A.   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which
habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries or howls to
the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, or in such
manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in the neighborhood who are of
ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are declared to be a public
nuisance.
B.   Whenever any person shall complain to the police department that a dog
which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or a cat which habitually cries or
howls is being kept by any person in the city, the police department shall
notify the owner of such dog or cat that a complaint has been received and that
person should take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the howling, yelping
or crying.
C.   If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping a cat or dog as
set forth in subsection B of this section is ineffective, then a verified
complaint of one citizen may be presented to the police department, alleging
that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or a cat which habitually
cries or howls, is being kept by any person within the city. The police
department shall inform the owner of such dog or cat that the petition has been
received and shall cite the owner of the dog or cat for violation of alleged in
the complaint.
D.   If the municipal court finds the party against whom the complaint is filed
guilty of violating the provisions of subsection B of this section, the court
may impose a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense
and a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second and
subsequent offenses, plus court costs.
E.   In the event of more than one conviction involving the same animal, the
court may, in its disposition and in addition to the fines imposed, order the
animal destroyed in the manner provided by law. The destruction order shall not
be effective until the time for appeal of the conviction shall have lapsed.
Upon appeal being perfected in the appropriate appellate court, the destruction
order shall be stayed until the appeal is resolved. (Ord. 1024 §1, 2006: Ord.
976 §1, 2002: Ord. 744 §§2–6, 1993: Ord. 692 §4, 1989)
6.08.121: NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS PER HOUSEHOLD:
A.   Owning, possessing or harboring more than four (4) dogs or cats, or
combination thereof, in a single household by any person is prohibited.
Exception: This prohibition shall not apply to any duly licensed kennel or
veterinary clinic in the city. Nor shall cats which are duly vaccinated and
licensed as of October 1, 1985, if counting them would exceed the limitation of
licensed pets per household.
B.   Any person found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each day the violation continues as each day's continued violation
of this section shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
(Ord. 1127, 2012)
6.08.122: INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
A.   It shall be an offense for any person to interfere with, hinder, delay or
obstruct in any manner whatsoever any animal control officer in the performance
of his official duties.
B.   Any person found in violation of this section shall, upon conviction in
the municipal court, be subject to a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 1000 §2, 2004: Ord. 616 §1, 1985)
6.08.130: DEAD ANIMALS:
The animal control officer and/or his representative is directed and authorized
to remove all dead animals found upon boulevards, streets, alleys and other
city property, and the animal control officer is authorized to enter upon
private property for the removal of the same, upon request of the owner. It
shall be the duty of any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of any dead
animal to notify the animal control department and to give the location where
the dead animal may be found. Every person who strikes any animal with a
vehicle and injures or kills such animal should notify the animal control
department immediately after the occurrence giving time and place of injury or
death, together with a description of the animal, and the name and address of
the person making the report. (Ord. 382 §12, 1975)
6.08.140: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS, HERPTILES AND FOWL:
Proper care of and treatment of all animals, herptiles and fowl shall be
required. It is unlawful for any person to maltreat, neglect, improperly
confine, fail to act or commit any act which results in cruelty to any animal,
herptile or fowl. Any person violating this section shall upon conviction be
fined a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court costs.
(Ord. 692 §5, 1989)
6.08.150: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Whenever the proper city authority or its authorized agent deems it desirable
to make an inspection of premises in the city, in order to determine the
existence of violations of any provisions of this chapter pertaining to the
health, welfare or safety of the public, the animal control officer or his
representative shall be allowed entrance to the premises for these purposes if
any of the following conditions exist:
A.   Entry is by permission or at the request of the occupant of the premises
or of the person in apparent charge, or
B.   Where an imminent danger to health, welfare or safety exists. (Ord. 382
§14(A), 1975)
6.08.160: SEARCH WARRANT:
If entry is refused or delayed by the occupant or person in apparent charge of
the premises, or if the conditions stated in section
6.08.150 of this chapter do not exist, the animal control officer or his
representative may apply to the proper magistrate for a search warrant to
authorize entry into the designated premises for the purpose of making an
inspection to determine the existence of a violation of any provision of this
chapter pertaining to the health, welfare or safety of the public. (Ord. 382
§14(B), 1975)
6.08.170: PROBABLE CAUSE FOR SEARCH WARRANT:
Probable cause for the purpose of a search warrant issued pursuant to section
6.08.160 of this chapter is that the applicant for the warrant has knowledge of
a violation or knowledge of facts which would indicate a violation of any
provision of this chapter pertaining to health, safety or welfare of the
public, and such applicant has stated the facts upon which his knowledge is
based in the affidavit provided for in section
6.08.160 of this chapter. (Ord. 382 §14(C), 1975)
6.08.180: APPLICATION FOR SEARCH WARRANT; ISSUANCE:
A.   The application for the search warrant shall be signed and sworn to by the
animal control officer or his representative and shall be accompanied by an
affidavit or affidavits containing facts within the personal knowledge of the
affiant or affiants that there is probable cause for the issuance of a search
warrant for certain premises, and that entry therein has been denied or unduly
delayed by the occupant or person in apparent charge.
B.   Thereupon, the proper magistrate may issue a search warrant directed to
the animal control officer or his representative authorizing him to enter and
inspect the premises. The search warrant shall name and describe with
reasonable particularity the place to be inspected, the reason for inspection,
and the name of the applicant on whose written application the warrant was
issued. (Ord. 382 §14(D)(1),(2), 1975)
6.08.190: INSPECTION:
An inspection under the authority of the search warrant shall be made within
fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the issuance, and after the
expiration of the fifteen (15) day period the warrant shall be null and void.
(Ord. 382 §14(D)(3), 1975)
6.08.200: UNRELATED INFORMATION TO BE CONFIDENTIAL:
Information unrelated to inspection obtained by search is confidential, with
the exception that any inspector who gains entrance to premises under the
authority of section
6.08.150 or
6.08.160 of this chapter shall not obtain or furnish evidence for, or testify
to, an offense other than a violation of the standards, rules and regulations
of the city pertaining to particular violations for which he is inspecting,
except with respect to a felony or misdemeanor involving an act of violence
which has been committed in his presence. (Ord. 382 §14(E), 1975)
6.08.210: CITATION FOR VIOLATIONS:
The animal control officer and/or his representative is authorized to advise
the owner and issue a citation to any person or persons within the city for an
offense of this chapter:
A.   Upon a complaint signed by a third party making such complaint; or
B.   Upon his own observation of an ordinance violation; or
C.   Upon probable cause when the cause is supported by proper evidence. (Ord.
408 §1, 1976: Ord. 382 §10(A), 1975)
6.08.220: PROCEDURE FOR CITATION:
In issuing the citation and complaint authorized by section
6.08.210 of this chapter, the animal control officer shall proceed as follows:
A.   He shall prepare a written citation to appear in court, on a citation form
to be provided by the city, which shall contain the name and address of the
cited person, the offense charged, and the date thereof. Such citation shall
state the date when the cited person shall appear in court.
B.   Such cited person shall sign the citation agreeing to appear as directed,
and one copy of the citation shall be delivered to such person, whereupon the
officer may release such cited person from custody.
C.   As soon as practicable, the officer shall verify the citation to appear
and cause the citation to be filed with the clerk of the municipal court,
retaining one copy for the records of the officer. (Ord. 408 §1, 1976: Ord. 382
§10(B), 1975)
6.08.230: SERVICE OF CITATION:
All citations issued shall be served personally upon the person or persons in
violation of this chapter, and the party served and named in the complaint
shall have at least ten (10) days prior to notice for appearance in the
municipal court to answer the complaint. (Ord. 408 §1, 1976: Ord. 382 §10(C),
1975)
6.08.240: PENALTY:
Any person pleading guilty or found guilty by the municipal court of an offense
in violation of this chapter shall be fined as provided in this chapter and
where no penalty is specifically provided, the fine shall be an amount not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 692 §6, 1989)
CHAPTER 6.10
SWINE AND GOATS
SECTION:
6.10.010: Regulations; Exceptions
6.10.010: REGULATIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain or
feed swine or goats within the city, except as specifically provided for in
this section.
B.   The keeping of not more than one Asian potbellied pig or similar small
swine per lot or premises shall be allowed under the following conditions:
   1.   For purposes of this chapter, "potbellied pig" means: Asian potbellied
pigs, Sharpei pigs, Vietnamese, Chinese or Asian pigs, or other similar swine
meeting the provisions of this chapter.
   2.   A potbellied pig shall be a pet that is to be kept for personal
enjoyment and not kept or raised for human consumption.
   3.   A potbellied pig shall be licensed with the city under such conditions
as the animal control division deems appropriate, including, but not limited
to, rabies vaccination, if available, and registry through a bona fide registry
firm.
   4.   A potbellied pig shall not exceed seventy five (75) pounds in weight,
and twenty one inches (21") in height.
   5.   There shall not be more than one potbellied pig more than three (3)
months of age per lot of residence.
   6.   The keeping of a potbellied pig for commercial breeding purposes is
prohibited in the city.
   7.   The premises where a potbellied pig is kept shall be cleaned regularly
and shall be maintained so that noxious odors are controlled.
   8.   Any person who keeps, maintains or harbors a potbellied pig shall keep
it confined on the premises. The confinement shall be accomplished by the
following means:
      a.   A fence or similar enclosure to prevent escape;
      b.   Keeping inside a house or other building;
      c.   Keeping on a leash to prevent escape. (Ord. 742 §1, 1993)
CHAPTER 6.12
ANIMAL ADOPTION
SECTION:
6.12.010: General Policy
6.12.020: Retrieval Of Unlicensed Dogs
6.12.030: Adoption Of Dogs And Cats
6.12.040: Adoption Of Cats (Rep. by Ord. 999 §9, 2004)
6.12.050: Shelter Hours For Adoptions
6.12.060: Holding Animal In Shelter
6.12.010: GENERAL POLICY:
The city's main concerns with respect to adoption of a cat or dog from the
shelter are: a) that the animal be in apparent good health, that all dogs or
cats be immunized against rabies, licensed, spayed or neutered, not vicious by
nature, and b) that the animal will be assured of a good home under the control
of a responsible person. The location of residence of the proposed owner is
immaterial, however, if it is within the city limits, a Warr Acres license will
be required. (Ord. 747 §1, 1994)
6.12.020: RETRIEVAL OF UNLICENSED DOGS:
The city resident owner of a dog that has been impounded and is not currently
licensed may have his pet returned upon payment of all outstanding shelter
charges and upon payment of deposits ensuring rabies immunization and
licensing. A nonresident must pay the shelter charges and have his animal
immunized against rabies if it has not had this treatment within the past
twelve (12) months. (Ord. 747 §2, 1994)
6.12.030: ADOPTION OF DOGS AND CATS:
A.   Qualifications For Adoption:
   1.   Apparent good health;
   2.   Not vicious;
   3.   Immunized;
   4.   Licensed (when place of residence is within the city);
   5.   Spayed or neutered;
   6.   In the case of a licensed dog or cat turned in at the shelter by the
owner of record or his authorized representative, the owner or representative
must give a release in writing for the animal's disposal or adoption;
   7.   In the case of a licensed dog or cat picked up by the animal control
officer as a stray or while running at large, or in response to a complaint,
the animal will not be available for adoption (other qualifications being met)
until the prescribed waiting period of seventy two (72) hours has expired and
the owner of record has failed to claim such animal; or the owner has given
written consent to the adopter for the animal's adoption; or the adopter (after
the waiting period) certifies that his efforts to locate the owner were
unsuccessful;
   8.   In the case of an unlicensed animal picked up by an animal control
officer as a stray or while running at large, or in response to a complaint,
the animal will not be available for adoption (other qualifications being met)
until the prescribed waiting period of seventy two (72) hours has expired and
the owner has failed to claim it.
B.   Adoption Fees: The adopter will be required to pay an adoption deposit as
set by the council. All payments will be paid to the city clerk. From such
deposit, the operating veterinarian shall be paid for any immunization or
spaying or neutering services where required, as well as any licensing fees.
The balance, if any, shall be accounted for according to state law or the
direction of the council. (Ord. 999 §8, 2004: Ord. 747 §3, 1994)
6.12.040: ADOPTION OF CATS:
(Rep. by Ord. 999 §9, 2004)
6.12.050: SHELTER HOURS FOR ADOPTIONS:
The city animal shelter will be open to the public for the claiming or adoption
of animals as follows: Monday through Friday, ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. (Ord. 747 §5, 1994)
6.12.060: HOLDING ANIMAL IN SHELTER:
An animal considered by the control officer to be suitable for adoption may be
held in the shelter for seven (7) calendar days following the mandatory
retention period if not claimed by the owner during the retention period. (Ord.
747 §6, 1994)
CHAPTER 6.13
EXOTIC WILDLIFE ABATEMENT
SECTION:
6.13.010: Short Title
6.13.020: Citation Of Authorities
6.13.030: Legislative Findings, Purpose And Intent
6.13.040: Definitions
6.13.050: Public Nuisance
6.13.060: Violations And Penalties
6.13.070: Registration Required
6.13.080: Exemptions
6.13.090: This Chapter Not Exclusive Legal Remedy
6.13.100: Running At Large
6.13.110: Reserved
6.13.120: Impoundment
6.13.130: List Of Institutions Qualified To Impound
6.13.140: Reserved
6.13.150: Procedure For Abatement Of Public Nuisances
6.13.160: Reserved
6.13.170: Enforcement Of This Chapter
6.13.180: Failure To Appear In Response To Citation
6.13.190: Right Of Entry
6.13.010: SHORT TITLE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WARR
ACRES EXOTIC WILDLIFE ABATEMENT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.020: CITATION OF AUTHORITIES:
The provisions of this chapter are being enacted pursuant to the authority of
11 Oklahoma Statutes section 22-121 and the authority of 50 Oklahoma Statutes
sections 16 and 17. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.030: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A.   The council hereby makes the following findings:
   1.   That "exotic wildlife", as defined in this chapter, when kept or
harbored within the corporate limits of the city of Warr Acres ("the city"),
poses a serious threat to the health, safety and/or general welfare of the
residents of this community by virtue of the physical attributes, natural
behaviors, habits, modes of life, and/or natural instincts of such animals; and
   2.   That exotic wildlife poses a serious threat to the health, safety and/
or welfare of the residents of the city because such animals, due to the
characteristics of their species, are incapable of being domesticated and
because the proper and safe keeping of such animals requires the exercise of
professional art, force, and/or skill; and
   3.   That keeping or harboring of exotic wildlife within the city, outside
of control by persons or organizations listed in section
6.13.080 of this chapter, can and often does render certain residents of this
community insecure in their daily lives and fearful for their health, safety
and/or general welfare and is an unwarranted and unnecessary intrusion into the
lives of such residents; and
   4.   That numerous incidents have been documented in other cities around the
United States and the world of exotic wildlife getting out of control and
killing, maiming, or injuring human beings; and
   5.   That even when in a juvenile stage of life, exotic wildlife can
seriously injure human beings, especially children, and can kill or seriously
injure animals such as domestic dogs, cats, and/or birds being kept by humans
as pets; and
   6.   That certain exotic wildlife, such as nonhuman primates, poses a threat
of disease to human beings due to their close biological relationship with
humans; and
   7.   That based upon the foregoing findings, it is clear that exotic
wildlife poses a serious hazard to the public health, safety and/or general
welfare of the citizens of this community and that such wildlife must be
prohibited outside the control of those persons or organizations listed in
section
6.13.080 of this chapter.
B.   Based upon the foregoing findings, as set forth in subsections A1 through
A7, inclusive, of this section, council states that the public purposes and the
intent of the provisions of this chapter are to legally prevent the keeping or
harboring of exotic wildlife within the city, to summarily impound exotic
wildlife within the city under certain circumstances, and, if necessary, to
abate by civil action in district court the keeping or harboring of exotic
wildlife within the city. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.040: DEFINITIONS:
A.   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ANIMAL: A member of the animal kingdom.
   ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT: The Warr Acres animal control department.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The person appointed and designated by the mayor or
police chief as the director of the animal welfare department.
   EXOTIC WILDLIFE: Any of the following animals:
   1.   A lion, tiger, leopard, panther, cougar, bobcat, ocelot, cheetah,
margay, mountain lion, lynx, jaguar, jaguarundi, or any and all other felines
(family Felidae), except the domestic cat (species Felis domesticus);
   2.   A grizzly bear, black bear, or any and all other bears (family
Ursidae);
   3.   A wolf, coyote, jackal, hyena, or any and all other canines (family
Canidae), except the domestic dog (species Canis familiaris) or the fox;
   4.   Any and all venomous reptiles (venomous members of the class Reptilia),
including, without limitation, Gila monsters (species Heloderma suspectum),
beaded lizards (species Heloderma horridum), and venomous snakes (venomous
members of the suborder Serpentes);
   5.   Any anaconda (species Eunectes murinus);
   6.   Any and all crocodiles, caimans, or alligators (family Crocodilia);
provided, alligators kept in a secure container by a currently established
commercial business on commercially zoned land pursuant to a state commercial
breeder's license shall be excluded from this definition;
   7.   Gorillas, orangutans, baboons, macaques or chimpanzees; or any nonhuman
primate (order Primata) that is not licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter; or any nonhuman primate (order Primata) that tests positive for
tuberculosis or herpes B; provided, macaques that were kept or harbored within
the city limits prior to the effective date hereof, and that are duly licensed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be excluded from this
definition;
   8.   Cassowaries (genus Casuarius); or
   9.   Any crossbreed or hybrid of any two (2) animals defined as "exotic
wildlife" in subsections A1 through A8, inclusive, of this section.
Provided, exotic wildlife shall not include native wildlife that is living in
the wild and is not owned or possessed or intentionally being kept by any
person.
   NATIVE WILDLIFE: Any and all species of wildlife that are indigenous to or
occur naturally within the state of Oklahoma.
B.   The mayor, the police chief and the animal control officer shall have no
power to add animals to the definition of "exotic wildlife" as set forth above,
and only the animals specified above shall be considered exotic wildlife for
purposes of this chapter; provided, however, the mayor or police chief may
recommend to the council of the city that animals be added to the definition of
"exotic wildlife" as specified above if any mammal, reptile, bird, or other
animal is found to pose a serious threat to the public health, safety and/or
general welfare of the residents of the city; provided, further, no such
additions shall be made by council except upon public notice and public hearing
as otherwise required for the formal adoption of a city ordinance. (Ord. 999
§10, 2004)
6.13.050: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Keeping or harboring exotic wildlife declared a public nuisance; use of land
for keeping or harboring exotic wildlife declared a public nuisance; keeping or
harboring exotic wildlife prohibited; use of land for keeping or harboring
exotic wildlife prohibited.
A.   The keeping or harboring of exotic wildlife within the corporate limits of
the city is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance per se.
B.   The use of any land within the corporate limits of the city to keep or
harbor exotic wildlife is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance per
se.
C.   The keeping or harboring of exotic wildlife within the corporate limits of
the city is hereby prohibited.
D.   The use of any land within the corporate limits of the city to keep or
harbor exotic wildlife is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.060: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A.   Any person found keeping or harboring exotic wildlife in violation of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and
costs. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense and
shall be subject to a separate fine and costs as provided herein.
B.   Any person who permits or allows any land owned or leased by him/her to be
used for keeping or harboring any exotic wildlife in violation of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and costs. Each
day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be
subject to a separate fine and costs as provided herein. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.070: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
A.   Any person keeping or harboring exotic wildlife within the city on the
effective date hereof shall register with the animal control department by no
later than July 1, 2005. Such registration shall include the name, address, and
telephone number of the person keeping or harboring such wildlife, a list of
all such animals being kept or harbored, and a description of the location or
locations where and the conditions under which such animals are being kept or
harbored. The registration shall also include photographs sufficient to
demonstrate to the superintendent that such animals are being adequately
restrained. The registration shall also include the name and address of all
owners or then current lessees of any land upon which such animals are being
kept or harbored.
B.   Any person keeping or harboring exotic wildlife within the city at the
time this chapter becomes effective shall remove all such wildlife from the
city by not later than July 1, 2005.
C.   Any person who fails to register, as required by subsection A of this
section, or who fails to remove from the city any exotic wildlife being kept or
harbored by him or her, as required by subsection B of this section, shall be
deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and costs. Each day a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be subject to
a separate fine and costs as provided herein.
D.   Any person who permits or allows land owned or leased by him/her to be
used for the keeping or harboring of any exotic wildlife in violation of
subsection C of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00), and costs. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense and shall be subject to a separate fine and costs as provided
herein. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.080: EXEMPTIONS:
The following persons or organizations shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:
A.   The Warr Acres animal control department;
B.   Any circus appearing in the city of Warr Acres for less than thirty (30)
days;
C.   Any agency or official of the federal, state or local government acting in
an official capacity;
D.   A licensed veterinarian while providing treatment for exotic wildlife;
E.   A duly licensed and authorized research facility, including, without
limitation, a university or college research facility; and
F.   Nature parks or centers professionally qualified to handle exotic animals
when presenting educational programs or performing other public services within
the city. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.090: THIS CHAPTER NOT EXCLUSIVE LEGAL REMEDY:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the filing and
prosecution of any other criminal charges and/or any other civil actions
allowed by law or to prohibit the allowance of any other legal remedies allowed
by law. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.100: RUNNING AT LARGE:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person keeping or harboring any lion, tiger,
leopard, panther, cougar, bobcat, ocelot, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx,
jaguar, or jaguarundi pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to allow such
animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the city.
B.   Any person violating the provisions of subsection A of this section shall
be deemed guilty of an offense. Each day such offense occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
C.   The first violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute an
offense, and any person convicted of such first offense shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus costs. The second and
any subsequent violations of the provisions of this section shall also
constitute an offense, and any person convicted of any such second or
subsequent offense or offenses shall be subject to a fine not exceeding seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus costs. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.110: RESERVED:
(Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.120: IMPOUNDMENT:
A.   If at any time a particular animal defined in this chapter as "exotic
wildlife" poses an imminent hazard to public health or safety by reason of its
running at large, being diseased, or being inadequately restrained by the
person keeping or harboring it, the animal control officer is authorized to
summarily impound the animal to a shelter designated by the animal control
officer and approved by the police chief and to therein confine the animal in a
humane manner; provided, prior to seizure and impoundment hereunder of animals
that are diseased or inadequately restrained, the animal control officer shall
obtain a search warrant from the court authorizing such seizure and
impoundment, which search warrant, if issued, shall be based on facts or
circumstances demonstrating that there is probable or reasonable cause to
believe that diseased or inadequately restrained wildlife exists and is present
on particular property; provided, further, no such search warrant shall be
required if immediate seizure and impoundment of a diseased or inadequately
restrained animal is necessary due to an emergency that threatens the public
health or safety.
B.   The owner of any exotic wildlife summarily impounded pursuant to
subsection A of this section shall be given written notice of such impoundment
within seventy two (72) hours after the impoundment. Notice shall be given by
personal delivery to the owner or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the last known address of such owner; provided, if the identity of the owner
is unknown and cannot be reasonably ascertained, or if the whereabouts or
mailing address of the owner is unknown and cannot reasonably be ascertained,
notice may be given by publication, one time, in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city. The notice shall state that such animal or animals
have been summarily impounded and shall describe the circumstances surrounding
the impoundment. The notice shall also state that the owner has only a
specified period of time within which to reclaim such animal and that such
animal shall be disposed of by the animal control officer if not timely
reclaimed, as provided by subsection C of this section.
C.   The owner of any exotic wildlife summarily impounded pursuant to
subsection A of this section may reclaim the animal within five (5) working
days from the date of the notice required by subsection B of this section;
provided, such reclamation shall be conditioned upon an adequate showing by the
owner that the animal will be kept at a lawful location, upon an adequate
showing that a diseased animal will be provided all necessary veterinary care,
upon a showing that the animal will be adequately restrained and upon the
payment of all impoundment, custody, veterinary fees and/or other costs related
to the impoundment, keeping and/or care of such animal, as determined by the
police chief or his/her designee.
D.   In the event any exotic wildlife summarily impounded pursuant to
subsection A of this section is not reclaimed by the owner thereof within five
(5) working days after the date of the notice required by subsection B of this
section, such animal shall be deemed to have been abandoned by its owner. Upon
such abandonment, the animal control officer shall have the authority and
option to remove the animal from the shelter and place the animal with a duly
licensed wildlife refuge, sanctuary, habitat or area or with a qualified person
or institution that can provide assurance that the animal will be properly
protected and cared for, with such placement to be approved by the mayor, or to
humanely dispose of said animal, with such disposal to be approved by the
mayor.
E.   For purposes of this section, the term "inadequately restrained" shall
mean and refer to a mode or method of keeping or harboring exotic wildlife that
may not be sufficient to prevent such wildlife from escaping captivity and/or
threatening humans, domestic animals or livestock. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.130: LIST OF INSTITUTIONS QUALIFIED TO IMPOUND:
The animal control officer is hereby directed to prepare a list of available
institutions with the means, knowledge, training and facilities to capture,
keep, harbor, board and dispose of any exotic wildlife that may be impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such list shall be prepared with
the advice and concurrence of the executive director/CEO of the Oklahoma City
zoological park and shall be approved by the mayor. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.140: RESERVED:
(Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.150: PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:
To abate the public nuisances declared by this chapter, the mayor or his/her
designee, and the municipal counselor or his/her designee, acting on behalf of
the city of Warr Acres, shall have the option to bring a civil action in
district court as authorized by 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 17. The following
procedures shall be adhered to:
A.   Before a civil action for abatement of a public nuisance is filed in
district court, as authorized by 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 17 and the
provisions of this section, the mayor or his/her designee, on behalf of the
city, shall serve the owner and/or keeper of any exotic wildlife and the owner
and/or lessee of record, if any, of any land upon which such exotic wildlife is
being kept or harbored, with a written statement demanding that such persons
immediately cause the removal of such wildlife from such land and from the
corporate limits of the city.
B.   The written statement to the owner and/or keeper of any exotic wildlife
and to the owner and/or lessee of record, if any, of any land where such
wildlife is being kept or harbored, as required by subsection A of this
section, shall contain the following information:
   1.   A statement that certain exotic wildlife is being kept or harbored on
certain land within the city, with such wildlife being identified and such land
being identified by a street address and/or legal description sufficient for
the owner and/or keeper of the exotic wildlife and the owner and/or lessee of
record of the land to locate the property on which the exotic wildlife is
located; and
   2.   A statement that the keeping or harboring of exotic wildlife within the
city has been declared a public nuisance per se pursuant to this chapter and is
in violation of this chapter; and
   3.   A statement that the use of any land within the city to keep or harbor
exotic wildlife has been declared a public nuisance per se pursuant to this
chapter and is in violation of this chapter; and
   4.   A statement ordering the owner and/or keeper of such wildlife, and the
owner and/or lessee of record, if any, of the land on which such wildlife is
being kept, to immediately abate the public nuisance and to immediately remove
the exotic wildlife permanently from such land and from the corporate limits of
the city.
C.   Service of the written statement required by this section shall be by
personal delivery to the owner and/or keeper of the exotic wildlife, and to the
owner and/or lessee of record, if any, of such land, or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of such owner and/or keeper
and landowner and/or lessee of record. Proof of such personal delivery or
certified mailing shall be kept in the regularly maintained files of the city.
If service of the written statement cannot be made by personal delivery or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, service of said statement shall be by
posting a copy of the statement on the property used for keeping or harboring
the exotic wildlife and/or by publication, as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes
section 1-102(8), once at least ten (10) days prior to any action by the city
pursuant to the provisions of this section or as otherwise allowed by law.
D.   If the order stated in the written statement required by subsection B4 of
this section is not complied with in full by the deadline set forth therein,
the mayor or his/her designee, and/or the municipal counselor or his/her
designee, in the name of the city, are hereby authorized to bring a civil
action in district court pursuant to 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 17 to abate a
public nuisance per se against any owner and/or keeper of such wildlife and/or
against any owner and/or lessee of record of any land being used for the
keeping or harboring of such wildlife. Said city officers are hereby further
authorized to seek any legal remedies in such civil action as may be allowed by
law.
E.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the mayor or his/her
designee, and/or the municipal counselor or his/her designee, in the name of
the city, are hereby authorized to assert a civil action in district court,
pursuant to 50 Oklahoma Statutes section 17, for abatement of exotic wildlife
as a public nuisance per se as a counterclaim against any person or persons
challenging the validity or applicability of this chapter without first giving
the notice otherwise required by subsections A through C, inclusive, of this
section. In such counterclaim said city officers may seek any legal remedies as
may be allowed by law in a civil action pursuant to 50 Oklahoma Statutes
section 17 for abatement of a public nuisance. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.160: RESERVED:
(Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.170: ENFORCEMENT OF THIS CHAPTER:
A.   The animal control officer, or his representative, are authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. In carrying out such duties, an animal
control officer may issue a citation to any violator to appear in municipal
court, in compliance with the provisions of 11 Oklahoma Statutes sections 27-
117 and 27-117.1.
B.   In issuing a citation, the animal control officer shall proceed as
follows:
   1.   The officer shall prepare a written citation to appear in municipal
court containing the name and address of the cited person, the nature, location
and date of the alleged offense, and the time and date of the municipal court
appearance. Unless the person requests an earlier date, the time specified in
the citation to appear shall be at least five (5) days after the issuance of
the citation.
   2.   The citation, and any copies thereof, shall be signed by the cited
person and one signed copy thereof shall be given to him.
   3.   The officer shall thereupon release the cited person from custody.
   4.   The officer shall file one copy of the citation with the municipal
court within three (3) days after issuing the citation. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
6.13.180: FAILURE TO APPEAR IN RESPONSE TO CITATION:
If a person fails to appear in response to a citation issued pursuant to this
chapter, a warrant for his arrest shall be issued. Any person who wilfully
fails to appear in response to a citation is guilty of an offense. (Ord. 999
§10, 2004)
6.13.190: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
For the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
the animal control officer shall have authority to enter upon private premises
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, provided such
entry is made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 999 §10, 2004)
TITLE 7
RESERVED
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Nuisances   8.04
Garbage And Refuse   8.08
Human Waste Disposal   8.12
Air Pollution Control   8.16
Fireworks   8.20
Noise   8.24
Public Meetings   8.28
Parks   8.30
Dilapidated Buildings   8.40
Smoke And Vape Free City   8.45
CHAPTER 8.04
NUISANCES 1
SECTION:
8.04.010: Designation
8.04.020: Owner Of Property Deemed Responsible For Offense
8.04.030: Abatement Procedures
8.04.060: Failure To Comply With Abatement Notice
8.04.090: Health Hazard
8.04.100: Dumping Of Refuse Matter
8.04.101: Littering Unlawful
8.04.102: Accumulated Litter Carried From Occupied Premises
8.04.110: Emission Of Odors, Fumes, Dust Or Smoke
8.04.120: Dumping Of Raw Sewage
8.04.130: Health Department Area Of Jurisdiction
8.04.140: Penalty
8.04.150: Graffiti
8.04.150.1: Short Title
8.04.150.2: Legislative Findings
8.04.150.3: Purpose And Intent
8.04.150.4: Definitions
8.04.150.5: Declaration Of Public Nuisance
8.04.150.6: Prohibited
8.04.150.7: Allowing Graffiti To Remain On Private Property
8.04.150.8: Removal Of Graffiti From Private Property
8.04.160: Dumpsters And Portable Storage Units
8.04.160.1: Definitions
8.04.160.2: Designation
8.04.160.3: Permit Required
8.04.160.4: Abatement
8.04.160.5: Violations; Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. 50 OS; 63 OS § 1-1011 et seq.
8.04.010: DESIGNATION:
It is unlawful for the owner of any lot or piece of property or ground in the
city to permit or suffer any conditions to exist on said property which
conditions would cause the same to become detrimental to health, benefit,
welfare and safety of the public and the community, or a hazard to traffic, or
which creates a fire hazard to the danger of property, which conditions would
constitute a nuisance. The following conditions are declared to be nuisances:
A.   The suffering or permitting of trash, chemical or liquid waste, runoff or
ponding, putrid substances, either animal or vegetable, to accumulate on said
property so as to cause the same to emit offensive or noxious odors therefrom,
to attract or to serve as a haven for rodents, vermin and stray animals, or to
create a health, safety, fire or traffic hazard. For the purposes of this
chapter and section, the term "trash" shall mean any refuse, litter, ashes,
leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal, or waste, or
matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded, or abandoned, or
any dilapidated building materials, toys or miscellaneous household or garden
items between the street and building limit line unless behind a sightproof
fence at or behind property line.
B.   The permitting or suffering of any lot, yard, parkway or sidewalk, or the
space abutting thereon, to the center of the street or to the center of the
alley, which is owned, occupied or controlled by any person who is the owner,
occupant, or agent of the owner, to become covered or overgrown with weeds or
grass or other injurious growth or accumulating so as to become in a condition
which is injurious to the health, welfare and safety to the public and
community or which creates a fire or traffic hazard to the same. For the
purposes of this chapter and section, the term "weed" shall mean to include,
but not be limited to, poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac and all
vegetation at any state of maturity which: 1) exceeds twelve inches (12") in
height, except healthy trees, shrubs, or produce for human consumption grown in
a tended and cultivated garden, unless such trees and shrubbery by their
density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare
and safety of the public and community, or a hazard to traffic or created a
fire hazard to property, or otherwise interfere with the mowing of said weeds;
2) regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or the
accumulation of refuse or trash; 3) harbors rodents, vermin or pests; 4) gives
off unpleasant or noxious odors; 5) constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or 6)
is dead or diseased.
C.   The suffering or permitting of any cellar, stable, henhouse, dog kennel,
or any place where any animals are kept or any water closet or privy vault
thereon to become in such a condition as to emit offensive odors or to be
injurious or dangerous to the health of the neighborhood.
D.   The excavating, dredging, grading, regrading, landfilling, berming, diking
or other manmade disturbing changes to improved or unimproved real property
which, by such actions, will increase or tend to increase the erosion of soil
and movement of sedimentation into, onto or through the streets, gutters, catch
basins, culverts, drainage channels or upon adjoining or neighboring property
interfering with circumstances which may result in injury to persons or
property; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the following
activities:
   1.   Agricultural or farming operations which constitute the principal use
of the land;
   2.   Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens, individual home
landscaping, customary and incidental repairs and maintenance work;
   3.   Routine maintenance or repair work on public or private roads, utility
easements and rights of way;
   4.   Emergency changes made on public or private property which are
necessary for the preservation of life, health or property;
   5.   An individual building lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less which is
undergoing the development or redevelopment process as a single unit.
E.   The suffering or permitting of dilapidated, uncared for, discarded or
abandoned building materials, toys, miscellaneous household or garden items, or
automotive or mechanical parts on any lot, yard, driveway, sidewalk, or porch,
patio or courtyard unless behind a sightproof fence at or behind the property
line.
F.   Allowing the collection or storage of used or useless tires outside the
confines of any structure except under the following conditions:
   1.   On a combustible surface the tires shall be in a completely enclosed
metal trailer elevated a minimum of eighteen inches (18") aboveground; or
   2.   On a noncombustible surface, tires shall be stored in an enclosed
trailer.
G.   Allowing the display for the purpose of selling new or used tires to
exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor space of the business. (Ord. 1071
§1, 2009: Ord. 793 §1, 1996: Ord. 780 §1, 1996: Ord. 663 §1, 1987: Ord. 562 §1,
1983: Ord. 529 §1, 1982: Ord. 417 §1, 1976: prior code §12-9)
8.04.020: OWNER OF PROPERTY DEEMED RESPONSIBLE FOR OFFENSE:
Any person who is the owner of any lot or piece of ground or property within
the city who suffers or permits conditions to prevail thereon so as to become a
nuisance in the manner set forth in section
8.04.010 of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense. For the purpose of this
chapter and section, the term "owner" means the owner of record of the property
in question as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer,
except where a new owner of record can be determined by the production of
current records on file with the county clerk's office showing a new owner for
the property who has not been entered on the current tax rolls. (Ord. 663 §1,
1987: Ord. 417 §1, 1976: prior code §12-10)
8.04.030: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
A.   The city council may cause property within the municipal limits having
conditions constituting a nuisance thereon, as defined in section
8.04.010 of this chapter, abated or removed, including the cleaning of trash
and the cutting or mowing of weeds or grass, in accordance with the following
procedure:
   1.   At least ten (10) days' notice shall be given to the owner of the
property by mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the
county treasurer's office before the city council holds a hearing or takes
action. The notice shall order the property owner to abate or remove the
nuisance, clean the property of trash or to cut or mow the grass on the
property, as appropriate, and the notice shall further state that unless such
work is performed within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the work
shall be done by the city and a notice of lien shall be filed with the county
clerk against the property for the costs due and owing the city. At the time of
mailing of notice to the property owner, the city shall obtain a receipt of
mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of
mailing and the name and address of the mailee. However, if the property owner
cannot be located within ten (10) days from the date of mailing by the city,
notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by
publication, as defined in 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 1-102, one time not
less than ten (10) days prior to any hearing or action by the city council;
If the city anticipates summary abatement of a nuisance in accordance with the
provisions of subsection B of this section, the notice shall state that any
continuation of the nuisance or any accumulations of trash or excessive weed or
grass growth on the owner's property occurring within six (6) months after the
removal of trash or cutting or mowing of weeds or grass on the property
pursuant to such notice may be summarily abated by the city and that the costs
of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner and that a lien may be
imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior
notice to the property owner;
   2.   The owner of the property may give his written consent to the city
authorizing the abatement of the nuisance or the removal of the trash or the
mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving said written consent, the owner waives
his right to a hearing by the city council;
   3.   A hearing may be held by the city council to determine whether the
continuation of the nuisance or the accumulation of trash or the growth of
weeds or grass has caused the property to become detrimental to the health,
benefit, and welfare of the public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or
creates a fire hazard to the danger of property;
   4.   Upon a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of
such conditions, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the
property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, and performance of
the necessary duties as a governmental function of the city. Immediately
following the cleaning or mowing of the property, the city clerk shall file a
notice of lien with the county clerk describing the property and the work
performed by the municipality, and stating that the municipality claims a lien
on the property for the cleaning or mowing costs;
   5.   The city council shall determine the actual cost of such cleaning and
mowing and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith,
including the cost of notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward by mail
to the property owner at the address specified in subsection A1 of this
section, a statement of such actual cost and demanding payment. If the cleaning
and mowing are done by the city, the cost to the property owner for said
cleaning and mowing shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance,
and equipment required. If the cleaning and mowing are done on a private
contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder;
In addition to the cost of abatement as heretofore provided for, there shall be
an administrative fee assessed to the property owner of two hundred dollars
($200.00) which shall be included as part of the total costs;
   6.   If payment is not made within thirty (30) days from the date of the
mailing of the statement, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of
the amount of the cost to the county treasurer of the county in which the
property is located and the same shall be levied on the property and collected
by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. Until fully paid, the
cost and the interest thereon shall be the personal obligation of the property
owner from and after the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer. In
addition, the cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the
property from the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer, coequal
with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments
and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and
the lien shall continue until the cost shall be fully paid. At any time prior
to the collection as provided in this subsection, the city may pursue any civil
remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon including an
action in personam against the property owner and an action in rem to foreclose
its lien against the property. A mineral interest, if severed from the surface
interest and not owned by the surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or
judgment lien created pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, if any,
the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment
and directing discharge of the lien; and
   7.   The city inspector/code official(s) is authorized to carry out the
duties of the city council in subsections A1 through A6 of this section. The
property owner shall have a right to appeal to the city council from any order
of the city inspector/code official(s). Such appeal shall be taken by filing
written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the
administrative order is rendered.
B.   If the city council causes property within the municipal limits to be
cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the
procedures provided for in subsection A of this section, any subsequent
accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the property
occurring within a six (6) month period may be declared to be a nuisance and
may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner. At
the time of each such summary abatement the city shall notify the property
owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the
property owner may request a hearing within ten (10) days after the date of
mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be as provided for in
subsection A of this section. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the
cost of such abatement shall be determined and collected as provided for in
subsections A5 and A6 of this section; provided, however, that this subsection
shall not apply if the records of the county clerk show that the property was
transferred after notice was given pursuant to subsection A of this section.
(Ord. 1084 §1, 2010: Ord. 845 §1, 1998: Ord. 812 §1, 1997: Ord. 663 §1, 1987:
Ord. 417 §1, 1976: prior code §12-11)
8.04.060: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ABATEMENT NOTICE:
In the event the owner of any lot, piece of ground or property, after service
of notice as provided in section
8.04.030 of this chapter, fails, refuses or neglects to abate or remove the
conditions existing on the property which constitute a nuisance if the owner
permits or suffers the same on the property within the time specified therein,
then, in addition to his being subject to being obligated to reimburse the city
for the costs required to abate or remove the conditions from his property as
prescribed in section
8.04.030 of this chapter, he will be subject, upon conviction thereof in the
municipal court, for the offense of creating or permitting a nuisance to exist
on his property, as provided for in section
8.04.020 of this chapter, and each day he fails to comply with the
administrative order from the city to abate or remove the nuisance, after
waiver of his right to appeal the order or upon his exhausting of his right to
appeal before the city council, as provided for in section
8.04.030 of this chapter, wherein the administrative order is affirmed, shall
be deemed a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal
court, be subject to fine and court costs as such. (Ord. 812 §5, 1997: Ord. 663
§1, 1987: Ord. 417 §1, 1976: prior code §12-14)
8.04.090: HEALTH HAZARD:
It shall be an offense for any person, firm or corporation to operate or
maintain a hog pen, cow lot, horse lot, outhouse, or any other nuisance within
the city limits, or so closely adjacent to the boundaries thereof as to
constitute a hazard to the health of the inhabitants thereof. (Ord. 416 §1,
1976: prior code §13-102)
8.04.100: DUMPING OF REFUSE MATTER:
It is unlawful for any person, without first securing the written permit of the
health department of the city, to dump or deposit any manure, garbage, offal or
other refuse matter on any public or private grounds within the city, or to
haul or carry from the city and dump or deposit any such materials within one-
half (1/2) mile of the city limits, for the purpose either of filling low
ground or of disposing of the materials or for any purpose whatsoever, and any
person who is convicted either of hauling or dumping such materials on any
public or private grounds within the city, or on such grounds within one-half
(1/2) mile outside such city limits, or any owner or occupant of lands or lots
who knowingly permits such throwing or dumping upon his premises, or who
permits such materials to remain on his premises after being notified to remove
the same by the health department, or any other officer of such city, whether
he knew of or permitted such throwing or depositing or not, shall be fined.
(Ord. 416 §1, 1976: prior code §13-103)
8.04.101: LITTERING UNLAWFUL:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to litter within the
corporate limits of the city.
B.   "Littering" is defined as throwing any trash, refuse, wastepaper, cans,
bottles, or any other object or substance whatever upon the public streets,
alleys, roadways and sidewalks of the city or upon any real property owned or
occupied by another. (Ord. 562 §3, 1983)
8.04.102: ACCUMULATED LITTER CARRIED FROM OCCUPIED PREMISES:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation
occupying any real property, either as tenant or owner, to allow accumulated
trash, wastepaper, litter objects, bottles, cans or any other used or disposed
of objects to be carried from the occupied premises, either by the wind,
elements or otherwise to any adjoining or other real estate not so owned or
occupied by the offender. (Ord. 562 §4, 1983)
8.04.110: EMISSION OF ODORS, FUMES, DUST OR SMOKE:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to permit the
emission of any obnoxious, injurious or offensive odors, dust, fumes or smoke
from any premises, machinery, smokestacks, boilers or chimneys owned, operated,
occupied, controlled or leased by such person, firm or corporation, or of any
such odors, fumes, dust or smoke which by reason of the nature thereof annoy
any person or persons, or injuriously affect the health of any person or
persons, or interfere with the peaceable enjoyment of the home, residence or
premises of any person or persons, or are a menace to the public peace, health
or safety. (Ord. 416 §1, 1976: prior code §13-105)
8.04.120: DUMPING OF RAW SEWAGE:
It is an offense for any person, firm or corporation to dump raw sewage on the
top of the ground or into barrow ditches within the city limits, or adjacent
thereto, or so close thereto as to constitute a health hazard to the
inhabitants thereof. (Ord. 416 §1, 1976: prior code §13-106)
8.04.130: HEALTH DEPARTMENT AREA OF JURISDICTION:
The jurisdiction of the health department of the city is extended, so that the
provisions of sections
8.04.090 through
8.04.140 of this chapter shall become operative and effective outside of and
within one mile of the city limits, in all matters affecting the health of the
inhabitants of the city. (Ord. 416 §1, 1976: prior code §13-104)
8.04.140: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of sections
8.04.090 through
8.04.130 of this chapter shall be fined for each offense, and each day's
continued violation of sections
8.04.090 through
8.04.130 of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as
such. (Ord. 416 §1, 1976: prior code §13-107)
8.04.150: GRAFFITI:
8.04.150.1: SHORT TITLE:
This section
8.04.150 shall be known and may be cited as the WARR ACRES GRAFFITI ERADICATION
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1041 §1, 2007)
8.04.150.2: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The council of Warr Acres hereby makes the following findings:
A.   That unsightly graffiti on public and private property within the city is
detrimental to the beauty of our community;
B.   That graffiti on public and private property within the city is often
related to criminal street gang activity, with graffiti being used to convey
information to gang members and mark gang territory;
C.   That gang related graffiti often provides a catalyst for gang related
criminal violence within the city;
D.   That gang related graffiti constitutes a growing blight on and a
substantial detriment to the health and safety of the residents of our
community; and
E.   That by reason of the foregoing findings, graffiti constitutes a public
nuisance to our community. (Ord. 1041 §1, 2007)
8.04.150.3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this section
8.04.150 is to provide for the prevention and removal of graffiti within the
city. The intent of the council is to prevent and remove a public nuisance that
is a growing blight on and a substantial detriment to the health, safety and
general welfare of our community and its inhabitants. (Ord. 1041 §1, 2007)
8.04.150.4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section
8.04.150 the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISING: Any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing,
picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on property by an
owner or occupant of the property, or an agent of such owner or occupant, for
the purpose of promoting products or services or conveying information to the
public.
APPLIES GRAFFITI, APPLY GRAFFITI OR APPLYING GRAFFITI: The act of drawing,
painting, chiseling, scratching or etching graffiti on public or private
property within the city.
GRAFFITI: Without limitation, any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan,
message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible to the
public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched or etched on a rock, tree,
wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other structure; provided, however, that
this definition shall not include advertising or any other letter, word, name,
number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of
any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the property, an occupant
of the property, or by an authorized agent for such owner or occupant.
MAYOR: The mayor or the building inspector or their designee.
OCCUPANT: Any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as a
tenant of property, or any person in actual physical possession of property.
OWNER: Any person shown by the records of the county clerk's office as the
owner of a fee simple interest in property.
REMOVAL, REMOVE, OR REMOVED: When used in relation to the eradication of
graffiti, means the act of taking graffiti off of, or masking the presence of
graffiti on, a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other
structure. (Ord. 1041 §1, 2007)
8.04.150.5: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The council hereby declares that graffiti on public or private property within
the city constitutes a public nuisance to the detriment of the city and its
inhabitants and visitors. The provisions for prevention and removal of such
public nuisance are set forth in section
8.04.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 1041 §1, 2007)
8.04.150.6: PROHIBITED:
No person shall apply graffiti to public or private property within the city.
Any person who applies graffiti to public or private property within the city
shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each act of applying graffiti shall
constitute a separate offense.
Any person convicted of the offense of applying graffiti to public or private
property within the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00), excluding costs. The provisions of this section shall be
enforced by the police department. (Ord. 1041 §1, 2007)
8.04.150.7: ALLOWING GRAFFITI TO REMAIN ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall allow graffiti to remain on private property within the city
longer than twenty (20) days after receiving a notice to remove graffiti.
Graffiti allowed to remain on private property within the city longer than
twenty (20) days from the date of the notice to remove graffiti, shall be
subject to removal by the city. (Ord. 1041 §1, 2007)
8.04.150.8: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The mayor may cause graffiti to be removed from private property located within
the city in accordance with the following procedure:
A.   Removal Of Graffiti With Or Without Consent Of Owner; Procedure:
   1.   The property owner, tenant and/or occupant, if any, may give their
written consent to the city authorizing removal of the graffiti. By giving such
written consent, the owner and the tenant and/or occupant each waive the right
to notice and a hearing as otherwise required by this section;
   2.   If the consent of the property owner, tenant and/or occupant, if any,
to remove graffiti from the property cannot be obtained, the director may
remove the graffiti without such consent pursuant to the procedures set forth
in this section;
   3.   To remove graffiti from property without the consent of the property
owner, tenant and/or occupant, if any, at least ten (10) days' notice of a
hearing shall be given to such persons. Notice to the owner shall be given by
mail directed to the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the
county treasurer's office. Notice to the tenant and/or occupant, if any, shall
be given by mail directed to the property address. The notice shall order the
property owner, tenant and/or occupant, if any, to remove graffiti from the
property and shall further state that unless such work is performed within
twenty (20) days of the date of the notice the work shall be done by the city.
At the time of mailing of notice to the property owner, tenant and/or occupant,
if any, the director shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service,
which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of
the mailee(s). In addition, notice shall be given by posting a copy of the
notice on the property at least one time not less than ten (10) days prior to
any hearing or action by the city. Any accumulations of graffiti on the
property occurring within one year from and after the date of the notice may be
summarily abated by the city without a hearing and further prior notice to the
property owner, tenant and/or occupant, if any, except by posting of notices at
least one time on the property not less than two (2) business days prior to
such summary abatement;
   4.   The hearing may be held by the mayor to determine whether the
accumulation of graffiti on the property has caused the property to become
detrimental or a hazard to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public
and the community; and
   5.   Upon finding that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment
or hazard, and that the property, the public, and the community would be
benefited by removal of such conditions, the mayor may authorize the city to
enter onto the property for the removal of the graffiti thereon.
B.   Appeal: The property owner and the tenant, if any, shall have a right of
appeal to the city council from any order of the mayor. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10)
business days after the administrative order is rendered.
C.   Summary Abatement: If a notice is given by the city to a property owner
and tenant, if any, ordering graffiti to be removed from property within the
city limits in accordance with the procedures provided for in subsection A of
this section, any subsequent accumulations of graffiti on the property
occurring within a one year period may be summarily abated without further
prior notice to the property owner or the tenant, if any. However, prior to the
summary abatement by the city, notice thereof shall be posted at least one time
on the property not less than two (2) business days prior to such summary
abatement. This subsection shall not apply if the records of the county clerk
show that the ownership and/or tenancy of the property was transferred after
notice was given pursuant to subsection A of this section.
D.   Cost Of Removal Of Graffiti: Removal of graffiti by the city pursuant to
the provisions of this section shall be performed at the sole expense of the
city. In removing the graffiti, the city shall restore the property as nearly
as possible to the condition as it existed immediately prior to the graffiti
being placed on the property. (Ord. 1041 §1, 2007)
8.04.160: DUMPSTERS AND PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS:
8.04.160.1: DEFINITIONS:
DUMPSTER: A container designed to receive and transport and dump waste which
exceeds forty (40) gallons in size. A dumpster includes waste disposal bags
that are designed to hold in excess of forty (40) gallons of waste and metal
bins that shall not exceed forty (40) cubic yards in size, excluding any city
owned dumpsters.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS: Portable containers that are placed on or in front of a
property for the purpose of storing, loading, or unloading furniture, clothing,
or other personal or household belongings as part of the process of renovation
or moving, the relocation of belongings to an off site commercial storage
location, or on site storage in the aftermath of the property being affected by
a natural disaster. Unlike trailers typically attached to semitrucks for
transport, portable storage units must be no larger than eight feet (8') tall
by eight feet (8') wide by sixteen feet (16') long. (Ord. 1149, 2015)
8.04.160.2: DESIGNATION:
Dumpsters and portable storage units are permitted and are hereby regulated
according to the provisions below on occupied properties primarily used
residentially in the following structure types:
R-1 single-family residential district
R-2 two- to four-family residential district
FE single-family estate district
PUD planned unit development for R-1, R-2 or FE
A.   Dumpsters Regulated:
   1.   Location: Dumpsters shall be placed on the property being serviced and
not on the street in front of the property. No commercial or construction
dumpster shall be located within ten feet (10') of an abutting building on an
adjacent property.
   2.   Time Limit:
      a.   A dumpster may remain on a property for thirty (30) days, with up to
two (2) 30-day extensions pursuant to the permitting provision below. Absent an
emergency condition, in no event shall a dumpster remain on a property in
excess of ninety (90) days in one 12-month period.
      b.   When the need for the dumpster is the result of an emergency
condition at the property to be served (example: water or fire damage;
hurricane damage) then in such instance the dumpster may remain for the length
of time necessary to remove the debris as determined by the code enforcement
officer or his designee. In such instances, the use of the dumpster is not
counted toward the limit of three (3) times per twelve (12) month period.
   3.   Sanitation: The following requirements shall be maintained while the
dumpster is on or at the site:
      a.   The area around the dumpster shall be kept free of debris and
litter;
      b.   Any dumpster into which animal or vegetable waste or material has
been dumped or deposited shall be removed or emptied within twenty four (24)
hours; and
      c.   Any dumpster producing or causing noxious, foul or offensive odors
shall be immediately removed or cleaned to eliminate the odor.
      d.   A full dumpster shall be removed from the property within two (2)
days.
   4.   Usage: A dumpster shall only be used to contain and remove debris and
material generated at the location where the dumpster is placed.
   5.   Identification: The name and telephone number of the owner of the
dumpster and/or the company that is responsible for the dumpster shall be
displayed in a weatherproof manner on the dumpster.
B.   Portable Storage Units Regulated:
   1.   Location: Portable storage units are prohibited from being placed on an
unpaved area in the front yard of a property. Portable storage units kept on
site must be kept in the driveway or paved, off street surface on the property
at the farthest accessible point from the street. Where possible, the unit
shall be placed on a paved surface to the rear or side of the principal
structure. When placed on the driveway or paved area in the side or rear yard,
portable storage units shall be located at least ten feet (10') from any
property line, space permitting.
   2.   Time Limit: A portable storage unit may remain on a property for ninety
(90) days.
   3.   Use During Natural Disaster: The above restrictions notwithstanding,
when the principal structure on the property has been made uninhabitable as a
result of a natural disaster for which a local state of emergency declaration
has been issued, or a fire or other damaging event beyond the control of the
owner, one or more portable storage units may be used for on site storage. The
authorization for such use shall be dependent on issuance of a building permit
for the reconstruction/repair of the principal structure(s) on the property and
shall expire upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal
structure(s) or twelve (12) months from the date of the event that damaged the
structure, whichever occurs first. For good cause shown and to recognize
extenuating circumstances, the code enforcement officer or his designee may
extend the authorization for as much as an additional twelve (12) month period
or until a certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first.
   4.   Advertising: Advertising is prohibited on a portable storage unit, with
the exception of the name and phone number of the unit's supplier, which is
required.
   5.   Hazardous Materials: The use of portable storage units for storage of
hazardous materials is prohibited.
The code enforcement officer or his designee may inspect the portable storage
unit to ensure no such materials are being stored inside.
   6.   Condition Of Portable Storage Unit: A portable storage unit with holes,
breaks, tears, or large areas of rust, in the opinion of the code enforcement
officer or his designee, may not be placed on or in front of any property.
(Ord. 1149, 2015)
8.04.160.3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A thirty (30) day permit shall be required for a dumpster that is not owned/
provided by the city and a portable storage unit. The permit shall be obtained
from the code enforcement officer or his designee. The permit shall be
displayed in a weatherproof fashion on the dumpster or a portable storage unit.
Extensions are permitted pursuant to subsections
8.04.160.2A2a and B2 of this chapter. The permit fee is forty dollars ($40.00).
(Ord. 1149, 2015)
8.04.160.4: ABATEMENT:
Any dumpster or portable on demand storage unit not in compliance with this
section
8.04.160 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the
city at the owner's or responsible person's expense. Abatement shall, at the
city's option, include the removal and/or the emptying of the dumpster and/or
portable on demand storage unit as the case may be. (Ord. 1149, 2015)
8.04.160.5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A.   Violation of any provision of this section
8.04.160 shall be punishable by a fine in an amount of not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day the
violation continues.
B.   In addition, a person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be
ordered to abate the problem and pay the cost incurred by the city if the city
abated the problem. (Ord. 1149, 2015)
CHAPTER 8.08
GARBAGE AND REFUSE 1
SECTION:
8.08.010: Definitions
8.08.020: Department Of Sanitation Created
8.08.040: Duty To Request Garbage Service
8.08.050: Deposit Of Garbage Only In Approved Container
8.08.060: Garbage Container Requirements
8.08.070: Collection, Transportation Or Disposal; Penalty
8.08.080: City Department Only To Collect
8.08.090: Collection Frequency
8.08.095: Bulky Waste
8.08.100: Location Of Containers; Sanitary Condition
8.08.110: Method And Sites For Disposal
8.08.120: Burning Or Burying Garbage
8.08.130: Dumping Prohibited
8.08.131: Owner's Permission Required For Use Of Container; Penalty
8.08.140: Authority To Inspect And Remove Garbage
8.08.150: Fees And Charges
8.08.151: Exemption From Being Charged
8.08.152: Landfill Fee
8.08.160: Graduation Of Fees And Charges
8.08.170: Nuisance
8.08.180: Compost Piles
8.08.190: Penalty
8.08.200: Nonpayment Or Delinquent Payment Of Fees
 
Notes
1 1. 27A OS ch. 2, art. 10.
8.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BULKY WASTE: Includes, but is not limited to: household appliances, furniture,
carpet, mattresses, box springs, water tanks, containerized do it yourself
remodeling wastes, fencing and similar noncontracted items, bagged grass and
brush produced as refuse from single-family dwellings receiving collection
services from a contractor. All appliances containing chlorofluorocarbons (air
conditioners, refrigerators, and freezers) must be certified "freon free" or
compressors must be removed before collection may be completed. Appliances
containing freon can be picked up by special arrangement. Items excluded under
the definition of bulky waste include hospital and medical waste, poisons,
acids and caustics, explosives, dirt and rocks, sewage and liquid waste,
nuclear materials, gasoline, kerosene, propane tanks, degreasers, lubricants,
tires and rims, antifreeze, paint, and commercial construction debris.
GARBAGE: All putrescible wastes, including vegetables, animal and poultry
offal, carcasses of small animals and dead fowl, and includes all such
substances accumulated by all public and private establishments and by all
residences. It shall not be construed to mean sewage and body wastes and
recognized industrial byproducts or waste.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm or corporation.
RUBBISH: Solid and ordinary waste, other than garbage, accumulated by all
public and private establishments and by all residences, including glass and
broken ware, discarded clothing, trash, tin cans, bottles, papers, and tree
limbs, grass and weed cuttings properly contained or bundled as described in
this chapter.
RUBBLE: Includes trees, dirt, rocks, ashes, debris resulting from construction,
reconstruction or repair of buildings, and other earthen, wooden or metal
materials, longer, larger and/or heavier than rubbish. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to preclude a person from removing "rubbish" and "rubble",
as defined herein, from his premises at the expense of such person, provided,
it is done in a neat and sanitary manner.
SERVICE UNITS: An average amount of garbage or rubbish not to exceed the
following:
The contents of four (4) garbage containers, each not greater than forty (40)
gallons and eight (8) 33-gallon bags. (Ord. 1072 §1, 2009: Ord. 989 §1, 2003:
Ord. 917 §1, 2000: Ord. 903-A §1, 2000: Ord. 415 §1, 1976: prior code §10-3)
8.08.020: DEPARTMENT OF SANITATION CREATED:
There is created a department of sanitation as the administrative body which
shall assist in maintaining good sanitation and health conditions within the
city by collecting, transporting and delivering for disposal and disposing of
in a safe and sanitary manner all garbage and rubbish. (Ord. 415 §1, 1976:
prior code §10-1)
8.08.040: DUTY TO REQUEST GARBAGE SERVICE:
To assist in maintaining the general sanitation and health of the city, it
shall be the duty of every owner of any premises located on a regularly
established garbage route to notify the city clerk at the beginning of such
ownership and request, accept and use the garbage pick up and collection
service; provided, however, that failure of any owner of such premises to make
such request shall not prevent nor in any way impair or impede the sanitation
department from adding the address of such premises to the proper garbage
collection route records and providing such service and otherwise enforcing by
appropriate action the regulatory measures prescribed in this chapter and
causing the fees or charges to be paid. Effective October 1, 1999, all new
residential and commercial accounts will be required to have a deposit of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for residential and fifty dollars ($50.00) for
commercial with the city. This amount to remain on deposit as long as the
customer receives garbage services at the residence or commercial site. (Ord.
1123, 2012)
8.08.050: DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE ONLY IN APPROVED CONTAINER:
No person shall deposit or place any garbage or rubbish in an alley, street or
other public place within the city, nor shall any person deposit or place it
upon private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the limits
of the city, nor shall any person deposit or place or not, within the limits of
the city, unless the same is enclosed in an approved container. (Ord. 415 §1,
1976: prior code §10-5(a))
8.08.060: GARBAGE CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
Garbage containers provided by owner/user shall be portable. The cover shall
not be removed except when depositing or removing the contents of the
receptacle. Such containers shall have a capacity of not more than forty (40)
gallons nor less than ten (10) gallons, and if one container is not sufficient
to hold the quantity of garbage or rubbish accumulated between collections, a
sufficient number of containers shall be provided by the owner/user. Garbage
container surfaces shall be kept free of garbage accumulation by wrapping in
paper all garbage placed in the container, by washing the container, or by
other means. Containers shall be located and maintained so as not to create a
fire hazard or provide a harborage for rodents or breeding of insects. Tree
limbs and cuttings will be picked up if tied in bundles in lengths not to
exceed four feet (4') and not to exceed fifty (50) pounds and placed at the
curb. Grass and weed cuttings will be put in plastic disposal bags, securely
tied, placed at the curb and picked up if not over fifty (50) pounds in weight.
Dumpster units will be considered the standard container when more than four
(4) 40-gallon cans or one hundred sixty (160) gallons of accumulation are
necessary. Oil drums, grease drums, and similar metal containers are not
acceptable as refuse containers, as well as cardboard boxes, and will not be
picked up or emptied. (Ord. 989 §2, 2003: Ord. 575 §1, 1983)
8.08.070: COLLECTION, TRANSPORTATION OR DISPOSAL; PENALTY:
A.   Prohibitions: No person, individual, corporation, association or joint
venture, other than the city sanitation department, shall collect, transport or
dispose of "garbage", "rubbish" or "rubble", as defined in this chapter, within
the city limits.
B.   Exceptions:
   1.   Rubble: Any person, individual, corporation, association or joint
venture, other than the city sanitation department, who has been duly licensed
by the city to operate as a private hauler of trash and refuse within the city
limits, per section
5.04.475 of this code, shall be authorized to collect, transport or dispose of
"rubble", as defined in this chapter, within the city limits.
   2.   Garbage; Rubbish: Any person, individual, corporation, association or
joint venture, other than the city sanitation department, who has been duly
licensed by the city to operate as a private hauler of trash and refuse within
the city limits, per section 5.04.475 of this code, shall be authorized to
collect, transport or dispose of "garbage" and "rubbish", as defined in this
chapter, within the city limits, or other refuse items, providing the party to
whom the duly licensed hauler is seeking to render such service has applied for
and been issued a private hauler service permit according to the requirements
prescribed herein.
   3.   Private Hauler Service Permit Application Requirements And Procedure:
      a.   The party seeking to contract for private trash and refuse service
must complete and submit a private hauler service permit application
accompanied by a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) application fee and a
proposed contract for service by a private hauler who has been duly licensed by
the city, per section
5.04.475 of this code, to the city clerk.
      b.   Upon receiving the completed permit application and fee, the
application shall be referred for review to the city sanitation supervisor who
shall submit a recommendation whether the application should be approved or
denied to the city clerk based upon the criteria specified herein.
      c.   Upon receiving the recommendation of the city sanitation supervisor
pertaining to the permit application, the city clerk shall schedule a meeting
to be held before the Warr Acres sanitation committee who shall review and make
a recommendation whether the application should be approved or denied based
upon the criteria specified herein. The permit applicant will be notified of
said meeting and shall be given the opportunity to present any information
relevant to the application being reviewed by the committee.
      d.   After the sanitation committee has made its recommendation whether
to approve or deny the permit application, the city clerk shall set a date for
a public hearing before the city council to review the permit application. The
applicant shall be given due notice of said hearing. The city council shall
decide whether to grant or deny a permit based upon a consideration of the
criteria specified herein and the recommendations of the sanitation supervisor
and sanitation committee.
      e.   If it is determined by the city council that a permit should be
granted, the applicant shall have ten (10) days from the date of the hearing to
have the permit issued to him by the city clerk. If after ten (10) days the
permit has not been issued, then the granting of the permit by the city council
will become effectively withdrawn without any refund of administrative fees.
   4.   C-3 Neighborhood Shopping Or C-4 General Business Zoning District: Any
party applying for the permit shall only be eligible for said permit if the
party is or represents a business establishment which is located in a C-
3 neighborhood shopping or C-4 general business zoning district within the
city, as defined in
chapter 19.36 of this code. All recommendations by the sanitation supervisor
and sanitation committee and determinations by the city council pertaining to
the approval or denial of a private hauler service permit shall be based upon
the following criteria:
      a.   The type of trash and refuse generated by the applicant's business
establishment must be such that the city sanitation department cannot presently
handle it in an adequately safe and sanitary manner given the city's present
sanitation capabilities and equipment;
      b.   The size and volume of trash and refuse generated by the applicant's
business establishment must be such that the city does not presently have the
capability to adequately handle it;
      c.   The number and frequency of trash and refuse pick ups to adequately
handle the sanitation needs of the applicant must be such as to impose too
great a burden on the city's equipment and manpower resources than the city can
presently provide;
      d.   The type of equipment and facilities required in order for the city
to adequately service the applicant's sanitation needs must be such the city
does not presently have at its disposal nor does the city have any functional
equivalent to perform the same.
   5.   Permit Term And Expiration: The term of the permit shall be for a
period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of issuance by the city or
until such time as the city council may determine the material conditions under
which the permit was granted have substantially changed, including the city's
current capability to adequately handle the permit recipient's sanitation
needs, whichever occurs first. If upon the expiration of the permit the city is
still incapable of adequately servicing the permit recipient's needs, the
permit recipient must reapply for a new permit, per the requirements and
procedure prescribed herein.
C.   Penalty: Any person, individual, corporation, association or joint venture
who is found in violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense and be
subject to a fine not to exceed seventy dollars ($70.00) for each offense, and
each day's continued violation of this section shall constitute a separate
offense and be punishable as such. (Ord. 606 §1, 1985)
8.08.080: CITY DEPARTMENT ONLY TO COLLECT:
Any person, individual, corporation, association or joint venture found guilty
of collecting, transporting or disposing of garbage or rubbish within the city
limits, other than the city sanitation department, shall be punished by fine
and costs, and any person violating any of the provisions of this section and
sections
8.08.070,
8.08.090 and
8.08.100 of this chapter is guilty of an offense, and each day's separate
violation thereof constitutes a separate offense. Each offense, upon
conviction, is punishable by fine and costs. (Ord. 415 §1, 1976: prior code
§10-6(b))
8.08.090: COLLECTION FREQUENCY:
Garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least twice a week unless prevented
by weather, holidays, or major equipment breakdown. (Ord. 415 §1, 1976: prior
code §10-6(c))
8.08.095: BULKY WASTE:
A.   Collection Requirements: The following requirements are established
governing the collection of bulky waste by the city.
   1.   Bulky waste must be generated by the owner, occupant or rental agent at
that residence to be eligible for collection and must be placed at the curb
line for collection or as otherwise designated by the superintendent.
   2.   Small items lying loose on the ground will not be picked up by the
bulky waste crew. They will be left for the customer to place them in an
approved can or in a bag.
   3.   Tree trimmings and branches must be placed together in piles with
individual branches not longer than eight feet (8') and dead trees (not more
than 6 inches in diameter) and similar materials placed at the curb line.
   4.   Such bulky waste shall not be commingled with yard waste or other
municipal solid waste or waste generated from a different residence.
   5.   Bulky waste shall be placed separately so as to allow ten feet (10') of
clearance from all obstacles, such as, power poles, guywires, signs, fire
hydrants and gas meters to allow mechanized pick up.
   6.   Bulky waste shall not be placed out for collection earlier than four
(4) days preceding the regular scheduled bulky waste collection day.
   7.   By placing bulky waste out for collection, the customer relinquishes
title to the bulky item picked up. The division may decline to accept such
items that contain other municipal solid waste, contraband, commercial
construction debris, or hazardous wastes.
   8.   Doors on refrigerators and other bulky wastes with affixed doors or
panels shall be removed before placement on curb line for collection. Occupants
of premises must contact the sanitation department for the disposal of items
containing freon, i.e., refrigerators, air conditioners, freezers, etc., during
the bulky waste collection period noted on the utility bill.
   9.   The customer will be charged an additional fee for each cubic yard of
bulky waste collected in excess of eight (8) cubic yards in any single
scheduled collection.
B.   Service: Up to eight (8) cubic yards of "bulky waste" as defined in this
chapter shall be placed at curbside by six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the
designated collection day.
   1.   Items shall be placed at least five feet (5') from mailboxes, gas
meters, cars, shrubs, or anything else that could interfere with hand loading
or mechanical equipment.
   2.   Items shall be placed at least ten feet (10') away from utility poles,
to prevent contact with overhead power lines.
   3.   Bulky waste shall be a length not exceeding ten feet (10') nor a weight
exceeding two hundred fifty (250) pounds.
   4.   Small items or loose items such as twigs, paper, grass and other
similar items must be containerized in plastic bags or boxes so that they do
not spill.
   5.   All items placed for collection must be able to be lifted and handled
by two (2) persons.
   6.   Types of bulky waste that can be placed for collection include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      a.   Household appliances,
      b.   Water tanks,
      c.   Furniture,
      d.   Mattresses,
      e.   Cardboard boxes that are broken down and bundled,
      f.   Fencing (up to 4 panels),
      g.   Containerized noncontracted remodeling waste such as leftovers from
do it yourself projects,
      h.   Refrigerators and air conditioners provided they do not contain
freon. Such items may be placed out for collection only if the compressor is
removed or the appliance has a sticker showing certified removal of the freon.
   7.   It shall be unlawful to place any waste out for bulky waste collection
that is not defined as "bulky waste" herein including, but not limited to, the
following:
      a.   Hospital or medical waste or hazardous waste of any kind;
      b.   Poisons, acids and caustics, explosives;
      c.   Dirt, rocks, bricks or concrete;
      d.   Sewage and liquid waste;
      e.   Nuclear materials;
      f.   Gasoline, kerosene, oils and other fuels;
      g.   Propane tanks, degreasers, lubricants, brake fluid, antifreeze,
batteries, tires and rims, car batteries;
      h.   Sheetrock or roofing items;
      i.   Contracted construction, reconstruction, demolition, and repair
waste.
C.   Violations: An owner, occupant or person in control of private premises
commits an offense if he or she places, deposits, permits to accumulate or
permits or causes placement of bulky waste material on those premises in a
manner or location that is in violation of this section. For the first offense,
a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus court costs shall
be imposed. For any second or subsequent offense and upon proof of prior
conviction, said person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. Violations of this section are continuous
and each day the violation occurs is a separate offense. (Ord. 1085 §1, 2010:
Ord. 1072 §2, 2009)
8.08.100: LOCATION OF CONTAINERS; SANITARY CONDITION:
A.   For residential sanitation pick up service, trash and refuse containers
shall be placed within a distance no greater than ten feet (10') of the corner
of the house nearest in distance to the street and otherwise in a generally
convenient location for collection whereby the city's sanitation carriers can
gain easy access to the same without the necessity of passing through such
obstacles and obstructions as adjacent buildings, garages, gates or doors.
Failure to so locate containers, shall make the residential customer's trash
and refuse subject to not being collected until the containers are placed in
location which is in compliance with this section.
B.   For commercial, apartment, church and school sanitation pick up service,
trash and refuse containers shall be placed in a generally convenient location
for collection, or such other specific location for collection as designated by
the sanitation supervisor of the city, whereby collection of the same can be
accomplished without the necessity of passing through or going around such
obstacles and obstructions as adjacent buildings, garages, and locked gates.
Failure to so locate containers shall make the customer's trash and refuse
subject to not being collected until the containers are placed in a location
which is in compliance with this section.
C.   All containers and the grounds immediately around the same shall be kept
in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. (Ord. 636 §1, 1986)
8.08.110: METHOD AND SITES FOR DISPOSAL:
All disposal of garbage, rubble and rubbish shall be by approved methods of
incineration or by sanitary landfill and cover, said method and sites to be
approved by the council and the state department of health. (Ord. 415 §1, 1976:
prior code §10-7(a))
8.08.120: BURNING OR BURYING GARBAGE:
No garbage, rubble or rubbish shall be burned or buried within the city;
provided this shall not preclude the burning of paper materials in an
incinerator with a spark arrestor with a weight no lighter than hardware cloth
and with spacing of one-fourth inch (1/4"), or as approved by the fire
department. (Ord. 415 §1, 1976: prior code §10-7(b))
8.08.130: DUMPING PROHIBITED:
No garbage, rubble or rubbish shall be dumped within the City limits. (Ord. 415
§1, 1976: Prior Code §10-7(c))
8.08.131: OWNER'S PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR USE OF CONTAINER; PENALTY:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to place, deposit, dispose or
discard trash, garbage, refuse, rubbish or rubble into any garbage container
used, owned or maintained by a commercial user without such user's permission
or consent.
B.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by
a fine and costs not to exceed the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00). (Ord.
566 §1, 1983)
8.08.140: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT AND REMOVE GARBAGE:
The Sanitation Department is authorized to inspect the premises, and collect
and remove from the owner or occupant of any premises in the City "garbage" and
"rubbish", as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 415 §1, 1976: Prior Code §10-8(a))
8.08.150: FEES AND CHARGES:
The following fees and charges are hereby established for the removal and
disposition of garbage and rubbish to be paid to the City by the owner of any
premises located on an established garbage route within the City. Such fees and
charges shall be billed monthly in arrears and paid to the City on or before
the tenth day of the month following the date of billing.
A.   For each single-family residence using a single service unit, duplex,
triplex, and fourplex, seventeen dollars ($17.00) per month, per residence. If
more than four (4) 40-gallon cans and/or eight (8) 33-gallon bags per residence
are necessary, the rate will be an additional two dollars fifty cents ($2.50)
per can or bag, per pick up.
B.   Multiple-dwelling units in excess of four (4) units, ten dollars ($10.00)
per month, per unit. Each unit shall be permitted a maximum of 0.4 yards or
80.8 gallons of garbage or rubbish per month. Such garbage and debris service
shall be accomplished by the use of eight (8) yard dumpsters or a combination
of smaller dumpsters not to exceed the eight (8) yard total, necessary to
accommodate the maximum according to the number of units, and shall be picked
up not less than twice a week.
C.   The monthly charge for commercial users shall be based upon the service
unit and frequency of pick ups in accordance with the following schedule:
 
DUMPSTERS
Size 1 x Week 2 x Week 3 x Week 4 x Week 5 x Week 6 x Week
2 yards  $ 30.00 $ 60.00 $ 90.00 $120.00 $  150.00$  180.00
3 yards  45.00   90.00   135.00  180.00  225.00    270.00
4 yards  60.00   120.00  180.00  240.00  300.00    360.00
6 yards  90.00   180.00  270.00  360.00  450.00    540.00
8 yards  120.00  240.00  360.00  480.00  600.00    720.00
17 yards 185.00  370.00  655.00  840.00  1,025.00  1,210.00
 
   1.   Pick ups requested in addition to the regular weekly pick ups will be
charged in accordance with the following schedule:
      ADDITIONAL DUMPSTER PICK UPS
 
Size     Per Occurrence
2 yards  $  7.50
3 yards  11.25
4 yards  15.00
6 yards  22.50
8 yards  30.00
17 yards 185.00
 
D.   The City shall be responsible for maintaining all dumpsters provided for
commercial users for usual wear and tear. When it becomes necessary, as
determined by the Sanitary Supervisor or at the request of the user, to clean
the inside of the dumpster due to other than ordinary permitted use, there
shall be a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the user.
E.   For commercial users not requiring a dumpster, a maximum of four (4) 40-
gallon cans will be picked up at the basic rate of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
per month. If more than four (4) 40-gallon cans are necessary, the rate will
increase six dollars ($6.00) per can, per month.
F.   The City shall charge an additional monthly fee of fifty cents ($0.50) for
each residential unit to cover the costs of household hazardous waste
collection and disposal.
G.   Limbs not bundled, trash and other solid waste not in a container,
including furniture and appliances, shall constitute an additional charge to be
established by the Public Works Director or his designee according to volume to
be collected. The resident or owner of property may request such pick up
service and the cost shall be added to the utility bill of the resident or
owner for the next billing cycle. Further, any items of furniture, appliances,
trash or solid waste not in containers or bundled which are placed or remaining
at curbside on trash collection day shall be deemed abandoned for pick up by
the City and may be removed by the City with the charge therefor added to the
utility bill of the resident or owner for the next billing cycle.
   1.   A base flat fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) shall be made for the
removal of material up to and including the first cubic yard. Additional
material may be included and removed at a charge of seventeen dollars ($17.00)
per cubic yard up to a maximum of forty (40) cubic yards.
H.   Residential customers may rent a four (4) yard dumpster for a thirty (30)
day time period. The customer shall complete an application and pay a seventeen
dollar fifty cent ($17.50) delivery fee for said dumpster. Customers with
outstanding balances will not be allowed to rent a dumpster until their bill is
paid in full. The customer shall call the Utility Billing Clerk when the
dumpster needs to be dumped and a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) will be
charged for each dump and reflected on their monthly utility bill. (Ord. 1174,
2017)
8.08.151: EXEMPTION FROM BEING CHARGED 1 :
Owners or operators acting on the behalf of owners of apartment multiple-
dwelling unit complexes having twenty (20) or more dwelling units per apartment
dwelling complex shall be eligible to apply to the City for an exemption from
being charged for individual dwelling units which are certified as being
"uninhabitable" dwelling units by the City pursuant to the following
application procedure available to the owners and operators of such apartment
dwellings:
A.   The owner or operator must make application for exemption of payment for
each dwelling unit for which the exemption is being sought that the units in
question are "uninhabitable" and as defined shall mean that the dwelling unit
or units in question are in such a state and condition that they are not
suitable for being occupied by tenants because a reasonable modicum of safety
and comfort cannot be afforded such tenants in such units. Said application
must be made to and filed with the City Clerk's Office accompanied by an
administrative application fee in such amounts as follows: Ten dollars ($10.00)
for up to a maximum with one dollar ($1.00) per each additional unit per
apartment complex location per application;
B.   The owner or operator must provide the City building inspector or his
designated agent with free access to inspect all units for which an exemption
is being applied. After inspecting each particular unit for which the exemption
has been applied, the building inspector or his designated agent shall
determine, in their sole discretion, whether said unit or units can be deemed
"uninhabitable", as defined hereinabove, and they shall certify their findings
as to whether said unit or units qualify for the exemption applied for and
submit the same to the City Clerk's Office. In the event the building inspector
or his designated agent find that the unit or units applied for do not qualify
for the exemption, the owner or operator applicant shall have ten (10) days to
appeal their findings, after notice thereof by the City Clerk's Office and
notice that the exemption applied for is being denied on the basis of said
findings, to a review panel composed of the Mayor, the Administrative Assistant
and City Clerk if the City Clerk's Office within said ten (10) day period and
the decision of the review panel shall be final;
C.   Should the City determine that the unit or units applied for qualify for
the exemption, the exemption from garbage service charges for each such unit
shall thereupon take effect for a period not to exceed six (6) months from the
date the exemption is granted by the City, or upon such time as the owner or
operator renders the unit or units into a habitable condition or is
subsequently found by the City that the unit or units are no longer
uninhabitable, whichever comes first, except that the owner or operator may
apply for a renewal of the exemption for an additional period not to exceed six
(6) months by resubmitting a new application and fee as specified hereinabove;
D.   During the effective term of any exemption granted by the City for any
particular apartment dwelling unit, the owner or operator shall be required to
disclose to the City any change in the habitability status of said unit or
units. Failure by the owner or operator to provide such disclosure of change in
the status to the City shall be grounds, upon its discovery of such lack of
disclosure and a finding that the status of a particular unit no longer makes
said unit qualify for the exemption which had been applied for and granted, for
the City to immediately thereupon review said exemption, to issue current
billing charges for garbage service for said unit, and to hold the owner or
operator in arrearage for all service fees which would have been chargeable as
of and upon the date said unit was no longer found to be uninhabitable by the
City. (Ord. 706 §2, 1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  13.04.070 of this Code.
8.08.152: LANDFILL FEE:
There is imposed upon each customer of the refuse and garbage service operated
by the City of Warr Acres a State mandated landfill fee and fee for related
expenses of the City of one dollar ($1.00) per month per residence and five
dollars ($5.00) per month for commercial users. The fee shall be in addition to
any periodic charges for refuse or garbage services. The fee shall be included
in each billing cycle, stated separately from any other periodic charges, and
shall be identified as a fee to pay for State mandated landfill charges. The
fee shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as, and in the
same manner as, the periodic charges for refuse and garbage service in
accordance with the regular billing practice of the City of Warr Acres. (Ord.
1181, 2018)
8.08.160: GRADUATION OF FEES AND CHARGES:
The minimum charge provided for in section
8.08.150 of this chapter shall be made where a single service unit is utilized
and no more than two (2) pick ups of garbage per week are required by the owner
or occupant of the premises or the Superintendent in order to keep the
particular premises in a sanitary condition. The charges may be graduated
upward or downward depending on the number of pick ups per week required by the
owner or occupant, and/or the Health Officer, in the interest of public health,
and the amount of garbage to be hauled. The charge for removal and collection
shall be set by the City Clerk in accordance with the recommendation of the
appropriate committee of the Council, and shall be subject to change on thirty
(30) days' notice. (Ord. 415 §1, 1976: Prior Code §10-8(c))
8.08.170: NUISANCE:
Fermenting, putrefying or odorous garbage and/or rubbish in containers
uncollected, or dumped in the open, or due to failure to request or pay the
garbage service charge, or due to improper type, placing or maintenance of
containers, is a nuisance and a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 415 §1, 1976:
Prior Code §10-9(a))
8.08.180: COMPOST PILES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance of
compost piles or pits for the storage and disposition of vegetable matter
consisting of grass cuttings, leaves and items of like nature so long as such
piles or pits are maintained in a satisfactory and sanitary manner, and do not
become a public nuisance by causing the emission therefrom of obnoxious odors.
(Ord. 415 §1, 1976: Prior Code §10-9(b))
8.08.190: PENALTY:
Any person within the City who fails, neglects or refuses to pay the charges
set forth in this chapter is punishable by fine and costs, and any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an offense and
each day's separate violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Each
offense, upon conviction thereof, is punishable by fine and costs. (Ord. 415
§1, 1976: Prior Code §10-10)
8.08.200: NONPAYMENT OR DELINQUENT PAYMENT OF FEES:
A utility billing account for garbage shall be considered delinquent upon the
failure of any customer or user to pay the full amount owed, including any
service fees, interest, penalties, and/or required deposits, after thirty (30)
days from the date on which the bill is stated to be due. In addition to the
penalties provided for within this chapter, delinquent utility billing accounts
for garbage shall be processed in the following manner:
A.   Retrieval Of Dumpsters: After an account has become thirty (30) days
delinquent the City may, in addition to all other remedies available to the
City for collection on open accounts, initiate termination procedures to
terminate garbage service to the described premises by entering the described
premises, pursuant to the right of ingress and egress granted by the customer
to the City in the utility service agreement, with all personnel and equipment
necessary to retrieve any City owned dumpsters. In addition to the notice
provisions contained herein, the City may serve notice to any appropriate State
agency of its intent to terminate utility services to the described property.
B.   Termination Procedures And Stay Of Termination Proceedings: Delinquent
accounts shall be subject to termination through the process established in
title 3,
chapter 3.07 of this Code.
C.   Additional Fees: If a user or customer's service is terminated for
nonpayment or delinquent payment, the service shall not be reinstated until a
security deposit of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for residential and fifty
dollars ($50.00) for commercial is provided to the City. Additionally, pursuant
to this chapter, the user or customer will be responsible for any charges for
garbage service required from the date of termination of services until the
date services are reestablished.
D.   Abatement Of Nuisance: In addition to the foregoing provisions and
penalties, the City may also proceed with an abatement of nuisance, pursuant to
section
8.04.030 of this title, if garbage service is terminated and a customer allows
trash to accumulate on their property. (Ord. 1180, 2018)
CHAPTER 8.12
HUMAN WASTE DISPOSAL 1
SECTION:
8.12.010: Definitions
8.12.020: Sanitary Water Closet Required
8.12.030: Connection To Sanitary Sewer
8.12.040: Costs To Be Borne By Owner
8.12.050: Inspection Of Disposal Methods
8.12.060: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS § 1-1009 et seq.
8.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
HEALTH OFFICER AND CITY MARSHAL: The persons appointed to such positions
according to the laws governing such appointments, or person or persons
authorized to act as their agents.
HUMAN EXCRETA: The bowel and kidney discharge of human beings.
SANITARY WATER CLOSET: The flush type toilet which is connected with a sewer
line of sufficient capacity and so constructed as to carry away the contents at
all times. (Prior code §§12-5, 12-6, 12-7)
8.12.020: SANITARY WATER CLOSET REQUIRED:
Every residence and building which is equipped with toilet facilities and in
which humans reside or are employed or congregate shall be required to have
sanitary methods for the disposal of human excreta, namely, sanitary water
closet or closets. The toilets required by this chapter shall be the sanitary
water closet type when located within three hundred feet (300') of a sanitary
sewer and connected thereto. (Prior code §12-1)
8.12.030: CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER:
It is unlawful for any person or persons, firm, or corporation owning property
within the city to permit the disposal of human excreta on any property owned
by such person or persons, firm or corporation, except in a sanitary water
closet or closets connected to a sanitary sewer. (Prior code §12-2)
8.12.040: COSTS TO BE BORNE BY OWNER:
The cost of providing for a sanitary method of disposal of human excreta shall
be borne by the owner or the owner's agent of the property located in the city.
(Prior code §12-3)
8.12.050: INSPECTION OF DISPOSAL METHODS:
It shall be the duty of the city council to appoint the health officer, city
marshal, or other duly authorized representative to make an inspection of the
methods of disposal of sewage within the city to secure compliance with this
chapter. Written notification of any violation of this chapter shall be given
by the health officer, city marshal, or other duly authorized representative,
to the owner or the owner's agent and the occupant of the property upon which
the violation occurs. If the provisions of this chapter have not been complied
with within the period of ninety (90) days following the date of notice of
violation, the owner or owner's agent of the property will be prosecuted in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code §12-4)
8.12.060: PENALTY:
Any person or persons, firm, corporation or agents thereof who neglect, fail or
refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter are guilty of an
offense, and each day's separate violation thereof constitutes a separate
offense. For each offense, such person or persons firm, corporation or agents
thereof may be fined not to exceed eighteen dollars ($18.00) and two dollars
($2.00) costs. (Prior code §12-8)
CHAPTER 8.16
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL 1
SECTION:
8.16.010: Title
8.16.020: Definitions
8.16.030: Amendments To Regulations
8.16.040: Enforcement
8.16.050: Violation Abatement Procedure
8.16.060: Hazardous Or Dangerous Condition Created
8.16.070: Data Sampling
8.16.080: Variance Board Created
8.16.090: Residency Required For Board
8.16.100: Terms Of Board Members
8.16.110: Powers And Duties; Meetings
8.16.120: Variances
8.16.130: Application For Variance
8.16.140: Hearing On Variance
8.16.150: Proprietary Information
8.16.160: Notice Requirements
8.16.170: Fee For Variance
8.16.180: Emission Of Air Contaminants
8.16.190: Violator Subject To Liabilities And Penalties
8.16.200: Air Pollution
8.16.210: Emission Of Dense Smoke
8.16.220: Incinerator Modification
8.16.230: Application For Permit; Incinerator Modification
8.16.240: Construction Standards For Incinerators
8.16.250: Operation And Maintenance Standards For Incinerators
8.16.260: Emission Of Particulate Matter; Incinerators
8.16.270: Compliance Required; Incinerators
8.16.280: Emission Of Dense Smoke; Incinerators
8.16.290: Fuel Burning Equipment; Emission Of Particulate Matter
8.16.300: Process Equipment Or Operations; Emission Of Particulate Matter
8.16.310: Control Of Dust; Process Equipment Or Operations
8.16.320: Hot Mix Asphalt Plants; Emission Of Particulate Matter
8.16.330: Emission Of Dense Smoke; Hot Mix Asphalt Plants
8.16.340: Fugitive Dust Control System; Hot Mix Asphalt Plant
8.16.350: Open Burning
8.16.351: Unlawful Burning Prohibited
8.16.360: Motor Vehicle Pollution Control Devices
8.16.370: Disconnection Of Motor Vehicle Pollution Control Devices
8.16.380: Liquified Petroleum Gas As Fuel
8.16.390: Tables And Charts
8.16.400: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 63 OS §§ 2001 et seq., 2003.
8.16.010: TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the AIR QUALITY
CONTROL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 316 §1, 1970)
8.16.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AIR CONTAMINANT: Any smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinder, dirt, noxious or
obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or radioactive
substances, waste particulates, or solid, liquid or gaseous matter in the
atmosphere which, in sufficient quantities, is capable of injuring human, plant
or animal life or depriving the enjoyment thereof.
AIR POLLUTION: The emission of any air contaminants in such place or manner
which, when by itself or combined with other air contaminants present in the
atmosphere, is detrimental to or endangers the health, comfort or safety of any
person or which may cause injury or damage to property or premises.
ATMOSPHERE: Surrounds the earth.
BOARD: The air quality control variance means the air that envelopes or board.
CHIMNEY OR STACK: Chimney, stack, conduit, duct, vent, flue, or opening of any
kind whatsoever arranged to conduct any products to the atmosphere.
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS AND FUELS: Any substance which will readily burn and
includes those substances which, although generally considered noncombustible,
are or may be included in the mass of the combustible material burned or to be
burned.
DENSE SMOKE: Smoke of shade or the equivalent opacity of the shade designated
as no. 1 on the Ringelmann chart or greater.
DIRECTOR: The director of the city-county health department or his designated
employees or representatives.
EMISSION: The emission of air contaminants into the atmosphere.
EVAPORATING LOSS CONTROL SYSTEM: A system or device designed and installed in
such a manner as to reduce or prevent the emission to the atmosphere of the
vapors of the hydrocarbon fuel contained in the fuel tank, carburetor or fuel
pump of the motor vehicle.
EXHAUST EMISSION CONTROL SYSTEM: A system, device or engine modification
designed and installed in such a manner as to reduce or prevent the emission to
the atmosphere of air pollutant gases, vapors and particulate matter released
from the motor vehicle engine through the exhaust manifold and tailpipe.
FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT: Any equipment, machinery, device, structure or
contrivance, and all appurtenances thereto, including ducts, breeching, fuel
feeding equipment, ash removal equipment, internal combustion engines,
combustion controls, stacks and chimneys, which burn fuel or combustible
material for the purpose of producing meat or energy, but does not process
equipment or operations or incinerators.
INCINERATOR: Any device, structure or contrivance used to dispose of refuse or
other waste by burning or the processing of salvageable material by burning but
excluding flares.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A self-propelled, wheeled vehicle designed for normal use of
public streets and highways.
MOTOR VEHICLE POLLUTION CONTROL DEVICE: Any or all of the devices or systems
referred to in this section and designed to control or prevent air pollution
emissions from motor vehicles.
MULTIPLE CHAMBER INCINERATOR: Any incinerator consisting of two (2) or more
combustion chambers of in-line or retort type physically separated by curtained
walls with gas passage ports or ducts and designed for maximum combustion of
the material to be burned.
OPEN BURNING: The burning of combustible materials or refuse in such a manner
that the products of combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere.
OPEN PIT INCINERATOR: A device consisting of a pit (into which the material to
be burned is placed), nozzles, pipes and other appurtenances designed and
arranged in a manner to deliver additional air and/or auxiliary fuel to, or
near, the zone of combustion so that theoretically complete combustion is
accomplished or approached.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Discrete particles of liquid (except uncombined water) or
solid matter or both which may or may not be suspended in air.
POSITIVE CRANKCASE VENTILATOR: A system or device designed and installed in
such a manner as to prevent or reduce the release or emission into the
atmosphere of gases or vapors produced or otherwise present in the crankcase of
the engine of a motor vehicle.
PROCESS EQUIPMENT OR OPERATION: Any equipment, machinery, device or premises
used for the treating, processing or manufacturing of materials, products or
substances, which operation may emit smoke, particulate matter or other air
contaminants.
PROCESS WEIGHT: The total weight of all materials introduced into any specific
process equipment or operation. Solid fuels shall be considered as part of the
process weight but liquids and gases used solely as fuel shall not.
PROCESS WEIGHT PER HOUR: The weight derived by dividing the total process
weight by the number of hours in one complete operation from the beginning of
any given process to the completion thereof, excluding any time during which
the equipment is idle.
PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION: All particulate matter and other air contaminants
emitted as a result of burning of refuse and combustible materials.
PROPRIETY INFORMATION: Any information obtained pursuant to this chapter which
relates to sales figures or to production processes unique to the owner or
operator or which affect the competitive position of such owner or operator.
REFUSE: Garbage, rubbish, trade waste, leaves, salvageable material,
agricultural waste and other wastes.
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart for grading the appearance, density, shade or
opacity of smoke, as published with instructions for use by the United States
bureau of mines, in information circular 7718, dated August 1955.
SMOKE: Small gasborne or airborne particles resulting from combustion
operations and consisting of carbon ash and other matter that is present in
sufficient quantity to be observable.
SOURCE: Any physical arrangement or structure which may emit air contaminants.
It includes, but is not limited to, stacks, chimneys, building openings, open
fires, vehicles, processes, equipment, structures and premises.
SOURCE GAS VOLUME: The total amount of gas, including air contaminants, emitted
from any process, equipment or operation into the atmosphere. (Ord. 316 §2,
1970)
8.16.030: AMENDMENTS TO REGULATIONS:
The council shall not enact or amend any ordinance, rule or regulation
concerning air quality control without first holding a public hearing and
giving not less than ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of such
hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Ord.
316 §3, 1970)
8.16.040: ENFORCEMENT:
The director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 316 §4, 1970)
8.16.050: VIOLATION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
A.   In addition to any penalties, upon determination by the director that a
violation of this chapter has occurred and that the person in violation has not
furnished satisfactory proof that corrective measures have been or are being
taken to abate the nuisance, the director shall give written notice to the
person in violation to abate the nuisance. The notice shall specify the section
which is being violated and a reasonable time, not exceeding twenty (20) days,
within which to abate the nuisance.
B.   If at the end of the time allowed the violation has not been corrected,
the director shall abate the nuisance as provided by law. (Ord. 316 §5, 1970)
8.16.060: HAZARDOUS OR DANGEROUS CONDITION CREATED:
When a violation of this chapter creates a hazardous or dangerous condition
capable of immediately harming life or property, the director shall summarily
abate the nuisance immediately and without notice. (Ord. 316 §6, 1970)
8.16.070: DATA SAMPLING:
Upon written notice, the director may require from any person subject to this
chapter data to establish the nature, extent, quantity or degree of air
contaminants which are or may be discharged by a source under such person's
control, and may require that such data be certified by a professional engineer
registered in the state. The director may, at his expense, designate an agent
to independently gather data as to the nature, extent, quantity and degree of
any air contaminants which are or may be discharged from the source. Subject to
the confidentiality requirements of section
8.16.150 of this chapter, an agent so designated is authorized to inspect any
facilities and equipment necessary to gather the data. The owners of the
premises being inspected will make the same available to inspection and shall
permit the director to install and maintain sampling and testing apparatus as
is reasonable and necessary for measurement of emissions of air contaminants,
provided that they shall not unduly interfere with the operations of the owner.
The director may, in writing, require the owner to provide and maintain means
of access to locations for sampling and testing purposes, in order to secure
data that will disclose the nature, extent, quantity or degree of air
contaminants discharged into the atmosphere. (Ord. 316 §7, 1970)
8.16.080: VARIANCE BOARD CREATED:
There is created a variance board which shall consist of five (5) members to be
appointed by the mayor with the consent and approval of the council. (Ord. 410
§1, 1976: Ord. 316 §9(a), 1970)
8.16.090: RESIDENCY REQUIRED FOR BOARD:
The members of the variance board shall be residents of the city. (Ord. 410 §1,
1976: Ord. 316 §9(b), 1970)
8.16.100: TERMS OF BOARD MEMBERS:
The members of the variance board shall serve for a term of three (3) years or
until their successor is appointed; provided that of the first five (5) members
appointed, two (2) shall serve for a term of two (2) years and one shall serve
for a term of one year. The terms shall expire on June 30 in the year in which
the term would expire, regardless of the date of appointment. Members may be
removed for cause. A member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve the
remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 410 §1, 1976: Ord. 316 §9(c), 1970)
8.16.110: POWERS AND DUTIES; MEETINGS:
A.   The members of the board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses,
require the production of records, documents and other matter, and administer
oaths.
B.   Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum, provided that no variance
shall be granted or revoked without the concurrence of at least four (4)
members.
C.   The board shall select from its number a chairman who shall serve for a
period of one year.
D.   The meetings and hearings of the board shall be called by the chairman.
E.   The members shall be given notice five (5) days prior to any hearing or
meeting. Emergency meetings or hearings may be held provided all members
consent to such meeting in writing.
F.   The board shall make other rules and regulations concerning the procedure
in granting or revoking variances as it deems necessary. (Ord. 410 §1, 1976:
Ord. 316 §9(d), 1970)
8.16.120: VARIANCES:
A.   Variances from the strict provision of this chapter may be granted by the
board, pursuant to applications therefor, when:
   1.   Due to conditions beyond the control of the person in violation, and
which are not self-imposed, compliance with this chapter will result in an
arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or the practical closing and
elimination of any lawful business, occupation or activity; and
   2.   There are not sufficient corresponding benefits or advantages to the
public in the reduction of air pollution.
B.   Variances shall be for a specified time, but not to exceed one year. Upon
expiration of a variance, additional variances may be granted.
C.   A variance granted shall be personal to the applicant and not
transferable.
D.   All variances granted are subject to review and revocation by the board.
(Ord. 409 §1, 1976: Ord. 316 §8, 1970)
8.16.130: APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE:
Any person may make an application for a variance from the terms of this
chapter by paying the required fee and by filing a written application with the
director. The application form shall be verified by the applicant and shall set
forth all information required by the board, including the full name and
address of the applicant, the nature of the violation and the extent to which a
variance is sought. (Ord. 316 §10, 1970)
8.16.140: HEARING ON VARIANCE:
No variance shall be granted or revoked without first holding a public hearing.
Not less than ten (10) days' notice shall be given to all interested persons as
appear in the files and records of the board. In addition, notice of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and published
within the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing. (Ord.
316 §11, 1970)
8.16.150: PROPRIETARY INFORMATION:
A.   No person shall disclose to anyone other than the director, the board or a
court of competent jurisdiction, any information furnished or obtained pursuant
to this chapter.
B.   Upon request of the interested party, all hearings or trials in which
proprietary information is to be divulged shall be held "in camera", and such
information shall be sealed and access otherwise limited. (Ord. 316 §12, 1970)
8.16.160: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
All notices required under this chapter, unless otherwise specified, shall be
in writing and shall be served upon the person being given notice personally or
mailed to his last known address, postage prepaid. The date of mailing shall be
considered as the date such notice is given. (Ord. 316 §13, 1970)
8.16.170: FEE FOR VARIANCE:
Any applicant for a variance shall pay a fee to the city in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00). Such fee shall be paid each time a variance is sought;
provided that the board may, in its discretion, review any variance denied
within ninety (90) days from the date of such denial without additional cost to
the applicant. (Ord. 316 §14, 1970)
8.16.180: EMISSION OF AIR CONTAMINANTS:
The emission of air contaminants in violation of this chapter is a public
nuisance and may be abated by the director as provided by law. (Ord. 316 §15,
1970)
8.16.190: VIOLATOR SUBJECT TO LIABILITIES AND PENALTIES:
Any person owning, operating or controlling a source of air contaminants which
violates this chapter shall be subject to all penalties and liabilities for
such violation. Each day of any such violation constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 316 §16, 1970)
8.16.200: AIR POLLUTION:
No person shall permit or cause air pollution. (Ord. 316 §17, 1970)
8.16.210: EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE:
No person shall cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any source
whatever, except as specifically permitted. (Ord. 316 §18, 1970)
8.16.220: INCINERATOR MODIFICATION:
No person shall install or make any alteration or modification to an
incinerator which affects the emission of air contaminants without first having
obtained a permit from the director and paying the fee of fifty dollars
($50.00). (Ord. 316 §19(a), 1970)
8.16.230: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; INCINERATOR MODIFICATION:
A person making application for a permit shall furnish such information
concerning the incinerator as the director may request, including the plans,
specifications, manufacturer's descriptive literature and test reports. (Ord.
316 §19(b), 1970)
8.16.240: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR INCINERATORS:
A.   All incinerators installed after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter shall be multiple chambered, gas fired in the primary
and secondary chamber, and water scrubbed. All incinerators shall have a
capacity of seventy five (75) pounds per hour or greater, provided that this
capacity shall not be applicable to incinerators designed and used exclusively
as pathological incinerators.
B.   An incinerator of different construction may be used when the director
determines that the incinerator will be equally effective in controlling the
emission of air contaminants and approves its installation. (Ord. 316 §19(c),
1970)
8.16.250: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR INCINERATORS:
All incinerators shall be maintained and operated according to good practices.
(Ord. 316 §19(d), 1970)
8.16.260: EMISSION OF PARTICULATE MATTER; INCINERATORS:
Incinerators with a maximum burning capacity of two hundred (200) pounds per
hour or more shall not emit particulate matter in excess of 0.2 grains per dry
cubic foot corrected to twelve percent (12%) carbon dioxide of exhaust gas
under standard conditions. Incinerators with a maximum burning capacity of less
than two hundred (200) pounds per hour shall not emit particulate matter in
excess of 0.3 grains per dry cubic foot corrected to twelve percent (12%)
carbon dioxide of exhaust gas under standard conditions. (Ord. 316 §19(e),
1970)
8.16.270: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; INCINERATORS:
Within twelve (12) months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, all existing incinerators shall comply with all provisions of
this chapter except section
8.16.240 of this chapter. (Ord. 316 §19(f), 1970)
8.16.280: EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE; INCINERATORS:
Incinerators may emit dense smoke not exceeding a shade or the equivalent
capacity of the shade designated as no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart for periods
not exceeding five (5) minutes in any sixty (60) minute period and not
exceeding twenty (20) minutes in any twenty four (24) hour period. (Ord. 316
§19(g), 1970)
8.16.290: FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT; EMISSION OF PARTICULATE MATTER:
A.   Fuel burning equipment shall not emit particulate matter in excess of that
indicated on table or chart 1, set out in section
8.16.390 of this chapter.
B.   Fuel burning equipment in operation prior to the effective date hereof
shall not emit particulate matter in excess of 0.6 pounds per million btu heat
input, provided that all such existing fuel burning equipment shall comply with
all the provisions of this chapter within twelve (12) months after it becomes
effective. (Ord. 316 §20, 1970)
8.16.300: PROCESS EQUIPMENT OR OPERATIONS; EMISSION OF PARTICULATE MATTER:
Process equipment or operations installed or commenced after the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not emit from the premises upon
which such equipment or operation is located particulate matter in excess of
that indicated on table 2, table 3, or chart 2, set out in section
8.16.390 of this chapter. Existing process equipment or operations shall have
twelve (12) months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter to comply with this section. (Ord. 316 §21(a), 1970)
8.16.310: CONTROL OF DUST; PROCESS EQUIPMENT OR OPERATIONS:
The owner or operator of any process equipment or operation shall maintain dust
control of the plant premises and plant owned, plant leased or plant controlled
access roads by paving, oil treatment or other suitable measures. Good
operating practices shall be observed in relation to stockpiling, screen
changing, and general maintenance to prevent dust generation and atmospheric
entrainment. Good operating practices, including water spraying or other
suitable measures, shall be employed to minimize dust generation and emission
when bins are pulled. (Ord. 316 §21(b), 1970)
8.16.320: HOT MIX ASPHALT PLANTS; EMISSION OF PARTICULATE MATTER:
Hot mix asphalt plants installed or commenced after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall not emit particulate matter into the
atmosphere in excess of the quantity set out in table 4, set out in section
8.16.390 of this chapter. Existing hot mix asphalt plants shall not emit
particulate matter into the atmosphere in excess of the quantity emitted at
plants exhibiting good operation and economic control. Within one year, all hot
mix asphalt plants shall comply with the emission rate shown on table 4 set out
in section
8.16.390 of this chapter, or a new rate to be determined by testing and
experience. (Ord. 316 §22(a), 1970)
8.16.330: EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE; HOT MIX ASPHALT PLANTS:
Hot mix asphalt plants may emit dense smoke not exceeding a shade or the
equivalent opacity of the shade designated as no. 3 on the Ringelmann chart for
periods not exceeding four (4) minutes in any sixty (60) minute period. (Ord.
316 §22(b), 1970)
8.16.340: FUGITIVE DUST CONTROL SYSTEM; HOT MIX ASPHALT PLANT:
No hot mix asphalt plant shall be operated unless it is equipped with a
fugitive dust control system for the hot aggregate which prevents the emission
of particulate matter from any point other than the chimney. (Ord. 316 §22(c),
1970)
8.16.350: OPEN BURNING:
No person shall cause or permit open burning in any public or private place
outside any building, provided that open burning may be conducted if no public
nuisance is or will be created, as follows:
A.   Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of firefighting
personnel when authorized by the fire chief;
B.   Fires set for the elimination of fire hazards or hazardous material where
there is no other practical or lawful method of disposal, and such burning is
authorized by the director and fire chief;
C.   Campfires and other fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial
purposes or for outdoor noncommercial preparation of food;
D.   Fires purposely set for the management of forest or game in accordance
with practices recommended by the Oklahoma department of agriculture or the
United States forest service, and which are authorized by the fire chief;
E.   The burning of refuse and other combustible materials generated in the
operation of a domestic household when no regular garbage service is available;
F.   The burning of combustible material in an open pit incinerator which is
designed and operated for the control of smoke and particulate matter;
G.   The burning of hydrocarbons by atmospheric flares when no other means of
disposal is practical;
H.   The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter for the
purpose of clearing land, and agricultural crop burning when:
   1.   The burning is not within one hundred fifty feet (150') of an occupied
residence or structure other than those located on property where the burning
is conducted,
   2.   Care is used to minimize the amount of dirt on the material being
burned,
   3.   Oil, rubber and other similar materials which produce unreasonable
amounts of air contaminants and smoke are not burned,
   4.   The burning occurs between three (3) hours after sunrise and three (3)
hours before sunset,
   5.   No traffic hazard is created,
   6.   The proposed burn site is preinspected by the fire chief or his
designee and approved allowing for conditions including, but not limited to,
humidity, wind speed, precautions, availability of water, terrain and fire
protection,
   7.   A burn permit is approved and signed by the fire chief or his designee
after payment of a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00),
   8.   Burn permits are effective for one day increments and may be withdrawn
and refunded at the discretion of the fire chief or his designee. (Ord. 1058
§1, 2008: Ord. 411 §1, 1976: Ord. 316 §23, 1970)
8.16.351: UNLAWFUL BURNING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to set fire to any forest, grass, woods,
wildlands or marshes, or to build campfires or bonfires, or to burn trash or
other material that may cause a forest, grass, structure, or woods fire in the
city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, when there is a gubernatorial proclamation of
extraordinary danger from fire in Oklahoma County, unless the setting of any
backfire is necessary to afford protection from the fire, or to save life or
property. The burden of proving the need for setting fires is on the person
claiming same as a defense. A violation of this section shall be an offense
punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court
costs. (Ord. 1014 §1, 2006)
8.16.360: MOTOR VEHICLE POLLUTION CONTROL DEVICES:
This section and sections
8.16.370 and
8.16.380 of this chapter shall apply to all motor vehicles registered or
subject to registration with the Oklahoma state tax commission in which, as new
vehicles, motor vehicle pollution control devices have been installed by virtue
of federal laws and regulations, in effect now and hereafter, requiring such
devices to be installed. However, nothing in this chapter shall supersede or
otherwise modify such federal laws and regulations, nor shall anything in this
chapter be construed to require the installation of motor vehicle pollution
control devices on motor vehicles not referred to by such federal laws and
regulations. (Ord. 316 §24(a), 1970)
8.16.370: DISCONNECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLE POLLUTION CONTROL DEVICES:
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the removal, disconnection or
disabling of a motor vehicle pollution control device which is on a motor
vehicle. (Ord. 316 §24(b), 1970)
8.16.380: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS AS FUEL:
Operation of a motor vehicle or its engine which uses liquefied petroleum gas
as fuel is exempted from provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 316 §24(c), 1970)
8.16.390: TABLES AND CHARTS:
The tables and charts referred to in this chapter are as follows:
A.   Fuel Burning Equipment:
 
Table 1
Heat Input In Million British Thermal Maximum Allowable Emissions Of
Units Per Hour                        Particulate Matter In Pounds Per Million
                                      British Thermal Units
Up to and including 10                0.60
100                                   0.35
1,000                                 0.20
10,000 and above                      0.10
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3848.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3850.png]
 
Utilization of the preceding figure is accomplished by determining the particle
size and then reading vertically to the curve and then horizontally to
determine the collection efficiency. This chart implies that as the particle
size decreases the collection efficiency is decreased.
B.   Process Equipment Or Operations:
 
Table 2
ALLOWABLE RATE OF PARTICULATE MATTER EMISSION BASED ON PROCESS WEIGHT RATE
Process Weight Rate Rate Of Emission Process Weight Rate Rate Of Emission
Pounds/Hr Tons/Hr   Pounds/ Hr       Pounds/Hr Tons/Hr   Pounds/Hr
100    0.05 0.551 16,000    8     16.5
200    0.10 0.877 18,000    9     17.9
400    0.20 1.40  20,000    10    19.2
600    0.30 1.83  30,000    15    25.2
800    0.40 2.22  40,000    20    30.5
1,000  0.50 2.58  50,000    25    35.4
1,500  0.75 3.38  60,000    30    40.0
2,000  1.00 4.10  70,000    35    41.3
2,500  1.25 4.76  80,000    40    42.5
3,000  1.50 5.38  90,000    45    43.6
3,500  1.75 5.96  100,000   50    44.6
4,000  2.00 6.52  120,000   60    46.3
5,000  2.50 7.58  140,000   70    47.8
6,000  3.00 8.56  160,000   80    49.0
7,000  3.50 9.49  200,000   100   51.2
8,000  4.00 10.4  1,000,000 500   69.0
9,000  4.50 11.2  2,000,000 1,000 77.6
10,000 5.00 12.0  6,000,000 3,000 92.7
12,000 6.00 13.6                 
 
Interpolation of the data in this table for process weight rates up to 60,000
pounds/hr shall be accomplished by use of the equation E = 4.10 P0.67, and
interpolation and extrapolation of the data for process weight rates in excess
of 60,000 pounds/hr shall be accomplished by use of the equation E = 55.0
P0.11-40, where E = rate of emission in pounds/hr and P = process weight rate
in tons/hr.
Utilization of this table is accomplished by first determining the process rate
in pounds/hr or in tons/hr and then reading the allowable rate of emission in
pounds/hr horizontally to the right.
 
Table 3
ALLOWABLE RATE OF PARTICULATE MATTER OF EMISSION BASED ON VOLUME PER SCFM
Source Gas Volume, Concentration GR/SCF Source Gas Volume, Concentration GR/SCF
SCFM                                    SCFM
7,000 or less 0.100 140,000           0.038
8,000         0.096 160,000           0.036
9,000         0.092 180,000           0.035
10,000        0.089 200,000           0.034
20,000        0.071 300,000           0.030
30,000        0.062 400,000           0.027
40,000        0.057 500,000           0.025
50,000        0.053 600,000           0.024
60,000        0.050 800,000           0.021
80,000        0.045 1,000,000 or more 0.020
100,000       0.042
120,000       0.040
 
Interpolation of the data in this table shall be accomplished by the use of the
equation C = 1.78S - 0.325 where S = source gas volume, SCFM and C =
concentration in grains per SCF. (GR = Grains)
Utilization of this table is accomplished by first determining the source gas
volume in SCFM and then reading the allowable concentration in GR/SCF
horizontally to the right.
C.   Hot Mix Asphalt Plants:
 
Table 4
Aggregate Process Weight Per Hour Particulate Matter Emission Rate Per Hour
(Pounds)                          (Pounds)
10,000  10
20,000  16
30,000  22
40,000  28
50,000  31
100,000 33
200,000 37
300,000 40
400,000 43
500,000 47
600,000 50
 
For a process weight between any 2 consecutive process weights stated in this
table, the emission limitation shall be determined by interpolation. (Ord. 316
§25, 1970)
8.16.400: PENALTY:
A.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or who fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be liable to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) including costs, and each day such violation is permitted to
exist constitutes a separate offense.
B.   In addition to the remedy in subsection A of this section, the city may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings to enjoin, restrain, correct or
abate any activity which has resulted in, or nuisance which has occurred as a
result of, a violation or violations of this chapter, or to restrain any act or
use on or about the premises made illegal by this chapter. (Ord. 1057 §1, 2008:
Ord. 338 §1, 1972: Ord. 316 §29, 1970)
CHAPTER 8.20
FIREWORKS 1
SECTION:
8.20.010: Selling, Offering For Sale, Or Trading
8.20.020: Possessing Or Igniting
8.20.030: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 68 OS §§ 1621 et seq., 1631; 11 OS § 655.
8.20.010: SELLING, OFFERING FOR SALE, OR TRADING:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation within the
city limits to sell or offer for sale, trade or barter any firecracker of any
size, type, kind or description, or any skyrocket, torpedo, bomb, Roman candle,
or other substance or device designed and intended for pyrotechnic or
noisemaking purposes. (Prior code §13-99)
8.20.020: POSSESSING OR IGNITING:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to have in his possession or to
discharge, ignite or in any manner shoot any fireworks or firecrackers of any
size, type or description, or any skyrockets, torpedoes, bombs, Roman candles,
or other substances or devices designed and intended for pyrotechnic or
noisemaking purposes; provided that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to pyrotechnic displays or fireworks in public parks or any other large,
open fields or areas when such are permitted by the fire chief or upon
proclamation of the mayor of the city. (Prior code §13-100)
8.20.030: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not to exceed eighteen dollars
($18.00) and two dollars ($2.00) costs, and each violation constitutes a
separate offense. (Prior code §13-101)
CHAPTER 8.24
NOISE 1
SECTION:
8.24.010: Prohibited
8.24.020: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 655; 63 OS § 1-1511 et seq.
8.24.010: PROHIBITED:
The operation of any machinery device or business producing a loud and
disturbing noise which results in the disturbance of the peace and welfare of
the public beyond the property occupied by the machinery, device or business
within the city is prohibited on Sunday and between the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on other days of the week. (Ord. 412
§1, 1976: prior code §13-82)
8.24.020: PENALTY:
Each day's violation of section
8.24.010 of this chapter constitutes a separate offense, and any person, firm
or corporation violating the provisions of section
8.24.010 of this chapter is guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine and costs for each offense. (Ord. 412 §1, 1976: prior code
§13-83)
CHAPTER 8.28
PUBLIC MEETINGS
SECTION:
8.28.010: Permit Required; Regulations
8.28.020: Penalty
8.28.010: PERMIT REQUIRED; REGULATIONS:
Any person or persons desiring to hold a peaceable public or religious meeting
upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or public places within the city shall
secure a permit from the mayor, in writing, giving the date or dates that the
meetings will be held, and the names of the person, persons or organization who
will hold the same. Upon the filing of said request, the mayor may grant a
permit, revocable at any time, for such person, persons or organization to hold
a meeting at such time and place and in such manner upon the public
thoroughfares in the city as the mayor determines will not interfere with the
general traffic or convenience of the public in the use of such streets,
alleys, parks or public places. It is unlawful for any person to hold or assist
in holding any such meeting without first obtaining such permit for the time
and place where such meeting shall be held. It is unlawful and an offense to
disturb or disquiet any such meeting, or to make any loud or unusual noise, or
by any rude conduct to annoy the speaker or other persons gathered at such
meeting. (Prior code §13-70)
8.28.020: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of an offense under the terms of section
8.28.010 of this chapter shall be fined such amount as may be set by the
municipal court. (Ord. 428 §1, 1976: prior code §13-78)
CHAPTER 8.30
PARKS
SECTION:
8.30.010: Office Of Park Director Created
8.30.020: Park Director; Power And Duties
8.30.030: Hours
8.30.040: Extension Of Hours And Closing
8.30.050: Sleeping In Park
8.30.060: Restriction In Selling And Advertising
8.30.070: Damaging Property
8.30.080: Offensive Conduct
8.30.090: Violations
8.30.100: Penalties
8.30.010: OFFICE OF PARK DIRECTOR CREATED:
There is created the office of the park director which shall be held by the
director of streets and alleys. The functions shall be as provided by ordinance
and the mayor. (Ord. 690 §1, 1989)
8.30.020: PARK DIRECTOR; POWER AND DUTIES:
The park director shall be responsible for the care, maintenance and control of
all parks and grounds for park purposes and all structures thereon, which are
owned or under the control of the city. The director shall have the power to
make and alter such rules and regulations as may be necessary to fulfill the
responsibilities set forth herein and to maintain security, order, safety and
efficient operation of the parks.
Such rules and regulations, including amendments thereto, shall be submitted to
the city council for approval at a public hearing and shall not be effective
until such approval is given by a majority of the council. (Ord. 690 §1, 1989)
8.30.030: HOURS:
The city parks shall be open to the public from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. each day of the week. At all other times the parks
shall be closed. No person shall refuse to leave any park or remain in any park
during such hours as the park is closed for public use. The hours shall be
posted at each park in conspicuous places to be easily observed. (Ord. 690 §1,
1989)
8.30.040: EXTENSION OF HOURS AND CLOSING:
The director may, for good cause shown, extend the hours of any park, or
portion thereof, for recreational, religious, civic, charitable, benevolent,
fraternal or similar activities which shall be granted upon the application for
a permit. The director shall also have the authority to declare any park, or
section thereof, temporarily closed to the public when he determines that an
emergency exists which affects the health, safety and welfare of the city or
the protection of its property. Such closing may continue in effect until the
next council meeting which shall review the circumstances and either rescind
the closing or allow it to continue. (Ord. 690 §1, 1989)
8.30.050: SLEEPING IN PARK:
It is unlawful for any person to sleep in any public park between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 690 §1, 1989)
8.30.060: RESTRICTION IN SELLING AND ADVERTISING:
No person shall sell, dispose or offer for sale, any food, merchandise or other
article or thing except as approved by the city council. No person may do any
hawking or peddling, distribution of handbills, erect any sign, board, or affix
any notice, advertisement or other writing to any property within the park.
(Ord. 690 §1, 1989)
8.30.070: DAMAGING PROPERTY:
No person shall damage, destroy, displace or remove any trees, shrubs, picnic
tables or seats, signs, fences, building, structures, equipments or other
public property whether manmade or naturally growing. (Ord. 690 §1, 1989)
8.30.080: OFFENSIVE CONDUCT:
The use, consumption or drinking of intoxicating beverages; drunkenness,
gambling or engaging in disorderly, unchaste or lewd conduct; making, aiding or
assisting in any disorderly noise, riot or breach of peace by any person shall
be unlawful. (Ord. 690 §1, 1989)
8.30.090: VIOLATIONS:
No person shall violate any provision of the duly approved rules and
regulations of the director. The director, all police and peace officers, and
park attendants or employees shall have the authority to eject from any park
any person whose conduct violates any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
690 §1, 1989)
8.30.100: PENALTIES:
In the absence of a different penalty, any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be deemed guilty of an offense
against the city and shall be fined a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00) plus costs. (Ord. 690 §1, 1989)
CHAPTER 8.40
DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8.40.010: Procedure To Condemn
8.40.010: PROCEDURE TO CONDEMN:
A.   The city council may cause dilapidated buildings within the municipal
limits to be torn down and removed in accordance with the provisions of this
section:
   1.   At least ten (10) days' notice that a building is to be torn down or
removed shall be given to the owner of the property before the city council
holds a hearing. A copy of the notice shall be posted on the property to be
affected. In addition, a copy of said notice shall be sent by mail to the
property owner at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the
office of the county treasurer. Written notice shall also be mailed to any
mortgage holder as shown by records in the office of the county clerk to the
last known address of the mortgagee. At the time of mailing of notice to any
property owner or mortgage holder, the city shall obtain a receipt of mailing
from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and
the name and address of the mailee. However, if neither the property owner nor
mortgage holder can be located, notice may be given by posting a copy of the
notice on the property, or by publication as defined in title 11 Oklahoma
Statutes section 1-102, one time not less than ten (10) days prior to any
hearing or action by the city council pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
   2.   A hearing shall be held by the city council to determine if the
property is dilapidated and has become detrimental to the health, safety, or
welfare of the general public and the community, or if the property creates a
fire hazard which is dangerous to other property.
   3.   Pursuant to a finding that the condition of the property constitutes a
detriment or a hazard and that the property would be benefited by the removal
of such conditions, the city council may cause the dilapidated building to be
torn down and removed. The city council shall fix reasonable dates for the
commencement and completion of the work. The city clerk shall immediately file
a notice of dilapidation and lien with the county clerk describing the
property, the findings of the municipality at the hearing, and stating that the
city claims a lien on the property for the destruction and removal costs and
that such costs are the personal obligation of the property owner from and
after the date of filing of the notice. The agents of the city are granted the
right of entry on the property for the performance of the necessary duties as a
governmental function of the city if the work is not performed by the property
owner within the dates fixed by the city council.
   4.   The city shall determine the actual cost of the dismantling and removal
of dilapidated buildings and any other expenses that may be necessary in
conduction with the dismantling and removal of the buildings, including the
costs of notice and mailing. The city clerk shall forward a statement of the
actual cost attributable to the dismantling and removal of the buildings and a
demand for payment of such costs, by mail to the property owner. In addition, a
copy of the statement shall be mailed to any mortgage holder at the address
provided for in subsection A1 of this section. At the time of mailing of the
statement of costs to any property owner or mortgage holder, the city shall
obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall
indicate the date of mailing and the name and address of the mailee. If the
city dismantles or removes any dilapidated buildings, the cost to the property
owner shall not exceed the actual cost of the labor, maintenance, and equipment
required for the dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings. If
dismantling and removal of the dilapidated buildings is done on a private
contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder.
   5.   When payment is made to the city for costs incurred, the city clerk
shall file a release of lien, but if payment attributable to the actual cost of
the dismantling and removal of the buildings is not made within six (6) months
from the date of the mailing of the statement to the owner of such property,
the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to
the county treasurer of Oklahoma County. The costs shall be levied on the
property and collected by the county treasurer as are other taxes authorized by
law. Until finally paid, the costs and the interest thereon shall be the
personal obligation of the property owner from and after the date of the notice
of dilapidation and lien is filed with the county clerk. In addition, the cost
and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the
notice of the lien is filed with the county clerk. The lien shall be coequal
with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments
and shall be prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the
property. The lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid. At the time of
collection, the county treasurer shall collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00)
for each parcel of property. The fee shall be deposited to the credit of the
general fund of the county. At any time prior to collection as provided for in
this subsection A5, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the
amount owing and interest thereon including an action in personam against the
property owner and an action in rem to foreclose its lien against the property.
A mineral interest, if severed from the surface interest and not owned by the
surface owner, shall not be subject to any tax or judgment lien created
pursuant to this section. Upon receiving payment, the city clerk shall forward
to the county treasurer a notice of such payment and shall direct discharge of
the lien.
   6.   The city may designate, by ordinance, an administrative officer or
administrative body to carry out the duties of the city council specified in
this section. The property owner shall have the right of appeal to the city
council from any order of the administrative officer or administrative body.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing written notice of appeal with the city
clerk within ten (10) days after the administrative order is rendered.
   7.   For the purposes of this section, "dilapidated building" means a
structure which through neglect or injury lacks necessary repairs or otherwise
is in a state of decay or partial ruin to such an extent that the structure is
a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. "Owner" means
the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county
treasurer.
   8.   Nothing in the provisions of this section shall prevent the city from
abating a dilapidated building as a nuisance or otherwise exercising its police
power to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the general public.
   9.   The officers, employees or agents of the city shall not be liable for
any damages or loss of property due to the removal of dilapidated buildings
performed pursuant to the provisions of this section or as otherwise prescribed
by law.
   10.   The provisions of the act shall not apply to any property zoned and
used for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 819 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 8.45
SMOKE AND VAPE FREE CITY
SECTION:
8.45.010: Definitions
8.45.020: Prohibition Of Tobacco, Marijuana And Vapor Products On City-Owned/
Operated Property
8.45.030: Posting
8.45.040: Violation And Penalty
8.45.050: Enforcement
8.45.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
INDOOR AREA: Means any enclosed area used or visited by employees or the
public, at all times, regardless of whether work is being performed. Indoor
area includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms,
classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by
employees, as well as all space between a floor and ceiling that is
predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors,
doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT: Means any product that contains a concentration of delta-
9 tetrahydrocannabinol greater than three- tenths of one percent (0.3%) on a
dry weight basis and is intended for human consumption. Marijuana product does
not include any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY: Means all buildings, indoor areas, and outdoor areas,
including but not limited to recreational areas, and other property, or
portions thereof, owned or operated by the City of Warr Acres, including but
not limited to vehicles and equipment owned by the Municipality.
OUTDOOR AREA: Means any area that is not an indoor area, and includes outdoor
recreational.
RECREATIONAL AREA: Any area that is owned, controlled or used by the City of
Warr Acres and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless
of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes but is not
limited to parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses,
walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming
pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, beaches surrounding lakes and skateboard
parks.
SMOKING: Means the carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or
other lighted smoking device and shall include devices designed to smoke
tobacco products or marijuana products.
TOBACCO-FREE: To prohibit the use of any tobacco product by anyone, anywhere,
at any time.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Means any product that contains tobacco and is intended for
human consumption. Tobacco product does not include any product approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product.
VAPOR PRODUCT: Means any noncombustible product, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic
circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to
produce a vapor in a solution or other form. Vapor product shall include any
vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that
is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any
vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain
nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, or other electronic devices. Shall also
include any vapor cartridge or other container containing a marijuana product.
(Ord. 1187, 2018)
8.45.020: PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO, MARIJUANA AND VAPOR PRODUCTS ON CITY-OWNED/
OPERATED PROPERTY:
A.   Smoking is prohibited in all places in which smoking tobacco products is
prohibited by Oklahoma State law. The smoking of marijuana products is hereby
prohibited in all places where the smoking of tobacco products is prohibited by
Oklahoma State law regardless of whether it is later found that Oklahoma State
law did or did not address the smoking of said products at the time of the
violation.
B.   Using tobacco products, marijuana products and vapor products is
prohibited on all Municipal property, indoor and outdoor, including parks and
recreational areas.
C.   Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person or entity from prohibiting
the use of tobacco products or vapor products (not including marijuana
products) on their property, even if the use of tobacco products or vapor
products (not including marijuana products) is not otherwise prohibited in that
area.
D.   No person or entity shall knowingly permit the use of tobacco products or
vapor products in an area that is under the control of that person or entity
and in which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by
law.
E.   No person or entity shall permit the placement of ash receptacles, such as
ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the control of that person or
entity and in which smoking is prohibited by law. However, the presence of ash
receptacles shall not be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products
or vapor products in violation of any provision of this chapter.
F.   No person or entity shall intimidate, threaten, or otherwise retaliate
against another person or entity that seeks to attain compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 1187, 2018)
8.45.030: POSTING:
A.   The person or entity that has legal or de facto control of an area in
which the use of tobacco products or vapor products is prohibited by this
chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous, and unambiguous sign at each point of
entry to the area, and in at least one other conspicuous point within the area.
This shall not apply to the use of marijuana products in public which is
prohibited.
B.   For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or vapor products (not
including marijuana products) in indoor areas, the sign or decal shall be at
least 4 inches by 2 inches in size and shall clearly state that smoking tobacco
products or the use of tobacco products is prohibited or that a tobacco-free
environment is provided. For restrictions on the use of tobacco products or
vapor products (not including marijuana products) in outdoor areas, signs shall
be weather-resistant, at least 15 inches by 15 inches in size, with lettering
of at least one inch (1"), and shall clearly state that smoking or tobacco use
is prohibited or that a tobacco-free environment is provided.
C.   For purposes of this section, the Mayor or his/her designee shall be
responsible for the posting of signs on Municipal property, both indoor and
outdoor.
D.   Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not
be a defense to a charge of the use of tobacco products or vapor products in
violation of any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1187, 2018)
8.45.040: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
A.   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of City of Warr
Acres Police Department. In addition, any peace officer or Code enforcement
official may enforce this chapter.
B.   Any person who knowingly violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
C.   The possession of a lighted tobacco product or vapor product in violation
of this chapter is a nuisance.
D.   Any person who possesses lighted marijuana product or a vapor product
utilizing a marijuana product in public shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
regardless of whether the person has a State issued license. Causing,
permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of this subsection
regarding use of a marijuana product in public shall also constitute a
violation of this subsection. Upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs and
applicable fees.
E.   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to
any other remedies available at law or in equity.
F.   Each instance of tobacco product or vapor product use in violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
G.   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any
provision of this chapter regarding tobacco product or vapor product use shall
also constitute a violation of this chapter.
H.   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law,
any violation of this chapter regarding tobacco product, marijuana product or
vapor product use may be remedied by the City Attorney, including, but not
limited to, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, Criminal
Code enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 1187,
2018)
8.45.050: ENFORCEMENT:
The City shall, at a minimum, do the following in order to prevent tobacco use
in City owned/operated places:
A.   Post signs at entrances to City owned/operated places which state that
tobacco use is prohibited; and
B.   Ask tobacco users to refrain from using any form of tobacco products, upon
observation of anyone violating the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1187,
2018)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 1
I.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
Interference With Or Impersonation Of City Officers   9.02
Interference With Fire Department   9.04
False Call Or Alarm   9.06
Flags And Decorations   9.08
Closed Or Restricted Areas   9.10
II.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
Assault   9.14
Battery   9.16
Injury With Acid   9.18
Interference With Medical Personnel   9.22
III.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC DECENCY
Offenses Involving Alcoholic Beverages   9.26
Gambling   9.28
Slot Machines; Pinball Machines   9.30
Prostitution   9.32
Disorderly Houses   9.34
Pornography And Obscenity   9.36
Controlled Substances And Drugs   9.38
IV.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE
Disorderly Conduct   9.42
Disturbing The Peace   9.44
Riot   9.46
V.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
City Property   9.54
Trespassing And Vandalism   9.56
Molesting Property   9.58
Floodlights   9.60
Larceny   9.62
Other Offenses Against Property Rights   9.64
VI.   CONSUMER PROTECTION
Confidence Games   9.70
Price Gouging   9.72
VII.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Curfew   9.76
Prevention Of Youth Access To Tobacco   9.77
VIII.   WEAPONS
Firearms And Weapons   9.82
IX.   PENALTIES
Penalty For Violations   9.90
X.   MISCELLANEOUS
Court Costs   9.94
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS; 11 OS § 642.
I.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT 1
CHAPTER 9.02
INTERFERENCE WITH OR IMPERSONATION OF CITY OFFICERS 2
SECTION:
9.02.010: Impersonation Of Police Or City Officers
9.02.020: Resistance Or Interference With An Officer
9.02.030: Eluding Or Attempting To Elude A Police Officer
9.02.040: Assaulting An Officer
9.02.050: Unlawful Acts Against Police Dogs
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS ch. 6.
2 2. 21 OS §§ 263, 264, 267, 268, ch. 12.
9.02.010: IMPERSONATION OF POLICE OR CITY OFFICERS:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city to falsely assume,
impersonate, pretend or falsely represent himself to be an officer or police
officer of the city. Such offense shall include any person who attempts to
exercise such functions of any officer without due authority; provided,
however, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent private persons
from making arrests for felonies or misdemeanors committed in their presence.
(Ord. 418 §1, 1976: prior code §13-55)
9.02.020: RESISTANCE OR INTERFERENCE WITH AN OFFICER:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to deter, interfere with, resist,
lend aid to resistance, oppose, obstruct, threaten, or intimidate any police or
other officer of the city in the discharge of duty including, but not limited
to, making lawful arrests, conducting investigations and serving lawful process
or court orders.
As used in this section, the phrase "oppose or obstruct" shall, in addition to
its common meaning, mean the following acts:
A.   Flight by one sought to be arrested before restraint, but after notice is
given that such person is under arrest;
B.   Any violence toward, resistance or opposition to the arresting or other
police officer after the arrested party is placed under arrest and before he is
incarcerated in jail;
C.   The giving of a warning to or assisting any person charged with an offense
or in the act of committing an offense to flee;
D.   To bar, lock, or create a barrier to the officer in the performance of his
duties;
E.   Refusal of an arrested party to make or provide his true name and make his
identity known to arresting authority when requested;
F.   Refusing to aid a police officer in making an arrest when so requested;
G.   Refusal to comply with a lawful order of the police officer while on
property owned or controlled by the city.
Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be punishable by a
fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs.
(Ord. 727 §1, 1992)
9.02.030: ELUDING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE A POLICE OFFICER:
No operator of a motor vehicle who has received a visual or audible signal to
stop by a police officer shall fail to comply or wilfully increase the speed or
extinguish the lights of such vehicle or commit other acts to elude or attempt
to elude the police officer. The signal to stop shall be given by emergency
light and a siren on a vehicle marked as a police vehicle.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be
fined two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 728 §1, 1992)
9.02.040: ASSAULTING AN OFFICER:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to assault, batter, or
assault and batter any city officer, police officer, or city official while
such officer is engaged in the performance of official duties.
B.   Any person violating this section shall upon conviction be fined two
hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 729 §1, 1992)
9.02.050: UNLAWFUL ACTS AGAINST POLICE DOGS:
A.   No person shall wilfully torture, torment, beat, mutilate, injure,
disable, or otherwise mistreat a police dog owned, or the service of which is
employed, by the city or any other law enforcement agency of the state or
political subdivision of the state.
B.   No person shall wilfully interfere with the lawful performance of any
police dog. (Ord. 1082 §1, 2010)
CHAPTER 9.04
INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT 2
SECTION:
9.04.010: Driving Over Fire Hose
9.04.020: Right Of Way Of Department Vehicles; Disorderly Conduct
 
Notes
2 2. 21 OS § 1217; 47 OS §§ 11-1109, 11-1108.
9.04.010: DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE:
Whenever any hose of the fire department is laid upon any street, alley,
bridge, vacant lot or other place, public or private, it is unlawful and an
offense for any person to drive any automobile, truck, bus, wagon, locomotive
or railway car or other vehicle over the same, except upon specific orders from
the fire chief or other officer in charge where the hose is being used;
provided that this section shall not apply to any vehicle belonging to the fire
department. (Ord. 421 §1, 1976: prior code §13-53)
9.04.020: RIGHT OF WAY OF DEPARTMENT VEHICLES; DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A.   All drivers, operators, engineers or conductors of automobiles, trucks,
buses, street or railway cars, or other vehicles, when in the vicinity of any
fire department vehicle or apparatus, when on its way to or on duty at a fire,
shall not follow or attempt to follow such vehicle or apparatus and shall so
manage and control such car, bus, truck or vehicle and the motive power which
moves the same so as not to interfere, obstruct or delay the fire department
vehicle or apparatus, or any part of it, in the discharge of its duty.
B.   Every person at or near a fire who conducts himself in a disorderly manner
or who neglects or refuses to obey promptly any order of the chief or his
assistants, or any police officer on duty at such fire, or who resists or
obstructs, hinders or abuses any officer of the fire department or fireman in
the proper discharge of his duty is guilty of an offense, and any police
officer may forthwith arrest, without warrant, and take to the police station
any person so offending. (Prior code §13-54)
CHAPTER 9.06
FALSE CALL OR ALARM 2
SECTION:
9.06.010: Falsely Engaging Fire Department
9.06.020: Falsely Engaging Police Department
9.06.030: 911 Emergency Telephone System
9.06.031: Notification Of Improper Use Of 911
 
Notes
2 2. 21 OS § 1851 et seq.
9.06.010: FALSELY ENGAGING FIRE DEPARTMENT:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city to turn or send in any
false alarm of fire or to make any false signal or alarm calculated wilfully to
falsely or unnecessarily call out the fire department or others engaged in the
prevention of fires. (Prior code §13-51)
9.06.020: FALSELY ENGAGING POLICE DEPARTMENT:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city to turn or send in any
false call or alarm for the purpose of improperly or carelessly attracting the
attention of the police or any police officer, or to wrongfully use any police
whistle or any other instrument used by the police, or to imitate any signal
used by police or other officers, or to molest or tamper with any police alarm
box, telephone or other instrument used by police officers in communicating or
signalling one another. (Prior code §13-52)
9.06.030: 911 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM:
No person shall knowingly use the 911 telephone system to report a nonemergency
condition or sound a false alarm or lodge a complaint or report false or
misleading information which results in the dispatch of emergency services from
any public agency as defined in this title. Any person violating the provisions
of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) and an assessment for the cost resulting from the
dispatch of emergency personnel and equipment. Each improper use of the 911
telephone system is an offense and fines and assessments are applicable to each
separate offense. (Ord. 696 §1, 1990)
9.06.031: NOTIFICATION OF IMPROPER USE OF 911:
Any person owning or leasing telephone equipment and telephone lines, and
receiving benefit from the 911 emergency telephone system and who use the 911
emergency telephone system for nonemergency purposes or allows a minor child or
minor children to use the 911 emergency system for nonemergency purposes, shall
be notified by certified mail, restricted delivery, after the third such
infraction. (Ord. 696 §2, 1990)
CHAPTER 9.08
FLAGS AND DECORATIONS 2
SECTION:
9.08.010: Removing Or Defacing
 
Notes
2 2. 21 OS ch. 9.
9.08.010: REMOVING OR DEFACING:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to remove, destroy, molest, deface
or disarrange any flag or other decoration that may be used by any other person
in, upon or about any building in the city to indicate celebration of any
holiday or public event, without consent of the owner thereof. (Prior code §13-
57)
CHAPTER 9.10
CLOSED OR RESTRICTED AREAS
SECTION:
9.10.010: Entering Closed Or Restricted Areas
9.10.010: ENTERING CLOSED OR RESTRICTED AREAS:
A.   No person shall enter or remain in an area or areas clearly designated by
the police department as closed to the general public or limited access to only
authorized persons during times of natural or manmade disaster, riot, civil
disorder, criminal or accident investigation or such other times as the chief
of police or his designee may determine necessary for the purpose of
maintaining and protecting life, property or the public peace.
B.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 731
§1, 1992)
II.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 1
CHAPTER 9.14
ASSAULT 2
SECTION:
9.14.010: Prohibited
9.14.015: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS part III.
2 2. 21 OS ch. 20.
9.14.010: PROHIBITED:
Any person who, in the city, attempts unlawfully to strike or in any unlawful
manner offers to do bodily harm to another, or who unlawfully makes an attempt
to apply, either directly or indirectly, any degree of force or violence to the
person of another is guilty of an assault, and an offense against the
ordinances of the city. (Prior code §13-32)
9.14.015: PENALTY:
Persons convicted of violating the provisions of section
9.14.010 of this chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine in the amount of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 906 §1, 2000)
CHAPTER 9.16
BATTERY
SECTION:
9.16.010: Prohibited
9.16.015: Penalty
9.16.010: PROHIBITED:
Any person in the city who uses any wilful and unreasonable force or violence
upon the person of another is guilty of a battery and an offense against the
ordinances of the city. (Ord. 422 §1, 1976)
9.16.015: PENALTY:
Persons convicted of violating the provisions of section
9.16.010 of this chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine in the amount of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 906 §2, 2000)
CHAPTER 9.18
INJURY WITH ACID
SECTION:
9.18.010: Prohibited
9.18.010: PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city, purposely or
premeditatedly, to put or throw, upon the person or property of another or upon
any animal, any acid, corroding or other irritating or harmful substance, with
intent to injure or harass such person, property or animal. (Prior code §13-33)
CHAPTER 9.22
INTERFERENCE WITH MEDICAL PERSONNEL
SECTION:
9.22.010: Prohibited
9.22.010: PROHIBITED:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to intentionally and wilfully
interfere with a physician, physician's trained assistant, nurse, nurse's aide,
paramedic, emergency medical technician, or other medical or hospital personnel
in the performance of their duties relating to the care and treatment of
patients in any hospital, clinic, other medical facility, or at the scene of a
medical emergency.
B.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 730
§1, 1992)
III.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC DECENCY
CHAPTER 9.26
OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
9.26.010: Prohibited
9.26.020: Sale To Minors
9.26.030: Possession Prohibitions
9.26.040: Consumption
9.26.050: Permitting Or Allowing Gatherings Where Minors Are Consuming
Alcoholic Beverages
9.26.010: PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to be intoxicated or drunk
in any street, avenue, alley or other public place or upon private property not
lawfully under his control in the city. (Ord. 661 §1, 1987)
9.26.020: SALE TO MINORS:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person selling intoxicating or
nonintoxicating alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off of the premises
to sell any such alcoholic beverages to any minor under the age of twenty one
(21) years. (Ord. 632A §1, 1986)
9.26.030: POSSESSION PROHIBITIONS:
A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person under twenty one (21)
years of age to be in possession of any intoxicating beverage containing more
than 3.2 percent alcohol, by weight, while such person is upon any public
street, avenue, alley, road, highway, or other public place, or upon private
property not lawfully under his control in the city.
B.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person under twenty one (21)
years of age to be in possession of any nonintoxicating alcoholic beverages, as
defined by the Oklahoma Statutes in title 37, section 163.1, on any public
street, avenue, alley, road, highway, or other public place, or upon private
property not lawfully under his control in the city. (Ord. 661 §1, 1987)
9.26.040: CONSUMPTION:
A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to consume any
intoxicating beverage containing more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight or to
consume any low point alcohol (3.2 beer) in any public place within the city.
B.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to consume any
intoxicating beverage containing more than 3.2 percent alcohol by weight or to
consume any low point alcohol (3.2 beer) in any of the city parks or on
property owned by the city, including property under lease by the city for
recreational purposes.
C.   The possession of the above referenced alcoholic beverage on the person of
any individual in the city where the container has been opened, the seal
broken, or the original cap or cork has been removed, shall be presumption of
drinking the alcoholic beverage in a public place within the city.
D.   Any persons found guilty, pleading guilty or pleading nolo contendere
before the municipal court to a violation of this section shall be punishable
by a fine in the amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court
costs. (Ord. 970 §1, 2002)
9.26.050: PERMITTING OR ALLOWING GATHERINGS WHERE MINORS ARE CONSUMING
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
   ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains
one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume or when diluted, mixed, or
combined with other substances. This term includes intoxicating beverages and
"low point beer" as defined herein.
   GATHERING: A party, gathering, or event, where a group of three (3) or more
persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social
activity.
   INTOXICATING BEVERAGE: Includes beverages containing more than three and
two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: 1) a person who, by court order, is the guardian of the
person of a minor; or 2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by the court.
   LOW POINT BEER: Means and includes beverages containing more than one-half
of one percent (1/2 of 1%) alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-
tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or
cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of
barley or other grain, malt or similar products.
   MINOR: Any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
   PARENT: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or
stepparent of another person.
   PREMISES: Any residence or other private property, place, or premises,
including any commercial or business premises.
   RESPONSE COST: The costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire,
and other emergency response providers to a gathering, including, but not
limited to: 1) salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement,
fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent
responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the
administrative costs attributable to such response(s); 2) the cost of any
medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other
emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or leaving
the scene of a gathering; 3) the cost of repairing any city equipment or
property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding
to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering; and 4) any other
allowable costs related to the enforcement of this section.
B.   Consumption Of Alcohol By Minor In Public Place, Place Open To Public, Or
Place Not Open To Public: Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for
any minor to:
   1.   Consume at any public place or any place open to the public, any
alcoholic beverage; or
   2.   Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage,
unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor
is being supervised by his or her parent or legal guardian.
C.   Hosting, Permitting, Or Allowing A Party, Gathering, Or Event Where Minors
Are Consuming Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited:
   1.   Unlawful Activity:
      a.   It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who
knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at the gathering. Reasonable steps are: controlling access to alcoholic
beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages
present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering
by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government issued identification cards
to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the
gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering.
      b.   It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to
knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises
where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person
having control of the premises either knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic
beverage or reasonably should have known that a minor consumed an alcoholic
beverage had the person taken all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption
of an alcoholic beverage by a minor as set forth in subsection C1a of this
section.
   2.   Conduct Between Minor And Parent Or Guardian: This section shall not
apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs
exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian.
   3.   Family Gathering: Nothing in this section should be interpreted to
prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from
providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision
of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering
intoxicated and is found in public then said providers of alcohol will be held
responsible in the same manner as a nonfamily gathering.
   4.   Religious Gathering: Nothing in this section should be interpreted to
prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if
a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in
public then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the manner as
a nonreligious gathering.
   5.   Premises Licensed By The State: This section shall not apply to any
premises licensed by the state of Oklahoma to dispense alcoholic beverages.
   6.   Penalty: Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished for the violation with a fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 1094, 9-21-2010)
CHAPTER 9.28
GAMBLING
SECTION:
9.28.010: Prohibited
9.28.020: Paraphernalia Declared A Nuisance
9.28.030: Possession Of Paraphernalia
9.28.040: Confiscation Of Paraphernalia
9.28.050: Destruction Of Paraphernalia
9.28.060: Pools
9.28.010: PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person or persons in the city to deal, play, carry on,
set up, or keep on his or their premises for play, or open, cause to be opened,
or conduct, either as owner, employee or lessee, whether for hire or not, any
lottery or any game in which the winning or reward is money or any
representative thereof, or any other thing of value; and no person or persons
shall conduct or play at any game of faro, money, roulette, keno, or any game
played with cards, dice, or any other device, for money, checks, credit,
merchandise, or any other representative of value. This general prohibition
found in this section shall not apply to bingo games conducted under and
pursuant to title 21, section 995.1 et seq., of the Oklahoma Statutes and under
a special use permit and business permit granted pursuant to this code. (Ord.
645 §2, 1986)
9.28.020: PARAPHERNALIA DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any property, instrument, or device designed or adapted for use, or which may
be used, in the city in any game, drawing, or lottery, the reward or winning of
which is money or any other thing of value, or which is used or kept in any
gambling house in the city as a convenience or accessory to the patrons or
habitues of any room or house used for gaming or gambling purposes, whether the
same was designed, constructed, or built for such purpose or not, is a
nuisance; and it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as
owner, manager, clerk, or employee, to keep, have in his or their possession,
or permit to be kept on his or their premises in the city any instrumentality
or device designed or adapted for use in any game, drawing, or lottery where
the reward or winning is money, or any other representative of or thing of
value. (Prior code §13-2)
9.28.030: POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA:
Possession in the city by any person, or the keeping or custody by any person,
of any property designed, constructed or built for the purpose of being used as
a gambling device or instrumentality shall be prima facie evidence that the
possessor or keeper thereof intended to use such device in violation of this
chapter and against the peace and welfare of the people of the city; and the
keeping or custody of any device or instrumentality which may be used for
gaming or gambling purposes, on or within any place, house, or room ordinarily
devoted to and used for gaming or gambling purposes shall be prima facie
evidence that such device or instrumentality was being kept and used as a
gambling device; and the fact that any person is apprehended or caught
loitering or staying about or in any place, house, or room in the city used for
the purpose of gaming and gambling, or reputed to be such, shall be prima facie
evidence that such person was at such place for the purpose of gambling, and in
violation of this chapter. (Prior code §13-3)
9.28.040: CONFISCATION OF PARAPHERNALIA:
It shall be the duty of any police officer who discovers or has knowledge of
the use, or existence of any gaming or gambling instrumentality or device,
described, referred to, or mentioned in this chapter as unlawful, to seize the
same and safely keep it until the next session of the municipal court, when it
shall be produced in the presence of the municipal judge, to be done with as
directed under this chapter, and any police or other officer of the city shall
have and is vested with the power and authority, either with or without writ or
process, to enter any room, house, or building where any offense prohibited by
this chapter is being committed, or any such room, house, or building as is
commonly known to be conducted in violation of this chapter, and shall without
writ or process take and keep possession of any property prohibited by this
chapter as being gambling instrumentalities or as used as a convenience or
accessory thereto. (Prior code §13-4)
9.28.050: DESTRUCTION OF PARAPHERNALIA:
Whenever there is produced in the presence of the municipal judge any property,
instrumentality, or device, and it is shown to the municipal judge that the
property, instrumentality, or device was designed, constructed, or built for
the purpose of being used for gambling, or as an accessory or convenience to
any gaming or gambling house, or to the owner, keeper or habitues of any room
or house used for gambling or gaming purposes; or if the municipal judge finds
that such property was used or kept for use in any game in which the reward or
winning was or should be money, merchandise, credit, or any other thing of
value, then the municipal judge shall order that the property be forthwith, by
the chief of police or other officer, publicly burned and destroyed, and the
officer so directed by the municipal judge shall immediately destroy the same.
(Prior code §13-5)
9.28.060: POOLS:
All owners, tenants, or occupants, their agents, servants, or employees, or any
building, or room or apartment in any building within the limits of the city
are prohibited from using the same or allowing the same to be used by any
person or persons for the purpose of carrying on therein the selling of pools
of any kind upon horseraces, baseball games, prizefights or contests occurring
or about to occur in this city or state or any other city or state, or where
persons are invited or do congregate to wager any money or valuable thing or
representative of value thereon. (Prior code §13-6)
CHAPTER 9.30
SLOT MACHINES; PINBALL MACHINES 1
SECTION:
9.30.010: Operation Prohibited; Nuisance
9.30.020: Playing Prohibited
9.30.030: Exemptions
9.30.040: Confiscation
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS § 964 et seq.; 68 OS art. 15.
9.30.010: OPERATION PROHIBITED; NUISANCE:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to operate or
be in control of the operation of any mechanical device, contrivance or
instrumentality ordinarily known as a "slot machine", a "one ball machine", or
a "marble table", and a "slot machine", "one ball machine" or "marble table" is
defined to be any machine which may be played by others for money, property,
checks, credits, or any representative of value, or any machine which vends
merchandise in varying quantities, such quantities in any way depending upon
chance. Such slot machines, one ball machines or marble tables are public
nuisances as being gambling devices and unlawful and against the welfare of the
city, and may be abated as provided in the ordinances of the city relating to
slot machines. (Prior code §13-73)
9.30.020: PLAYING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to deposit any coin or slug for
the purpose of playing the same in any mechanical device known as a slot
machine, one ball machine and/or marble table machine, as described in section
9.30.010 of this chapter, or to play at, or exhibit or be in charge of any card
raffle or lottery or game of chance, whether the winning is money, merchandise,
checks, tokens, or other evidence of winning. (Prior code §13-74)
9.30.030: EXEMPTIONS:
Vending machines and automatic salesmen machines which do nothing more than
store merchandise or other commodities and deliver a stated amount upon deposit
of a coin therein, when licensed under the ordinances of the city, shall not be
deemed "slot machines" within the terms of section
9.30.010 of this chapter. (Prior code §13-75)
9.30.040: CONFISCATION:
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to seize and take charge
of any machine operated or used in violation of sections
9.30.010 and
9.30.020 of this chapter, and convey the same to the presence of the municipal
judge; and if the municipal judge finds upon a hearing that such machine was
used in violation of this chapter he shall declare the same a nuisance and
unlawful and shall order it destroyed forthwith in such manner and form as he
shall prescribe. (Prior code §13-76)
CHAPTER 9.32
PROSTITUTION 1
SECTION:
9.32.010: Consorting For Immoral Purpose
9.32.020: Indecent Conduct
9.32.030: Soliciting In Public Places
9.32.040: Unlawful Acts Designated
9.32.050: Consorting With Prostitute
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS ch. 42.
9.32.010: CONSORTING FOR IMMORAL PURPOSE:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person within the city to consort with
another of the opposite sex for an immoral purpose in any room, building,
dwelling, hotel, rooming house, street, sidewalk, or any other place, or to
occupy the same for an immoral purpose. (Prior code §13-44)
9.32.020: INDECENT CONDUCT:
It is unlawful and an offense for any prostitute, or any woman who has the
reputation of being a prostitute, to conduct herself in such an unseemly, lewd,
boisterous, or indecent manner, in walking or riding through the streets,
thoroughfares, and public places of the city, as to call attention to either
her immoral character or business, or to wear any gaudy, flashy or unusual
clothing calculated to attract or direct attention to herself, or which
suggests her avocation or character.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct himself or herself in such unseemly,
lewd, boisterous or indecent manner as to be offensive to the good morals of
the city, either by word, act, or exposure of person. (Prior code §13-43)
9.32.030: SOLICITING IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It is unlawful and an offense for any woman to go about the streets,
thoroughfares, parks, or other public places in the city or to go into or
frequent any residence, place of business, or other place in the city, at any
time, for the purpose of calling attention to or soliciting any business or
patronage for immoral purposes. (Prior code §13-45)
9.32.040: UNLAWFUL ACTS DESIGNATED:
It is unlawful and an offense, in the city, for any person to approach or speak
to any other person of the same or opposite sex, or by any sign or suggestion
to indicate or attempt to persuade or induce any other person to:
A.   Do or perform any immoral or unlawful act;
B.   Play at any gambling game;
C.   Purchase any obscene picture or printed matter;
D.   Go to, or enter, any room, building, or other place or enclosure wherein
unlawful or immoral acts are committed, or are to be performed;
E.   Go upon the streets, or about any public or private grounds, within the
city, for any such unlawful purpose, or for the purpose of inducing patronage
for any bawdyhouse, assignation house, or other house of ill fame;
F.   Solicit for any rooming house or hotel by suggesting the existence thereof
to persons of the opposite sex;
G.   Induce or attempt to induce any person to go to or to occupy any room or
building for any immoral or unlawful purpose;
H.   Solicit for any place where intoxicating liquors are illegally kept or
sold, or where drugs are kept or offered for unlawful sale;
I.   Accept or receive from any female the proceeds of any unlawful or immoral
act or calling. (Prior code §13-46)
9.32.050: CONSORTING WITH PROSTITUTE:
It is unlawful and an offense to be found in any public or private place of the
city consorting with or in the company with any prostitute or other person of
lewd character. (Prior code §13-42)
CHAPTER 9.34
DISORDERLY HOUSES 1
SECTION:
9.34.010: Keeping Or Maintaining
9.34.020: Pimping And Procuring
9.34.030: Inmates And Visitors
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 1026 – 1029.
9.34.010: KEEPING OR MAINTAINING:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city to keep or maintain or
aid or abet or assist in keeping or maintaining, or to occupy or use any room,
building, dwelling, hotel, rooming house, or other place for purposes of
prostitution or assignation or immoral sexual relations, or to knowingly lease,
rent, or let the same for such purposes, or to knowingly permit the same to be
used for such purposes. (Prior code §13-48)
9.34.020: PIMPING AND PROCURING:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city to act as procurer,
pimp or solicitor for any bawdyhouse, house of ill fame, house of prostitution,
or house of assignation, or for any male person to solicit business for any
lewd or immoral woman. Any person who assists or persuades any female to visit
or become an inmate of any bawdyhouse, house of ill fame or house of
prostitution or assignation, or who in any manner persuades or induces any
female to leave any place in the city for the purpose of prostitution, shall be
deemed a procurer or pimp within the meaning of this section and punished as
provided in this title. (Prior code §13-49)
9.34.030: INMATES AND VISITORS:
Any person in the city, whether male or female who, is an inmate or resident of
any disorderly house, brothel, bawdyhouse, house of ill fame, or house of
assignation, and any person who is found in or visiting any such house, is
guilty of an offense, but this section shall not apply to physicians or
officers in the discharge of their professional or official duties. (Prior code
§13-50)
CHAPTER 9.36
PORNOGRAPHY AND OBSCENITY 1
SECTION:
9.36.010: Prohibited
9.36.020: Sales And Display Of Materials
9.36.030: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS §§ 1040.8 et seq., 1021.
9.36.010: PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to wilfully
print, publish, design, prepare, import, copy, distribute, exhibit, display,
buy, lend, sell, offer to sell, give away, offer to give away, or possess with
intent to distribute, sell, lend or give away, any obscene, lewd or lascivious
book, pamphlet, magazine, paper, drawing, picture, photograph, figure, image,
or other engraved, printed or written matter, or any article or other thing of
obscene, lewd, or lascivious character or use. (Ord. 376 §2, 1974)
9.36.020: SALES AND DISPLAY OF MATERIALS:
A.   Requirements: All publications, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers,
drawings, pictures, photographs, figures, images, or other engraved, printed or
written matter, or any article or other things not characterized or construed
as obscene or pornographic, but having a connotation or influential effect as
being obscene, lewd or lascivious in character or use, including the showing
and displaying of the nude body, sexual acts, or other characters of sexuality,
if sold, may be sold, distributed and made available only to customers or
patrons over the age of eighteen (18) years, and only then from under the
counter, shelf, table or rack, completely hidden from view at all times from
persons and customers patronizing such store or place of business until the
sale has been made to the person or customer buying such item.
B.   Maintain List Or Schedule Of Materials: This chapter does permit the
proprietor, owner, or manager, however to maintain a list or schedule, by title
only, of all publications of this kind and nature in the store or place of
business on display and open to public view.
C.   Displaying Material Harmful To Minors:
   1.   Definitions:
   A REASONABLE BONA FIDE ATTEMPT: An attempt to ascertain the true age of the
minor by requiring production of a driver's license, marriage certificate,
birth certificate or other governmental or educational identification card or
paper and not relying solely on the oral allegations or apparent age of the
minor.
   HARMFUL TO MINORS: That quality of any description, exhibition, presentation
or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse when the material or performances taken as
a whole, has the following characteristics:
      a.   The average adult person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the material or performance has a predominant tendency to
appeal to a prurient interest in sex to minors; and
      b.   The average adult person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the material or performance depicts or describes nudity, sexual
conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse in a manner that is
patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community with respect
to what is suitable for minors; and
      c.   The material or performance lacks serious literary, scientific,
artistic, or political value to minors.
   KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry or both:
      a.   The character and content of any material or performance which is
reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and
      b.   The age of the minor; however, an honest mistake shall constitute an
excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a bona fide attempt to
ascertain the true age of such minor.
   MATERIAL: Any book, magazine, newsletter, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, record or recording tape,
videotape.
   MINOR: Any unmarried person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the areola; or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   PERFORMANCE: Any motion picture film, videotape, played record, phonograph
or tape, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance, or other exhibition
performed or presented to or before an audience of one or more, with or without
consideration.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or other
legal entity, of any kind.
   SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in
undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT: Includes the following: the fondling or other touching of
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; ultimate sex acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, sodomy; masturbation, and excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any of the activities set forth herein.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Include the following: human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; human genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   2.   Offenses: No person having custody, control or supervision of any
commercial establishment shall knowingly:
      a.   Display material which is harmful to minors in such a way that
minors, as a part of the invited general public, will be exposed to view such
material; provided, however, a person shall be deemed not to have displayed
material harmful to minors if the material is kept behind devices commonly
known as "blinder racks" so that the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the material is
not exposed to view;
      b.   Sell, furnish, present, distribute, allow to view, or otherwise
disseminate to a minor, with or without consideration, any material which is
harmful to minors; or
      c.   Present to a minor or participate in presenting to a minor, with or
without consideration, any performance which is harmful to a minor.
   3.   Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under
the ordinance certified in this subsection that:
The material or performance involved was displayed, presented or disseminated
to a minor at a recognized and established school, church, museum, medical
clinic, hospital, public library, governmental agency, quasi-governmental
agency and persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such
persons or organizations, and which institution displays, presents or
disseminates such material or performance for a bona fide governmental,
educational or scientific purpose. (Ord. 678 §1, 1989: Ord. 376 §3, 1974)
9.36.030: PENALTY:
Any person who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of an offense and shall be fined a sum not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00). Each day that any violation of this chapter occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate
violation. Every act, thing, or transaction prohibited by this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense as to each item, issue or title involved and
shall be punishable as such. For the purpose of this chapter, multiple copies
of the same identical title, monthly issue, volume and number or other such
identical material will constitute a single offense. (Ord. 678 §2, 1989: Ord.
376 §4, 1974)
CHAPTER 9.38
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND DRUGS
SECTION:
9.38.010: Marijuana Defined
9.38.015: Affirmative Defense - Marijuana
9.38.020: Possession Of Controlled Dangerous Substances
9.38.021: Penalties For Violating Section 9.38.020 Of This Chapter
9.38.025: Possession Of Paraphernalia
9.38.026: Penalties For Violating Section 9.38.025 Of This Chapter
9.38.030: Inhalation Of Glue And Other Substances
9.38.031: Violation Of Section 9.38.030 Of This Chapter
9.38.035: Possession And Sale Of Certain Toxins
9.38.036: Exceptions
9.38.037: Permit, Application, Issuance And Form
9.38.038: Penalties
9.38.040: Sale Of Hypodermic Needle Or Syringe
9.38.045: Penalty For Violating Section 9.38.040 Of This Chapter
9.38.010: MARIJUANA DEFINED:
"Marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or
not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include:
A.   The mature stalks of such plant or fiber produced from such stalks,
B.   Oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, including cannabidiol
derived from the seeds of the marijuana plant,
C.   Any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation
of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), including
cannabidiol derived from mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake,
D.   The sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination,
E.   For any person participating in a clinical trial to administer cannabidiol
for the treatment of severe forms of epilepsy pursuant to 63 Oklahoma Statutes
section 2-802, a drug or substance approved by the Federal Food and Drug
Administration for use by those participants,
F.   For any person or the parents, legal guardians or caretakers of the person
who have received a written certification from a physician licensed in this
State that the person has been diagnosed by a physician as having Lennox-
Gastaut Syndrome, Dravet Syndrome, also known as Severe Myoclonic Epilepsy of
Infancy, or any other severe form of epilepsy that is not adequately treated by
traditional medical therapies, spasticity due to multiple sclerosis or due to
paraplegia, intractable nausea and vomiting, appetite stimulation with chronic
wasting diseases, the substance cannabidiol, a nonpsychoactive cannabinoid,
found in the plant Cannabis sativa L., or any other preparation thereof, that
has a tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than three-tenths of one
percent (0.3%) and that is delivered to the patient in the form of a liquid,
G.   Any Federal Food and Drug Administration-approved cannabidiol drug or
substance, or
H.   Industrial hemp, from the plant Cannabis sativa L., and any part of such
plant, whether growing or not, with a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration of not more than three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) on a dry
weight basis which shall not be grown anywhere in the State of Oklahoma but may
be shipped to Oklahoma pursuant to the provisions of subsection E or F of this
section. This shall not apply to any growth which is authorized pursuant to 63
Oklahoma Statutes sections 420A - 426. (Ord. 1189, 2018)
9.38.015: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE - MARIJUANA:
Pursuant to State Question 788, adopted in 2018 and codified in title 63 of the
Oklahoma Statute at sections 420A through 426, no person shall be charged with
a violation of this Code for engaging in conduct which, at the time of the
alleged conduct, was lawful under Oklahoma Statutes sections 420A - 426, as
those sections may be amended or repealed. This defense shall not be available
if the alleged conduct was not in strict compliance with State Statutes in
effect on the date of the alleged conduct. (Ord. 1189, 2018)
9.38.020: POSSESSION OF CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess
marijuana or any other substance which is classified as a controlled dangerous
substance under the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, 63
Oklahoma Statutes section 2-101 et seq., unless such substance was obtained
directly, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order from a practitioner,
while acting in the course of his or her professional practice, or except as
otherwise authorized by the Oklahoma Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances
Act, title 63, section 2-101 et seq. (Ord. 1189, 2018)
9.38.021: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING SECTION 9.38.020 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Persons convicted of violating the provisions of section
9.38.020 of this chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine in the amount of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 1000 §3, 2004: Ord. 906
§3, 2000: Ord. 551 §1, 1983)
9.38.025: POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA:
A.   No person shall use or possess drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled dangerous
substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act,
except those persons holding an unrevoked license in the professions of
podiatry, dentistry, medicine, nursing, optometry, osteopathy, veterinary
medicine or pharmacy.
B.   No person shall deliver, possess or manufacture drug paraphernalia knowing
it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Dangerous Substances Act. (Ord. 956 §1, 2002)
9.38.026: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING SECTION 9.38.025 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of section
9.38.025 of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court
costs. (Ord. 956 §1, 2002)
9.38.030: INHALATION OF GLUE AND OTHER SUBSTANCES:
A.   It is unlawful for any person deliberately to smell, inhale, breathe,
drink or otherwise consume any compound, liquid, chemical, narcotic, drug, or
any other substance or chemical containing any ketones, aldehydes, organic
acetones, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons, such as gasoline, glue, fingernail
polish, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, or any other substance or combination
thereof containing solvents releasing toxic vapors, which can cause conditions
of intoxication, inebriation, excitement, elation, stupefaction, paralysis,
irrationality, dulling of the brain or nervous system, or any other changing,
distorting or disturbing of the eyesight, thinking processes, judgment, balance
or coordination of such person.
B.   The provisions of this section shall not pertain to any person who
inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise consumes such material or substance
pursuant to the direction or prescription of any licensed doctor, physician,
surgeon, dentist or podiatrist; nor to the consumption of intoxicating liquor
in such place or manner as may be authorized and permitted by State law and
local ordinances. (Ord. 535 §§1, 2, 1982)
9.38.031: VIOLATION OF SECTION 9.38.030 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of section
9.38.030 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars
($200.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 906 §3, 2000: Ord. 535 §3, 1982)
9.38.035: POSSESSION AND SALE OF CERTAIN TOXINS:
It is unlawful for any person to possess, sell, distribute or to inhale or
ingest for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication or of distortion
or disturbance of the auditory, visual or mental processes, any compound,
liquid or chemical commonly known as "locker room" or "rush", which contains
alkyl nitrites (isopropyl nitrite, butyl nitrites [consisting mainly of
isobutyl nitrites] and/or any of its isomer or analogs) or any similar
compound, liquid or chemical. (Ord. 689 §1, 1989)
9.38.036: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of section
9.38.035 of this chapter shall not apply to:
A.   The possession and use of the substances listed as part of the care or
treatment of a disease, condition or injury by a licensed physician or pursuant
to a prescription of a licensed physician;
B.   The possession or sale of the substance as part of a known manufacturing
process or industrial operation when the possessor or operator has obtained a
permit from the Chief of Police. (Ord. 689 §1, 1989)
9.38.037: PERMIT, APPLICATION, ISSUANCE AND FORM:
The Chief of Police shall establish procedures for application, form and
issuance of a permit to legitimate research, manufacturing and industrial
applicants and shall have the authority to make reasonable rules in order to
carry out the intent of the ordinance codified in sections
9.38.035 through
9.38.038 of this chapter. (Ord. 689 §1, 1989)
9.38.038: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of the ordinance codified in
sections
9.38.035 through
9.38.037 of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction of
such offense, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00) and costs. (Ord. 689 §1, 1989)
9.38.040: SALE OF HYPODERMIC NEEDLE OR SYRINGE:
Sale of disposable or permanent type hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe
shall be prohibited except when prescribed by a licensed physician. (Ord. 912
§1, 2000)
9.38.045: PENALTY FOR VIOLATING SECTION 9.38.040 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of section
9.38.040 of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) excluding costs for each
offense and each sale shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 912 §1, 2000)
IV.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE 1
CHAPTER 9.42
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
SECTION:
9.42.010: Certain Acts Deemed Offenses
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS part VI.
9.42.010: CERTAIN ACTS DEEMED OFFENSES:
Any person who conducts himself in a riotous or disorderly manner, or who
openly uses profane or indecent language, or who indecently exposes his or her
person, or who is guilty of any lewd or lascivious conduct in public, or who
commits any nuisance upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in
the city is guilty of an offense. (Prior code §13-27)
CHAPTER 9.44
DISTURBING THE PEACE 2
SECTION:
9.44.010: Disturbing Assemblies Or Funerals
9.44.020: Noise, Abusive Language Or Fighting
9.44.030: Warning Devices
9.44.040: Exceptions
9.44.050: Unusual Noises For Advertising
 
Notes
2 2. 21 OS § 1361 et seq.
9.44.010: DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES OR FUNERALS:
Any person who, in this city, disturbs or disquiets any congregation or
assembly or funeral met for religious worship, or for any other lawful purpose,
by making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourses within
their place of worship, or so near the same as to disturb the order or
solemnity of the meeting, or disturbs any lawful assemblage of people by rude
or indecent behavior or otherwise, is guilty of an offense. Any person who
wilfully disturbs, interrupts or disquiets any assemblage of people for the
purpose of any funeral, or who, without authority of law, obstructs or detains
any person or persons engaged in carrying or accompanying any dead body of a
human being to a place of burial is guilty, upon conviction, of an offense.
(Prior code §13-30)
9.44.020: NOISE, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE OR FIGHTING:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to make any loud or unusual noise
or to use any abusive, violent, obscene or profane language, or to threaten to
fight, quarrel, challenge to fight, or to fight, or to shoot any firearms or
brandish the same, which by reason of said act, disturbs, either by day or
night, the peace and quiet of the city, or any part thereof, or any persons
therein, or annoys the inhabitants thereof. (Prior code §13-23)
9.44.030: WARNING DEVICES:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sound, use, or operate any
horn, bell, whistle, or other warning device on any motor vehicle within the
city limits for any purpose other than as a warning device in traffic on any
day between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
The use of horns, bells, whistles or other warning devices as a means of
attracting the attention of persons in residences or places of business, during
the hours set forth in this section, is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance,
and any person so doing shall be deemed to have committed an offense against
the ordinances of the city. (Prior code §13-24)
9.44.040: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of section
9.44.030 of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to music furnished by any
person, firm or corporation for the exclusive enjoyment of persons actually
upon the premises or within the place of business of such person, firm or
corporation, provided the music so furnished is not sufficiently loud or
offensive as to annoy the public generally or to disturb the peace; provided,
further, that no loudspeaker located upon any premises outside walls of any
building located thereon shall be operated between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Prior code §13-25)
9.44.050: UNUSUAL NOISES FOR ADVERTISING:
It is unlawful and an offense, in the city, to make, or persist in making, in
any street or upon any private property, any unnecessary, unusual or
objectionable noise, calculated to or resulting in the annoyance of other
persons, or ringing of bells to attract attention to auctions, or for other
purposes. The practice ordinarily known as "barking", used as calling the
attention of persons to certain businesses, whether in or near the street, is
expressly forbidden as an offense. (Prior code §13-26)
CHAPTER 9.46
RIOT 2
SECTION:
9.46.010: Committing And Permitting
 
Notes
2 2. 21 OS §§ 1311 et seq., 1321.1 et seq., 1321.9.
9.46.010: COMMITTING AND PERMITTING:
Any three (3) or more persons who, in this city, assemble together, or act in
concert, to do any unlawful act with force or violence against the property of
this city, or the person or property of another, or against the peace or to the
terror of others, and who make any movement or preparation therefor, and every
person present at such meeting or assembly who does not endeavor to prevent the
commission or perpetration of such unlawful act, is guilty of an offense.
(Prior code §13-31)
V.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 1
CHAPTER 9.54
CITY PROPERTY 2
SECTION:
9.54.010: Trespassing On Or Taking Possession Of
9.54.020: Injury To Streets, Curbs Or Alleys
9.54.030: Mutilation Or Removal Of Signs
9.54.040: Reward For Information
9.54.050: Penalties For Violating Section 9.54.030 Of This Chapter
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS part VII.
2 2. 11 OS § 660; 21 OS §§ 1753, 1754.
9.54.010: TRESPASSING ON OR TAKING POSSESSION OF:
Any person who unlawfully takes possession of any property, real or personal,
belonging to the city, or to the possession of which the city is entitled, or
who commits any wilful trespass thereon, or who unlawfully withholds the
possession thereof from the city is guilty of an offense. The unlawful
withholding of the possession of any property mentioned in this section, after
demand therefor has been made under the direction of the council, is a separate
and new offense for every day the possession is withheld after such demand, and
shall be punished in like manner as provided in this title. (Prior code §13-59)
9.54.020: INJURY TO STREETS, CURBS OR ALLEYS:
Any person who, in the city, wilfully or wantonly cuts, breaks or removes, or
in any manner displaces any curbing, guttering, street crossing, paved streets
or alleys, or any part thereof, or who recklessly or intentionally drives any
car, truck, tractor, or wagon loaded with asphalt materials, lumber, or
building materials of any kind into or on the curbing or concrete guttering of
any paved street is guilty of an offense. (Prior code §13-60)
9.54.030: MUTILATION OR REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
It is an offense for any person to mutilate, remove or destroy any signs put up
by the city, or any other public property. (Prior code §13-96)
9.54.040: REWARD FOR INFORMATION:
Any person who furnishes information and appears against a person violating the
terms of section
9.54.030 of this chapter, shall be entitled to receive and shall receive a
reward in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) payable from an appropriation of the
city made for that purpose. (Prior code §13-98)
9.54.050: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING SECTION 9.54.030 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Persons convicted of violating the provisions of section
9.54.030 of this chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine in the amount of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs, plus restitution at the court's
discretion. (Ord. 906 §4, 2000: Ord. 657 §2, 1987)
CHAPTER 9.56
TRESPASSING AND VANDALISM 2
SECTION:
9.56.010: Street Trees Or Public Ways
9.56.020: Occupancy Of Land; Unauthorized
9.56.030: Unauthorized Entry
9.56.040: Parking Or Use Of Land; Unauthorized
9.56.045: Acts Of Trespassing
9.56.050: Penalty
 
Notes
2 2. 21 OS § 1835.
9.56.010: STREET TREES OR PUBLIC WAYS:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to wilfully or wantonly cut,
deface or in any way injure any tree or sapling standing or growing in any of
the streets, alleys or public places within the city, or to attach any
guywires, telephone, telegraph or electric wires, or any wire to any live tree,
or to dig any hole, ditch or trench in any public street, road, avenue or alley
or other public premises or ground within, belonging to or under the
supervision or control of the city, or to take or remove any dirt, earth or any
substance therefrom, or to cut, break or otherwise injure any pavement, curb or
gutter therein or to connect any driveway thereto without first securing
permission from the city inspector to do so, and all such digging, removing, or
driveway connection shall be done under the supervision of the street and
superintendent or city engineer. (Prior code §17-1)
9.56.020: OCCUPANCY OF LAND; UNAUTHORIZED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to intrude, enter or squat upon
any lot or piece of land within the city without license or authority from the
owner thereof, or to erect or occupy thereon any hut, hovel, shanty, or other
structure whatever without such license or authority; or to erect or occupy
within the bounds of any street, alley or avenue of the city any hut, hovel,
shanty, or other structure whatever. (Prior code §17-2)
9.56.030: UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to enter upon the property of
another or into an area or structure on such property (whether such property,
area or structure is public or private) when such entrance is plainly forbidden
by signs or otherwise or when the property, area or structure is enclosed,
except when such entrance is in the line of duty, or with the expressed or
tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of
law or ordinance. (Prior code §17-3)
9.56.040: PARKING OR USE OF LAND; UNAUTHORIZED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to park an automobile or other
vehicle, or to place any structure or object on the driveway, yard or property
of another without the expressed or tacit consent by the owner or person in
charge thereof, or when necessary for the performance of a duty. (Prior code
§17-4)
9.56.045: ACTS OF TRESPASSING:
A.   No person shall trespass on the real property of another, either public or
private. The term "public property" means any property dedicated to public use
over which the federal, state, or municipal governments, or any political
subdivision thereof, exercises dominion or control. The term "private property"
means any property other than public property. The term "trespass" as used in
this section shall be defined and mean the following acts:
   1.   Each and every actual entry upon the premises of an owner or other
person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or implied
consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession;
   2.   Each and every entry upon real property contrary to the provisions of
any posted sign or published warning to stay out of or off the premises or
otherwise regulates entry or use of the property;
   3.   Remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful
possession after having been told or directed to leave the premises by the
owner, or an agent or employee of the owner or other person in lawful
possession of the premises;
   4.   Remaining on private property at any time other than during posted
hours of business operation after having been directed to vacate the premises
by a police officer; provided that the provision of this subsection shall not
apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is
authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises,
nor shall the provisions of this subsection apply unless the hours of business
operation are posted upon such premises;
   5.   Returning to private property before the posted time of opening for
business operation on the next business day after having been directed to
vacate the premises under the terms of subsection A4 of this section;
   6.   Entering or remaining upon any public or private property wherein a
healthcare or treatment facility is located when such person enters or remains
therein in defiance of an order not to enter or direction to leave such
premises personally communicated to such person by the owner or operator of the
healthcare facility or other authorized person;
   7.   Remaining on any property owned or in possession of the public school
system or other institution devoted to the education of children from preschool
through twelfth grade, after such person has been requested to leave or vacate
school premises by any faculty member, principal, authorized security guard or
police officer.
B.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 726 §1, 1992)
9.56.050: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an offense and
each violation shall be considered a separate offense; and upon conviction of
any offense, any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine as set by the court for each offense. (Ord. 431 §1, 1976:
prior code §17-5)
CHAPTER 9.58
MOLESTING PROPERTY 2
SECTION:
9.58.010: Utility Or City Property
9.58.020: Automobiles Or Machinery Of Others
9.58.030: Malicious Mischief
 
Notes
2 2. 21 OS §§ 1787, 1788, 1786.
9.58.010: UTILITY OR CITY PROPERTY:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city to alter, remove,
molest or tamper with any wire, fixture, pipe, conduit, meter or other
appliance of any waterworks plant, gas, electrical, telephone, or telegraph
company, or other company, association or person, operating a similar business
or calling, or to tap any such supply wires or pipes, or to fraudulently or
secretly extract or use any water, electricity or gas of such plant or company,
or to uncover or open up any manhole or other opening to any such property, or
to uncover or open up any manhole or other opening to any sewer, unless the
person doing so is an employee of the company or city or under authority and
direction to do so. It is unlawful and an offense for any person in the city to
leave any manhole or other opening so opened without replacing the fixtures and
appliances thereto in their proper place and position. (Prior code §13-35)
9.58.020: AUTOMOBILES OR MACHINERY OF OTHERS:
From and after the passage of the ordinance codified herein, it is unlawful for
any person or persons to loiter in or upon any automobile or motor vehicle, or
to molest, drive or attempt to drive any automobile for joyriding or any other
purpose, or to meddle with any machinery or appliances thereof, without the
consent of the owner of such automobile or motor vehicle. (Prior code §13-36)
9.58.030: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to maliciously or intentionally
injure, deface or destroy any real or personal property not his own, and upon
conviction thereof, he or she shall be fined as provided by this code. (Ord.
477 §1, 1978)
CHAPTER 9.60
FLOODLIGHTS
SECTION:
9.60.010: Requirements 
9.60.010: REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to have, keep
or maintain, or cause or permit to be kept or maintained, either as the owner
or as the one in possession or in charge thereof, any floodlight or any other
reflector type light on any property in the city in such a manner that the
light therefrom is unnecessarily thrown into the residence of any person or
persons in the vicinity where the light is located, so as to constitute, while
the light is on, a continuous annoyance to the person or persons occupying the
residence into which the light is thrown. (Prior code §13-58)
CHAPTER 9.62
LARCENY 2
SECTION:
9.62.010: Defined
9.62.020: Crimes Against Rented Or Leased Personal Property
 
Notes
2 2. 21 OS ch. 68.
9.62.010: DEFINED:
It is unlawful and an offense to commit larceny within the City. "Larceny" is
defined as taking the private property of another, the value of which does not
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), accomplished by fraud or stealth, with
the intent to deprive the other thereof. (Ord. 1179, 2017)
9.62.020:  CRIMES AGAINST RENTED OR LEASED PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person who is given the temporary right to
possess and use any personal property by way of any lease or rental agreement,
who, after the term of such agreement has expired, willfully fails to return
possession of such property to its rightful owner. Any person found guilty of a
violation of this division shall be punished as provided in section
9.90.010 .
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to lease or rent for any period of time
whatsoever, any motor vehicle, and, with the intent to cheat or defraud, who
pays the fees for such lease or rental by means of a false, bogus, or worthless
check written for the sum of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any
person found guilty of a violation of this division shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs and fees. (Ord.
1194, 2019)
CHAPTER 9.64
OTHER OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS
SECTION:
9.64.010: Anonymous Campaign Literature
9.64.020: Use Of City Address And Phone Numbers
9.64.030: Misleading Communications
9.64.040: Penalty
9.64.010: ANONYMOUS CAMPAIGN LITERATURE:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership,
organization, or association to cause to be broadcast, written, printed,
posted, or distributed a statement, circular, poster, or advertisement which is
designed to influence the voters on the nomination or election of a candidate
or to influence the voters on any constitutional or statutory amendment or on
any other issue in a state, county, city, or school district election, or to
influence the vote of any member of the legislature, unless there appears in a
conspicuous place upon such circular, poster, or advertisement, or within a
broadcast statement, either the name and address of the person who paid for the
communication, if an individual, or the name and address of the president,
chairman, or secretary, or of two (2) officers of the organization, if an
organization, which paid for the communication.
B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to material purchased
before the effective date hereof; provided, that proof of purchase can be
properly documented. The provisions of this section shall not apply to bumper
stickers, pins, buttons, and other small items upon which the required
information cannot be conveniently printed. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to skywriting, water towers, or other means of displaying of
such a nature that the inclusion of the required information would be
impractical. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any matter
broadcast by the electronic media or thing published in any newspaper,
magazine, or journal recognized and circulating as such, which matter is
broadcast by the electronic media or published by such newspaper, magazine, or
journal on its own behalf and upon its own responsibility and for which it
shall not charge or receive any compensation whatsoever, nor shall the
provisions of this section apply to any publication issued by any legally
constituted election officials in the performance of their duties.
C.   Persons violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be assessed a fine in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00), plus court and related costs. (Ord. 1048 §2, 2008)
9.64.020: USE OF CITY ADDRESS AND PHONE NUMBERS:
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, firm, corporation,
partnership, organization, association or entity of any kind to use or to
incorporate the official address, phone numbers, city seal, logo, or any other
identifying information of the city in any written, posted or distributed
statement, circular, poster, advertisement, document, paper, or verbal or
electronic communication of any kind which is, or which contains material that
is, designed to influence voters on the nomination or election of a candidate
or to influence voters on any matter requiring a vote of the qualified voters
of the city or state to approve or disapprove any issue or question presented.
The use of disclaimers of any kind shall not excuse a violation of this
section. (Ord. 1065 §1, 2009)
9.64.030: MISLEADING COMMUNICATIONS:
It shall be a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation,
partnership, organization, association or entity of any kind to make any
communication of any kind, whether written, verbal, or electronic, with the
intent to cause the recipient of such communication to believe that such
communication is an official communication originated or endorsed by the city.
The use of disclaimers of any kind shall not excuse a violation of this
section. (Ord. 1065 §1, 2009)
9.64.040: PENALTY:
A violation of the provisions of section
9.64.020 or
9.64.030 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense plus court costs and fees. Each
separate copy or instance of any communication in violation, whether written,
electronic, or verbal, shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 1065 §1,
2009)
VI.   CONSUMER PROTECTION
CHAPTER 9.70
CONFIDENCE GAMES
SECTION:
9.70.010: Certain Acts Deemed Unlawful
9.70.010: CERTAIN ACTS DEEMED UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful and an offense in the city for any person to:
A.   Play at or attempt to play at any game commonly known as a "confidence
game";
B.   Keep or permit to be kept or operated in any room, tent or other place
under his control, any confidence game, or any trick, device or game, whether
ordinarily known as a confidence game or not, in which, or by which, any person
is or may be unsuspectingly tricked or duped into turning over or giving up
money or any other thing of value;
C.   By any false claim or representation of supernatural or occult powers,
secure possession of any money or other thing of value belonging to or owned by
another person;
D.   Induce or attempt to induce any person to give up or pay over any money or
other thing of value by any false representation or pretense, or in exchange
for any false or bogus coin or check, draft or other false evidence of value,
or in consideration of refraining from a lawful or unlawful arrest, or in
consideration of refraining from reporting any lawful or unlawful act to any
public official;
E.   Act as a solicitor, capper or procurer for any of the unlawful games or
businesses forbidden in this section, or in any manner persuade or attempt to
induce any person to play at or patronize any such unlawful game or business.
(Prior code §13-71)
CHAPTER 9.72
PRICE GOUGING
SECTION:
9.72.010: During Times Of Emergency Or Disaster
9.72.010: DURING TIMES OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER:
A.   It is unlawful for any person, contractor, landlord, lessor, business or
other entity to sell or offer to sell or to rent or lease or offer to rent or
lease consumer food items, repair or reconstruction services, emergency or
medical supplies or gasoline, equipment or any shelter or housing, for an
amount which is ten (10) or more percent greater than the price charged by such
person, contractor, landlord, lessor, business or other entity for said goods
or services, equipment, or shelter or housing immediately prior to an emergency
or disaster, unless said person, contractor, landlord, lessor, business or
other entity can prove that the increase in price was directly attributable to
additional costs imposed on it by the supplier of the goods or for labor and
materials used to provide the service.
B.   For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
   CONSUMER FOOD ITEM: Any article which is used or intended for use for food,
drink, confection or condiment by man or other animal.
   EMERGENCY: Any occurrence, or threat thereof, whether accidental, natural,
or caused by man, in war or peace, which results or may result in substantial
injury or harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property.
   EMERGENCY SUPPLIES: Shall include, but are not limited to, water,
flashlights, radios, lumber, plastic, generators, batteries, candles, blankets,
soaps and diapers.
   MEDICAL SUPPLIES: Includes, but is not limited to, prescription and
nonprescription drugs, bandages, gauzes and isopropyl alcohol.
   REPAIR OR RECONSTRUCTION SERVICES: Are those contractor services for repairs
to residential and commercial property of any type which are damaged as a
result of the disaster.
C.   Any person who shall be convicted of violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof in the
municipal court shall be punished by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00)
plus court costs for each violation. (Ord. 885 §1, 1999: Ord. 880 §1, 1999)
VII.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
CHAPTER 9.76
CURFEW
SECTION:
9.76.010: Title
9.76.020: Definitions
9.76.030: Curfew For Minors
9.76.040: Exceptions
9.76.050: Parental Responsibility
9.76.060: Police Procedures
9.76.070: Responsibility Of Owners Of Public Places
9.76.080: Violations And Penalties
9.76.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ORDINANCE REGULATING THE
PRESENCE AND CONDUCT OF MINORS ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES. (Ord. 713 §1,
1991)
9.76.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section:
CITY: The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma County, Oklahoma.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a minor: a) as a natural or adoptive
parent; b) as a legal guardian; c) as a person who stands in loco parentis; or
d) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or place
to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business,
entertainment, or other lawful purpose. A public place shall include, but not
be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, cafe,
theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center and any other place devoted to
amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the
front or immediate area of the above.
REMAIN: To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets,
including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four
(4) or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets
for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home.
STREET: A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public as
a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk
thereof for pedestrian travel. The term street includes the legal right of way,
including, but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the
sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found
within the legal right of way of a street.
TIME OF NIGHT: Referred to here is based upon the prevailing standard of time,
whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, generally
observed at that hour by the public.
YEAR OF AGE: Continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth to (but not
including the day of) the next, such as the eighteenth birthday, making it
clear that seventeen (17) or less years of age is herein treated as equivalent
to the phrase "under eighteen years of age". (Ord. 713 §1, 1991)
9.76.030: CURFEW FOR MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person less than eighteen (18) years of age to be or
remain in or upon the streets within the city at night during the period of
time ending at six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and beginning:
A.   At twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sunday through Thursday; and
B.   At one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Saturday morning and Sunday morning. (Ord.
1023 §1, 2006: Ord. 713 §1, 1991)
9.76.040: EXCEPTIONS:
In the following exceptional cases a minor on a city street during the
nocturnal hours for which section
9.76.030 of this chapter is intended to provide the maximum limits of
regulation shall not, however, be considered in violation of the curfew
ordinance:
A.   When accompanied by a parent of such minor;
B.   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take
said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of time
and purpose within a specified area;
C.   When exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fide of such exercise by
possessing a written communication, signed by a parent of such minor with their
home address and telephone number, specifying when, and where and in what
manner said minor will be on the streets at night (during hours when the curfew
ordinance is otherwise applicable to said minor) in the exercise of a first
amendment right specified in such communication;
D.   In case of reasonable necessity, but only if the minor has in said minor's
possession a written communication signed by the minor, countersigned by a
parent of such minor evidencing their home address and telephone number, and
establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a
designated time for a described purpose including points of origin and
destination;
E.   When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides,
or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor not communicating an objection
to the police officer;
F.   When returning home, by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes of the
termination of) a school activity, or an activity of a religious or a voluntary
association, provided the minor has a written communication in the minor's
possession, countersigned by the parent indicating the home address and
telephone number, the purpose of the event, when, where, and in what manner
said minor will be on the streets at night;
G.   When authorized, by regulation issued by the city council, in other
similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled but adapted to
necessary nighttime activities of more minors than can readily be dealt with on
an individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the city
council permitting use of the streets should be issued sufficiently in advance
to permit appropriate publicity through news media and through other agencies
such as the schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the
streets permitted, the period of time involved not to extend more than thirty
(30) minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity, and the reason
necessary and is consistent with public interest and the purposes of the curfew
ordinance codified in this chapter;
H.   When the minor carries a certified card of employment, briefly identifying
the minor, the addresses of his home and his place of employment and his hours
of employment or carries a valid proof of employment which may include the
latest payroll receipt not over thirty (30) days old;
I.   When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement
through the city, particularly on normal routes. (Ord. 713 §1, 1991)
9.76.050: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It is unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit
or by inefficient control to allow, such minor to be or remain upon any city
street under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise
beyond the scope of, the curfew ordinance. The term "knowingly" includes
knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the
whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to
continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community
standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, a
fortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the
activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. (Ord. 713 §1, 1991)
9.76.060: POLICE PROCEDURES:
A.   A police officer of the city, upon finding or having attention called to
any minor on the streets or in or around a public place in prima facie
violation of the curfew ordinance, normally shall take the minor to the city
police station, or other places designated by the chief of police, where a
parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor, whereupon they
shall be interrogated. This is intended to permit ascertainment, under
constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts, and to centralize responsibility
in the personnel then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and
uniform enforcement, and recording, thus making available experienced
supervisory personnel, the best of facilities and access to information and
records. In the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a
police officer on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment
in determining age.
B.   Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may deliver to a parent
thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances, for example a minor of tender
age near home whose identity may readily be ascertained or are known.
C.   In any event such police officer shall within twenty four (24) hours file
a written report with the chief of police, or shall participate to the extent
of the information for which he is responsible; said report shall be treated
for purposes of juvenile records in accordance with state statutes.
D.   When a parent, immediately called, has come to take charge of the minor,
and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be released
to the custody of such parent. If the parent cannot be located, or fails to
take charge of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the juvenile
authorities, except to the extent that in accordance with police regulations,
approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the minor may temporarily be
entrusted to a relative, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a
parent assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending the
availability or arrival of a parent.
E.   In all cases of a violation by a minor the chief of police shall cause to
be personally delivered or by certified mail, send to a parent written notice
of said violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in
full enforcement of the curfew ordinance, including enforcement of parental
responsibility of applicable penalties. (Ord. 957 §1, 2002: Ord. 713 §1, 1991)
9.76.070: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF PUBLIC PLACES:
It is unlawful for any person operating or having charge of any public place to
knowingly allow, permit or suffer the presence of minors in violation of the
curfew established by this chapter. (Ord. 713 §1, 1991)
9.76.080: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
The penalty upon a plea of guilty, nolo contendere, or finding of guilt shall
be a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 957
§1, 2002: Ord. 713 §1, 1991)
CHAPTER 9.77
PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO
SECTION:
9.77.010: Short Title
9.77.020: Definitions
9.77.030: Furnishing Or Sale Of Tobacco Products To Minors
9.77.040: Receipt Of Tobacco Products By Minors
9.77.050: Distribution Of Tobacco Product Samples
9.77.060: Sale Of Tobacco Products Except In Original, Sealed Package
9.77.070: Public Access To Displayed Tobacco Products
9.77.080: Report Of Violations And Compliance Checks
9.77.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1054 §1, 2008)
9.77.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CIGARETTE: Any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned or
heated under ordinary conditions of use, and consists of or contains:
A. Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing
tobacco,
B. Tobacco, in any form, that is functional in the product, which, because of
its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filter, or its packaging and
labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette
described in subsection A of this definition.
The term "cigarette" includes "roll your own" (i.e., any tobacco which, because
of its appearance, type, packaging, or labeling, is suitable for use and likely
to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as tobacco for making cigarettes).
For purposes of this definition of cigarette, nine one-hundredths (0.09) of an
ounce of "roll your own" tobacco shall constitute one individual "cigarette".
PROOF OF AGE: A driver's license, license for identification only, or other
generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as
eighteen (18) years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness
of the individual and appears on its face to be valid.
SAMPLE: A tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for
the purpose of promoting the product.
SAMPLING: The distribution of samples to members of the public in a public
place.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product that contains tobacco and is intended for human
consumption.
TRANSACTION SCAN: The process by which a seller checks, by means of a
transaction scan device, the validity of a driver's license or other government
issued photo identification.
TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE: Any commercial device or combination of devices used
at a point of sale or entry that is capable of deciphering in an electronically
readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or bar code of a
driver's license or other government issued photo identification. (Ord. 1054
§1, 2008)
9.77.030: FURNISHING OR SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS:
A.   Prohibition: It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell, give,
or furnish in any manner any tobacco product to another person who is under
eighteen (18) years of age or to purchase in any manner a tobacco product on
behalf of any such person. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under
eighteen (18) years of age to handle tobacco products when required in the
performance of the employee's duties.
B.   Proof Of Age: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco
products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if
an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the
prospective purchaser may be under eighteen (18) years of age. If an individual
engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products has demanded and was
shown proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under
eighteen (18) years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age
shall not constitute a violation of this subsection.
C.   Defenses: Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown, and reasonably
relied upon proof of age shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection A
or B of this section. A person cited for violation of this section shall be
deemed to have reasonably relied upon proof of age, and such person shall not
be found guilty of such violation, if such person proves that:
   1.   The individual who purchased or received the tobacco product presented
a driver's license or other government issued photo identification purporting
to establish that such individual was eighteen (18) years of age or older; and
   2.   The person cited for the violation confirmed the validity of the
driver's license or other government issued photo identification presented by
such individual by performing a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan
device.
Provided, that this defense shall not relieve from liability any person cited
for a violation of this section if such person failed to exercise reasonable
diligence to determine whether the physical description and picture appearing
on the driver's license or other government issued photo identification was
that of the individual who presented it. The availability of the defense
described in this subsection does not affect the availability of any other
defense under any other provision of law.
D.   Fines: When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a
continued sentence for a violation of subsection A or B of this section, the
total of any fines, fees, or costs shall not exceed the following:
   1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense;
   2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within a two (2)
year period following the first offense; and
   3.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the third or subsequent offense
within a two (2) year period following the first offense. (Ord. 1054 §1, 2008)
9.77.040: RECEIPT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person who is under eighteen (18)
years of age to purchase, receive, or have in his or her possession a tobacco
product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which
is false or fraudulent for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco
product. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under eighteen (18) years of
age to handle tobacco products when required in the performance of the
employee's duties.
B.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of subsection A of this section, the total of any
fines, fees, or costs shall not exceed the following:
   1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense; and
   2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second or subsequent offense within
a one year period following the first offense. (Ord. 1054 §1, 2008)
9.77.050: DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCT SAMPLES:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to distribute tobacco
products or product samples to any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
B.   No person shall distribute tobacco product samples in or on any public
street, sidewalk, or park that is within three hundred feet (300') of any
playground, school, or other facility when the facility is being used primarily
by persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
C.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of subsection A or B of this section, the total of any
fines, fees, or costs shall not exceed the following:
   1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense;
   2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense; and
   3.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the third or subsequent offense.
(Ord. 1054 §1, 2008)
9.77.060: SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS EXCEPT IN ORIGINAL, SEALED PACKAGE:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to sell cigarettes except in
the original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer.
B.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of this section, the total of any fines, fees, or
costs shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord.
1054 §1, 2008)
9.77.070: PUBLIC ACCESS TO DISPLAYED TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person or retail store to display or
offer for sale tobacco products in any manner that allows public access to the
tobacco product without assistance from the person displaying the tobacco
product or an employee or the owner of the store. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to retail stores which do not admit into the store
persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
B.   When a person is convicted or enters a plea and receives a continued
sentence for a violation of this section, the total of any fines, fees, or
costs shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord.
1054 §1, 2008)
9.77.080: REPORT OF VIOLATIONS AND COMPLIANCE CHECKS:
A.   Any conviction for a violation of this chapter and any compliance checks
conducted by the police department pursuant to subsection B of this section
shall be reported in writing to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement (ABLE)
commission within thirty (30) days of the conviction or compliance check. Such
reports shall be compiled in the manner prescribed by the ABLE commission.
Convictions shall be reported by the court clerk or his designee and compliance
checks shall be reported by the chief of police or his designee.
B.   Persons under eighteen (18) years of age may be enlisted by the police
department to assist in enforcement of this chapter pursuant to the rules of
the ABLE commission. (Ord. 1054 §1, 2008)
VIII.   WEAPONS 1
CHAPTER 9.82
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
SECTION:
9.82.010: Definitions
9.82.011: Carrying Weapons Generally
9.82.012: Discharging Firearms
9.82.013: Throwing Weapons Or Objects
9.82.014: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 21 OS ch. 53.
9.82.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings set forth below unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
PISTOLS: Any firearm capable of discharging a projectile composed of any
material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels less than sixteen inches (16") in length, and using
either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include
flare guns, underwater fishing guns or blank pistols.
RIFLES: Any firearm capable of discharging a projectile composed of any
material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels more than sixteen inches (16") in length, using either
gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include archery
equipment, flare guns or underwater fishing guns. In addition, any rifle
capable of firing "shot" but primarily designed to fire single projectiles will
be regarded as a rifle.
SHOTGUNS: Any firearm capable of discharging a series of projectiles of any
material which may reasonably be expected to be able to cause lethal injury,
with a barrel or barrels more than eighteen inches (18") in length, and using
either gunpowder, gas or any means of rocket propulsion, but not to include any
weapon so designed with a barrel less than eighteen inches (18") in length. In
addition, any "shotgun" capable of firing single projectiles but primarily
designed to fire multiple projectiles such as "shot" will be regarded as a
shotgun.
STUN GUN: Any weapon, instrument or electronic device capable of discharging an
electrical charge which may reasonably be expected to stun, temporarily
paralyze or cause a debilitating or lethal injury as a result of the electrical
charge. (Ord. 842 §1, 1998)
9.82.011: CARRYING WEAPONS GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to carry upon or about his person, or in his
portfolio or purse, a stun gun, sword cane, blackjack, loaded cane, bill, hand
chain, metal knuckles, or any other offensive weapon, except as in this chapter
provided. Provided further, that this section shall not prohibit the proper use
of guns and knives for hunting, fishing or recreational purposes, nor shall
this section be construed to prohibit any uses of weapons in a manner otherwise
permitted by municipal ordinance or by state law. (Ord. 1164, 2015)
9.82.012: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
No person shall discharge any species of firearms, air guns, stun guns, or
weapons except as provided hereinafter:
A.   Police Officers: Police officers, or those impressed into peace officers'
duties by the police department, who in the performance of their duties,
discharge firearms as the occasion warrants;
B.   Shooting Gallery; Annual Permit: Any type of firearm discharged in an
approved shooting gallery or on an approved shooting range, but not until the
shooting gallery or shooting range has been approved by the chief of police
and, an annual permit issued to the owner or operator to conduct the shooting.
The chief of police or his designee shall inspect each place for which a permit
is requested for a shooting gallery or shooting range, and a permit shall be
issued if the chief or his designee finds that the gallery or range is arranged
with adequate safeguards so as not to endanger the public, and if he finds that
the shooting gallery or shooting range is operated and supervised in a manner
so as not to endanger the lives of persons and property including those
participating in the shooting. (Ord. 842 §1, 1998)
9.82.013: THROWING WEAPONS OR OBJECTS:
It is unlawful for any person to throw in any public or private place or any
place where there is any person or property to be endangered or injured
thereby, any stone, piece of brick, wood or any other missile or object upon or
across any street or at any person, building or vehicle irrespective of whether
injury or damage is caused by such action. (Ord. 842 §1, 1998)
9.82.014: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00),
plus court costs, as may be determined by the municipal court, except where
otherwise specified or hereafter set out. (Ord. 842 §1, 1998)
IX.   PENALTIES
CHAPTER 9.90
PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
9.90.010: Penalties Designated
9.90.015: Violation Of Section 9.26.020 Of This Title
9.90.010: PENALTIES DESIGNATED:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00), excluding court costs, as may be determined by the municipal court
except where otherwise specified herein:
A.   For an offense established by section
9.02.030 of this title, the maximum fine shall be a sum not to exceed seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs.
B.   For offenses established by sections
9.02.020,
9.02.040 and
9.02.050 of this title, the maximum fine shall be a sum not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 1083 §1, 2010)
9.90.015: VIOLATION OF SECTION 9.26.020 OF THIS TITLE:
Any person who sells or furnishes low point beer to a minor shall violate
section
9.26.020 of this title and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by the
payment of a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court
costs. (Ord. 967 §2, 2002)
X.   MISCELLANEOUS
CHAPTER 9.94
COURT COSTS
SECTION:
9.94.010: Complainant Responsibility
9.94.020: Cases Referred To Collection Agency; Fee
9.94.010: COMPLAINANT RESPONSIBILITY:
Any person, except a police officer or other employee of the city, filing a
criminal offense complaint in the municipal court, shall deposit with the clerk
of the court, court costs in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or in the
amount allowed by state statute. The court costs so deposited by such a
complainant shall be refunded to the complainant or person depositing same upon
conviction or acquittal of the defendant; the court costs shall not be
refundable if the charges are dismissed at the request of the complainant who
made the deposit or because the complainant refused to appear in court to
testify or aid in the prosecution of the charges filed by such complainant.
(Ord. 753 §1, 1994)
9.94.020: CASES REFERRED TO COLLECTION AGENCY; FEE:
Any court case and fine which has been referred to a collection agency shall
have a collection agency fee assessed as a cost in the respective case. Said
fee shall be in the amount of thirty five percent (35%) of the amount due or
the actual fee charged by the collection agency pursuant to its contract with
the city, if different. (Ord. 1115, 2011)
TITLE 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 1
Application Of Traffic Regulations   10.04
Administration And Enforcement   10.08
Traffic Commission   10.12
Drivers' And Chauffeurs' Licenses   10.16
Proof Of Insurance And Certification Of Existence Of Security   10.18
Collisions; Accident Reports   10.20
Traffic Control Devices, Signs And Signals   10.24
Rules Of The Road   10.28
Miscellaneous Driving Regulations   10.32
Intoxicating Substances; Transport And Use   10.36
Speed Limits   10.40
One-Way And Through Streets; Intersections   10.44
Stopping, Standing And Parking   10.48
Loading Zones And Public Carrier Stops   10.52
Emergency Vehicles   10.56
Truck Routes   10.60
Inspection Of Vehicles   10.64
Unlawful Vehicles   10.68
Pedestrians   10.72
Motorcycles And Motor Scooters   10.76
Bicycles   10.80
Abandoned Vehicles   10.84
Vehicle Impoundment    10.88
Violations; Citations; Penalty   10.92
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS.
CHAPTER 10.04
APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
10.04.010: Animals And Nonmotorized Vehicles
10.04.020: Emergency Vehicles
10.04.030: Construction Or Maintenance Vehicles Or Machinery
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-101 – 11-107.
10.04.010: ANIMALS AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES:
Every person propelling or pulling any cart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Prior code §18-
20)
10.04.020: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
A.   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles (i.e., police
and other law enforcement vehicles, fire department vehicles and ambulances
when engaged in emergency runs), except as follows: The driver, when operating
any such vehicle in an emergency, or while engaged in the performance of his
duties or in pursuit of an actual or suspected violation of the law, except as
otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
   1.   Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this title;
   2.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation;
   3.   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property;
   4.   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specific directions so long as he does not endanger life or property.
B.   The exemptions in subsections A2 and A4 of this section shall apply only
when the driver of the emergency vehicle sounds a siren as may be reasonably
necessary, and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp and/or lens visible from
the front under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred
feet (500') as a warning to others. The foregoing exemptions shall not,
however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his
reckless disregard of the safety of others. (Ord. 435 §1, 1976: prior code §18-
21)
10.04.030: CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE VEHICLES OR MACHINERY:
The provisions of this title shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles
or vehicles or machinery used in the construction or maintenance of streets and
highways, and such vehicles or machinery may be operated on any part of the
street whether the same is open to traffic or closed, when such operation is
necessary in the maintenance or construction of the streets or highways. (Prior
code §18-23)
CHAPTER 10.08
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 1
SECTION:
10.08.010: Adoption Of Regulations; Enforcement
10.08.020: Police And Fire Departments; Powers And Duties
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-103.
10.08.010: ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
A.   The adoption of all traffic rules and regulations within the city is
reserved to the council, which shall have full authority to regulate traffic,
vehicles and parking by ordinance or resolution.
B.   It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street
traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable
to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to cooperate with other law enforcement officers in
developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and in protecting life
and property. (Ord. 433 §1, 1976: prior code §18-1)
10.08.020: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS; POWERS AND DUTIES:
A.   Officers of the police department, subject to direction by the chief of
police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in
conformance with this title; provided that in the event of a fire or other
emergency, to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers may direct
traffic as conditions may require.
B.   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic and may make arrests for traffic and
parking violations.
C.   No person not properly authorized shall direct or attempt to direct
traffic.
D.   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or officer of the fire department.
E.   The police department is empowered to regulate and control traffic without
council action on a temporary basis, and pursuant thereto are authorized, on a
temporary basis, to:
   1.   Establish stop signs and traffic control devices at all intersections
that, in the opinion of the department, constitute a hazard;
   2.   Establish loading zones upon the streets for the loading and unloading
of buses and taxis, and to designate a portion of any street for that purpose;
and, when so designated and plainly marked, the same shall not be used for
parking or for any other purpose;
   3.   Establish either angle or parallel parking upon the streets of the city
in such manner as in its judgment to reduce traffic hazards;
   4.   Establish time limits upon parking, and designate the time that parking
shall be permitted with plain markers;
   5.   Erect or install, during short periods of time to assist in eliminating
traffic congestion or abnormal traffic conditions, signs prohibiting or
indicating required movements of traffic or prohibiting or indicating required
parking of vehicles;
   6.   Prohibit and prevent all obstructions and encroachments into and upon
all public and private property which interfere with the free movement of
traffic or the blocking of vision, and provide for the removal of all
encroachments and obstructions at the expense of the owner of the ground
fronting thereon, or the person placing the same there.
F.   Any police officer is authorized to make arrests for violations of traffic
ordinances of the city which he observes on any highway or street that forms
the boundary line of the city and any other adjoining political jurisdiction,
said authority to enforce traffic ordinance and make arrests on boundary lines
and streets provided for pursuant to title 47, section 108.1 of the Oklahoma
Statutes, subject to the provisions of section 15-101 et seq., of title 47 of
the Oklahoma Statutes. (Ord. 672 §2, 1988: Ord. 665 §1, 1988: Ord. 657 §4,
1987: Ord. 433 §1, 1976: prior code §18-2)
CHAPTER 10.12
TRAFFIC COMMISSION
SECTION:
10.12.010: Creation; Membership; Appointment
10.12.020: Ex Officio Members
10.12.030: Members; Terms
10.12.031: Absences To Terminate Membership
10.12.040: Officers; Meetings
10.12.050: Powers And Duties
10.12.060: Recommendations; Procedure
10.12.061: Adoption Of Guidelines
10.12.070: Authority To Exercise Emergency Traffic Control Powers
10.12.010: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT:
There is established a traffic commission of the city. The commission shall
consist of five (5) residents of the city, to be appointed by the mayor with
consent and approval of the council. Membership shall consist of one member
appointed from each ward and one member at large, all of whom shall serve
without compensation. (Ord. 423 §1, 1976)
10.12.020: EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:
In addition to the five (5) members appointed as set forth in section
10.12.010 of this chapter, the fire chief and police chief shall serve as ex
officio members of the commission, but they shall act in an advisory capacity
and shall have no power to vote on matters coming before the commission. (Ord.
423 §2, 1976)
10.12.030: MEMBERS; TERMS:
The term of each member shall be three (3) years, or until his successor takes
office, except for the initial appointments which shall be as follows: Members
from wards 1 and 3, and the at large member shall be appointed for terms of two
(2) years, which shall thereafter be full three (3) year terms. Members
appointed from wards 2 and 4 shall be appointed for a full three (3) year term.
(Ord. 423 §3, 1976)
10.12.031: ABSENCES TO TERMINATE MEMBERSHIP:
If any individual member of the commission shall be absent from more than one-
half (1/2) of any four (4) consecutive meetings of the traffic commission, he
shall thereupon cease to hold office and the vacancy created thereby shall be
filled as provided in this chapter for original appointment to the commission.
(Ord. 879 §1, 1999: Ord. 557 §1, 1983)
10.12.040: OFFICERS; MEETINGS:
The commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from the membership who
shall serve for periods of one year, or until their successors are elected. The
commission shall meet in regular sessions not less than once per month; such
date to be established by the commission. In addition, the commission shall
meet upon special call by the mayor, chairman or vice chairman of the
commission at the request of the city council. (Ord. 557 §2, 1983)
10.12.050: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The general duties of the commission shall be to coordinate traffic activities,
review proposed traffic ordinances, receive complaints, and conduct hearings
having to do with traffic matters within the city. In addition, the commission
shall carry out any and all further duties which may be imposed on the
commission by the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 423 §5, 1976)
10.12.060: RECOMMENDATIONS; PROCEDURE:
The commission shall recommend to the council ways and means toward improving
or changing traffic or parking conditions, and the administration or
enforcement of traffic regulations. All recommendations made to the council
based upon proposed traffic ordinances or other traffic matters shall be in
writing, with copies of all such recommendations provided to all department
heads and the planning commission. (Ord. 423 §6, 1976)
10.12.061: ADOPTION OF GUIDELINES:
There is adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out for
use and as guidelines for the traffic commission in the exercise of its powers,
duties and recommendations as provided herein, the uniform traffic control
devices as adopted by the national advisory committee on traffic control in
1978, and as from time to time amended, and as published by the United States
department of transportation. The adoption of such uniform control code shall
be advisory to the commission in its duties; provided, however, any deviation
therefrom shall be supported by reasons to justify such variance. A current
copy of the uniform traffic control devices code shall be maintained at all
times by the city clerk for use by the commission and shall be available for
use and inspection by the public. (Ord. 557 §3, 1983)
10.12.070: AUTHORITY TO EXERCISE EMERGENCY TRAFFIC CONTROL POWERS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the police chief or fire chief from
exercising powers over traffic control on a temporary basis in such situations
as they may deem emergencies. Any such action taken under this section shall be
effective as if adopted by the council, provided the temporary action taken
shall only be effective until the next council meeting following the next
traffic commission meeting. (Ord. 423 §7, 1976)
CHAPTER 10.16
DRIVERS' AND CHAUFFEURS' LICENSES
SECTION:
10.16.010: Required; Possession
10.16.011: Operation Of Motor Vehicle In Violation Of Restrictions
10.16.020: Permitting Unauthorized Persons To Drive
10.16.030: Invalid Licenses
10.16.040: Employment Of Unlicensed Chauffeur
10.16.050: Renting Vehicles
10.16.060: Penalties
10.16.010: REQUIRED; POSSESSION:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a motor vehicle
within the city without having been issued a valid driver's license from and as
required by the laws of the state.
B.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a motor vehicle
within the city without having a valid driver's license issued from the state
in his or her immediate possession. (Ord. 619 §1, 1985)
10.16.011: OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE IN VIOLATION OF RESTRICTIONS:
A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a motor
vehicle in any manner or under any conditions which are in violation of the
restrictions imposed on a driver's license issued to that person by the state
department of public safety.
B.   Any person who is convicted of the offense of operating a motor vehicle
under conditions which violate the restrictions imposed upon their driver's
license shall be required to pay a fine in the amount of thirty five dollars
($35.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 657 §5, 1987: Ord. 662 §1, 1985)
10.16.020: PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS TO DRIVE:
A.   It is an offense for any person to cause or knowingly permit his child or
ward under the age of sixteen (16) years to drive a motor vehicle on any
streets in the city, when such minor is not authorized to do so by the
provisions of the laws of the state.
B.   It is an offense for any person to authorize or knowingly permit any
vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any of the streets
of the city by any person who is not authorized under the provisions of this
title to operate such vehicle.
C.   No person who is under the age of fourteen (14) years shall operate a
vehicle on the streets of the city. (Prior code §18-15)
10.16.030: INVALID LICENSES:
A.   No person shall display or have in his possession any canceled, revoked,
suspended, fictitious, photostatic or fraudulently altered operator's or
chauffeur's license. It is unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a
motor vehicle within the city whose driver's license has been canceled,
suspended, revoked or denied by the state.
B.   No person shall lend his operator's or chauffeur's license to any other
person or knowingly permit the use thereof by another.
C.   No person shall display or represent as one's own any operator's or
chauffeur's license not issued to him. (Ord. 896 §1, 2000: prior code §18-17)
10.16.040: EMPLOYMENT OF UNLICENSED CHAUFFEUR:
No person shall employ as a chauffeur of a motor vehicle any person not then
licensed by the laws of the state. (Prior code §18-18)
10.16.050: RENTING VEHICLES:
A.   No person shall rent a motor vehicle to any other person unless the latter
person is then duly licensed as required by the laws of the state or, in the
case of a nonresident, then duly licensed under the laws of the state or county
of his residence, except a nonresident whose home state or county does not
require that an operator be licensed.
B.   No person shall rent a motor vehicle to another until he has inspected the
operator's or chauffeur's license of the person to whom the vehicle is to be
rented and compared and verified the signature thereon with the signature of
such person written in his presence. (Prior code §18-19)
10.16.060: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of the following designated sections
shall, upon conviction thereof, be required to pay a fine in an amount as
follows:
A.   For violation of subsection
10.16.010A of this chapter, a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court
costs;
B.   For violation of subsection
10.16.010B of this chapter, a fine of thirty five dollars ($35.00), plus court
costs;
C.   For violation of section
10.16.030 of this chapter, a fine of one hundred sixty dollars ($160.00), plus
court costs. (Ord. 1000 §9, 2004: Ord. 657 §5, 1987)
CHAPTER 10.18
PROOF OF INSURANCE AND CERTIFICATION OF EXISTENCE OF SECURITY
SECTION:
10.18.010: Security Verification Form Required
10.18.020: Definitions
10.18.030: Possession Of Security Verification Form While Operating Or Using
Certain Vehicles
10.18.040: Penalty
10.18.010: SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM REQUIRED:
A.   The owner of a motor vehicle registered in this state and operating said
vehicle within the city's boundaries, shall carry in such vehicle at all times
a current owner's security verification form listing the vehicle, or an
equivalent form which has been issued by the department of public safety which
shall be produced by any driver thereof upon request for inspection by any law
enforcement officer and, in case of a collision, the form shall be shown upon
request to any person affected by said collision.
B.   The following shall not be required to carry an owner's or operator's
security verification form or an equivalent form from the department during
operation of the vehicle and shall not be required to surrender such form for
vehicle registration purposes:
   1.   Any vehicle owned or leased by the federal or state government, or any
agency or political subdivision thereof,
   2.   Any vehicle bearing the name, symbol or logo of the business,
corporation or utility on the exterior and which is in compliance with the
compulsory insurance law according to records of the department of public
safety which reflect a deposit, bond, self-insurance, or fleet policy,
   3.   Any vehicle authorized for operation, under a permit number issued by
the interstate commerce commission, or the Oklahoma corporation commission,
   4.   Any licensed taxicab, and
   5.   Any vehicle owned by a licensed used motor vehicle dealer. (Ord. 573
§1, 1983)
10.18.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have
the following meanings:
COMPULSORY INSURANCE LAW: The law requiring liability insurance in conjunction
with the operation of a motor vehicle in this state as found in article VI,
chapter 7 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
OPERATOR'S POLICY: An operator's policy of liability insurance shall insure the
named person against loss from the liability imposed upon him by law for
damages arising out of the operation or use by him of any motor vehicle not
owned by him, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's
policy.
OWNER'S POLICY: An owner's policy of liability insurance:
A.   Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference all
vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted,
B.   Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person, except
as provided in subsection D of this section, using an insured vehicle with the
express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the
liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
operation or use of such vehicle,
C.   May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing laws,
and
D.   Shall be issued by an authorized carrier providing coverage in accordance
with section 7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes.
SECURITY: A. A policy or bond meeting the requirements of section 7-204 of
title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes,
B.   A deposit of cash or securities having the equivalency of limits required
under section 7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits
for a policy or bond, or
C.   Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of section 7-503 of title 47 of
the Oklahoma Statutes, having the equivalency of limits required under section
7-204 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes as acceptable limits for a policy or
bond.
SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM: A security verification form is a form, approved by
the state board for property and casualty rates, verifying the existence of
security required by the compulsory insurance law of the state of Oklahoma.
(Ord. 573 §1, 1983)
10.18.030: POSSESSION OF SECURITY VERIFICATION FORM WHILE OPERATING OR USING
CERTAIN VEHICLES:
Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in this state shall, while
operating or using such vehicle within the city's boundaries, carry either an
operator's or an owner's security verification form issued by a carrier,
providing the operator is not excluded from coverage thereon; or an equivalent
form issued by the department of public safety, reflecting liability coverage.
(Ord. 573 §1, 1983)
10.18.040: PENALTY:
A.   An owner or operator who fails to produce for inspection a valid and
current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by
the department upon request of any peace officer of the Warr Acres city police
department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
B.   A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be suspended or
deferred in whole or in part by the court.
C.   Upon conviction, bond forfeiture or deferral of sentence, the court shall
forward an abstract to the department of public safety within ten (10) days
reflecting the action taken by the court. (Ord. 1000 §5, 2004: Ord. 573 §1,
1983)
CHAPTER 10.20
COLLISIONS; ACCIDENT REPORTS 1
SECTION:
10.20.020: Information, Assistance And Notice To Police Required
10.20.030: Stopping And Remaining At Scene Of Accident
10.20.035: Penalties For Violating Section 10.20.030 Of This Chapter
10.20.040: Report; Time Limit; Confidentiality
10.20.050: Striking Unattended Vehicles; Notice Required
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS ch. 10.
10.20.020: INFORMATION, ASSISTANCE AND NOTICE TO POLICE REQUIRED:
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person, or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by
any person, shall give his name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle he is driving, and shall, upon request, and if available, exhibit his
operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck, or the driver or
occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with. He shall render to
any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the
carrying, or making of arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a
physician or hospital for medical treatment, if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary, or if such carrying is requested by the injured person,
and he shall by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such
accident to the police department, as provided in this chapter. (Prior code
§18-3)
10.20.030: STOPPING AND REMAINING AT SCENE OF ACCIDENT:
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person, or damage to any vehicle or property, shall immediately
stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident and shall remain at the scene
of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of section
10.20.020 of this chapter. Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic
more than is necessary. (Prior code §18-4)
10.20.035: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING SECTION 10.20.030 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Persons convicted of violating the provisions of section
10.20.030 of this chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine in the amount of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 907 §1, 2000)
10.20.040: REPORT; TIME LIMIT; CONFIDENTIALITY:
A.   The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident, or if physically
incapable then the owner of such vehicle, shall within forty eight (48) hours
report such accident to the police station, and make a full report upon the
forms to be provided by the police department; provided, further, that in any
accident where death, personal injury or property damage is involved, the
driver or drivers of the vehicles shall immediately report the same to the
police station and shall in all cases remain at the scene of the accident until
police officers have arrived.
B.   All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents shall be
without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the
confidential use of the police department, or other governmental agencies
having use of the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the
identification of a person involved in an accident may be disclosed when such
identity is not otherwise known, or when such person denies his presence at
such accident.
C.   No reports or information filed by the drivers as provided in this section
shall be used in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident,
except that the police department shall furnish, upon demand of any party to
such trial or upon demand of any court, an affidavit stating that a specified
accident report has or has not been made to the department, in compliance with
the law. (Prior code §18-5)
10.20.050: STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLES; NOTICE REQUIRED:
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended
shall immediately stop, and shall then and there either locate and notify the
operator or owner of such vehicle as to the name and address of the driver and
owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or shall leave, in a
conspicuous place in or on the vehicle struck, a written notice giving the name
and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking.
(Prior code §18-6)
CHAPTER 10.24
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNS AND SIGNALS 1
SECTION:
10.24.010: Authority To Install And Maintain
10.24.020: Compliance Required; Exceptions
10.24.030: Traffic Control Signals; Legend
10.24.035: Penalties For Violating Section 10.24.030 Of This Chapter
10.24.040: Flashing Red Or Yellow Signals
10.24.050: Injury Or Removal Prohibited
10.24.060: Unauthorized Signs, Signals Or Devices Prohibited
10.24.070: Establishment Of Safety Zones, Traffic Lanes And Islands
10.24.080: Traffic Control In Construction Areas
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-201 et seq.
10.24.010: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN:
Traffic control devices, signals and signs shall be placed and maintained when
and as provided in this title, to make effective the provisions of this title,
and such additional devices as may be required shall be placed and maintained.
(Prior code §18-41)
10.24.020: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device, signal or sign applicable thereto placed in accordance with the
traffic ordinances of the city unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
in this title. (Prior code §18-42)
10.24.030: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS; LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words
"Go", "Caution" or "Stop", or exhibiting different colored lights successively,
one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used; and the
terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
A.   Green alone or "Go": Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either of such turns. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or
left shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B.   Yellow alone or "Caution": Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby
warned that the red or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter,
and such vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection when the yellow or
"caution" signal is exhibited unless a stop cannot be made in safety, in which
event vehicles may proceed through the intersection, if such move can be made
with caution. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until
the green or "go" signal is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a
pedestrian "walk" signal.
C.   Red alone or "Stop": Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then
before entering the intersection, and shall not proceed across the intersection
until green or "go" is shown alone. No pedestrian facing such signal, shall
enter the roadway until the green or "go" signal is shown alone unless
authorized to do so by a pedestrian "walk" signal.
D.   Red with green arrow: Vehicular traffic facing such signal may enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield
the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection. No pedestrian facing such signal shall
enter the roadway until the green or "go" signal is shown alone, unless
authorized to do so by a pedestrian "walk" signal. (Prior code §18-43)
10.24.035: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING SECTION 10.24.030 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Persons convicted of violating the provisions of section
10.24.030 of this chapter shall be punished by a monetary fine in the amount of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 1000 §6, 2004: Ord. 907
§1, 2000)
10.24.040: FLASHING RED OR YELLOW SIGNALS:
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience
by vehicular traffic as follows:
A.   Flashing Red (Stop) Signal: When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject
to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
B.   Flashing Yellow (Caution) Signal: When a yellow lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution. (Prior code §18-44)
10.24.050: INJURY OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED:
No person shall without lawful authority alter, deface, injure, knock down or
remove any official traffic control device or sign, or any railroad sign or
signal, or any inscription, shield or insignia thereupon or any other part
thereof, or attempt to do so. (Prior code §18-45)
10.24.060: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR DEVICES PROHIBITED:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or
highway within the limits of the city any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or
device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic control device or railroad sign or signal which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, or which projects any flashing or revolving beams of
light, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. (Prior code
§18-46)
10.24.070: ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY ZONES, TRAFFIC LANES AND ISLANDS:
A.   The council shall establish safety zones, traffic lanes, islands and other
traffic control devices, and the street department shall carry such directions
into effect to maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the
surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular
danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as deemed
necessary by the council.
B.   To mark or construct safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as deemed necessary by the council for the protection of pedestrians.
C.   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places, consistent
with this title, and the direction of the council.
D.   To construct and maintain traffic islands. (Ord. 438 §1, 1976: prior code
§18-70)
10.24.080: TRAFFIC CONTROL IN CONSTRUCTION AREAS:
A.   During such times as construction, repair and maintenance of North
MacArthur Avenue between the intersections of Northwest 50th Street and
Northwest 63rd Street is being performed under traffic, the chief of police is
authorized to erect, or cause to be erected, such traffic control devices as
he, in his discretion, may determine necessary to protect members of the public
and the construction personnel. Each person using or driving a vehicle on North
MacArthur during such times shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen or
other traffic control devices which are placed to regulate, control, and guide
traffic through the construction or maintenance area. As used in this
subsection, "construction or maintenance area" means any area upon or around
North MacArthur that is visibly marked as an area where construction, repair,
and maintenance is temporarily occurring. The construction or maintenance area
also includes the streets accessing North MacArthur at designated construction
or maintenance areas, beginning at the point where properly posted traffic
control devices start to warn and guide the public into and through the
construction or maintenance including, but not limited to, instructions to
merge from one lane into another lane, to reduce speed, or to follow directions
of flagmen.
B.   Any person who violates any provision of this section by failure to comply
with any traffic control device established by the chief of police pursuant to
the authority granted by this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) not including court costs, assessments and fees. (Ord. 1012
§1, 2005)
CHAPTER 10.28
RULES OF THE ROAD 1
SECTION:
10.28.010: Reckless, Careless Or Negligent Driving Unlawful
10.28.015: Texting While Driving Prohibited
10.28.020: Following Vehicles Too Closely Prohibited
10.28.030: Driving On Right Side Of Street Required; Exceptions
10.28.040: Traffic Lanes
10.28.050: Passing
10.28.060: Overtaking Vehicles On The Left
10.28.070: Overtaking Vehicles On The Right
10.28.080: Right Of Way
10.28.090: Turns At Intersections
10.28.100: U-Turns Permitted At Intersections; Exceptions
10.28.110: Turn And Stop Signals Required
10.28.120: Turn And Stop Signals; Devices Or Means
10.28.130: Turn And Stop Signals; Method Of Giving By Hand Or Arm
10.28.150: Leaving Vehicle Doors Open
10.28.160: One-Way Street; Driving In The Opposite Direction
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS ch. 11.
10.28.010: RECKLESS, CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT DRIVING UNLAWFUL:
A.   It is unlawful and shall be deemed reckless, careless or negligent driving
for any person to drive any vehicle within the city recklessly, carelessly or
negligently in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without due
caution under the circumstances then existing, or at a dangerous rate of speed,
or in such manner as to endanger the rights, life or property of any person.
B.   Any person who shall violate the provisions of subsection A of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be required to pay a fine, plus court
costs, as follows: reckless driving, a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00); careless driving, a fine not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00); negligent driving, a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 657 §6, 1987)
10.28.015: TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED:
A.   Prohibited Actions: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor
vehicle on any street or highway within the city of Warr Acres while using a
handheld electronic communication device to manually compose, send or read an
electronic text message while the motor vehicle is in motion.
B.   Penalty: Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than seventy
dollars ($70.00).
C.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply
if the person is using the cellular telephone or electronic communication
device for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following
regarding an imminent emergency situation:
   1.   An emergency response operator;
   2.   A hospital, physician's office or health clinic;
   3.   A provider of ambulance services;
   4.   A provider of firefighting services; or
   5.   A law enforcement agency.
D.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section:
   CELLULAR TELEPHONE: An analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by
the federal communications commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth
reserved for cellular telephones.
   COMPOSE, SEND OR READ: With respect to a text message means the manual
entry, sending or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any person or
device.
   ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE: An electronic device that permits the user
to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than
through an oral transfer or wire communication. This term does not include a
device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or
a voice operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a
motor vehicle, or a handsfree device that allows the user to write, send or
read a text message without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate or initiate a feature or function.
   TEXT MESSAGE: Includes a text based message, instant message, electronic
message, photo, video or electronic mail. (Ord. 1160, 2015)
10.28.020: FOLLOWING VEHICLES TOO CLOSELY PROHIBITED:
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle, the
traffic, condition of the street, and surrounding circumstances. (Prior code
§18-27)
10.28.030: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF STREET REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
Upon a two-way street of sufficient width, vehicles shall be driven upon the
right half of the street except when passing another vehicle or when the right
half is obstructed. In crossing an intersection of streets or an intersection
of a street with a railroad, a vehicle shall at all such times be driven on the
right half of a two-way street unless the right half is obstructed. Slow moving
vehicles shall be driven as closely as practicable to the right edge or curb.
(Prior code §18-28)
10.28.040: TRAFFIC LANES:
When a street has been divided into lanes for traffic, drivers shall observe
the following rules:
A.   A vehicle shall normally be driven in the lane nearest the right edge or
curb of the street when this lane is available for travel, except when
overtaking another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn.
B.   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as is practicable entirely within a
single lane, and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety and has signaled for a
change of lane or direction. (Prior code §18-29)
10.28.050: PASSING:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right, and each shall give to the other half of the main traveled portion
of the street, as nearly as practicable. (Prior code §18-30)
10.28.060: OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT:
The driver of a vehicle overtaking on the left another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall give notice of his approach by horn, shall pass at a
safe distance to the left of the vehicle being overtaken, and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of such overtaken
vehicle. The driver of a vehicle being approached from the rear shall give way
to the right on audible signal in favor of the overtaking vehicle when
practicable, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely
passed by the overtaking vehicle. No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the
centerline of a street in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction if the left side is not clearly visible and free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be made in safety, nor at any railway crossing, on a hill, nor when crossing
any intersection with another street. (Prior code §18-31)
10.28.070: OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE RIGHT:
A.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
   1.   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
   2.   Upon a street with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked
vehicles and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles
in each direction;
   3.   Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstruction and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving
vehicles;
B.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the right
only under conditions set out in subsection A of this section, and then
permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by
driving off the pavement or main traveled portion of the roadway, except in an
emergency. (Prior code §18-32)
10.28.080: RIGHT OF WAY:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this title, the following rules
shall determine the right of way of vehicles:
A.   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right
of way to a vehicle which has already entered the intersection from a different
roadway.
B.   When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection having no traffic control
signals or signs from different roadways at approximately the same time, the
driver of the vehicle on the right shall have the right of way.
C.   Where two (2) or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs
or signals on two (2) or more intersecting cross streets, and are approaching
so as to enter the intersection at the same time, the actions set out in this
subsection shall be taken. Where each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle
coming from the right shall have the right of way. Where each vehicle is
required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right of
way. Where each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from
the right shall have the right of way. Where one vehicle is required to stop
and the other to slow or take caution, the one slowing or taking caution shall
have the right of way. Where one vehicle is required to slow and the other take
caution, the one required to take caution shall have the right of way. In any
event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection shall have the
right of way over one which has not so entered the intersection.
D.   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the
left shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard; but the driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this title, may make such left turn, and all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall
yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn.
E.   In all cases, emergency vehicles, as defined in this title, and when
plainly designated and marked, shall have the right of way on the roadways.
F.   Any vehicle parked parallel or at an angle with the curb when ready to
move shall yield the right of way to oncoming traffic in the street approaching
from the rear, and shall proceed into the line of traffic only after the driver
has indicated his intention of driving from the curb and into the line of
traffic by giving the signal for a left turn, and in no event shall enter the
line of traffic while a hazard exists.
G.   Any vehicle attempting to park by backing into a parking space shall have
the right of way to such parking space over any other vehicle heading into such
space. (Prior code §18-33)
10.28.090: TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall comply with
the following provisions:
A.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn itself shall be made
as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
B.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half
of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof; and after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to
the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
C.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall
be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be
made from the left portion of the lane and by passing to the right of the
centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
D.   Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left
turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left hand
curb or edge of the roadway. (Prior code §18-34)
10.28.100: U-TURNS PERMITTED AT INTERSECTIONS; EXCEPTIONS:
It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to turn such vehicle around on any
roadway within the city so as to proceed in the opposite direction except at an
intersection; provided, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make such
a turn at any intersection:
A.   Where traffic control signals, and/or four-way stop signs are installed,
except as authorized by U-turn signs;
B.   Where a police officer is directing traffic, except at his direction;
C.   Where an official "No U-turn" sign has been placed and is maintained;
D.   When otherwise permitted, a U-turn may be made only when it can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic. (Prior code §18-35)
10.28.110: TURN AND STOP SIGNALS REQUIRED:
No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection or turn a vehicle to enter a
private road or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or
move right or left upon a roadway, without giving an appropriate signal in the
manner provided in this chapter. A signal of intention to turn right or left
when required shall be given continuously during not less than the one hundred
feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning. No person shall stop or
suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate
signal in the manner provided in this chapter to the driver of any vehicle
immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. (Prior
code §18-36)
10.28.120: TURN AND STOP SIGNALS; DEVICES OR MEANS:
Any turn or stop signal required shall be given either by means of the hand and
arm or by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device of proper type;
but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would
not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle, then the signals
must be given by such a lamp or lamps or signal device. (Prior code §18-37)
10.28.130: TURN AND STOP SIGNALS; METHOD OF GIVING BY HAND OR ARM:
All signals required by hand and arm by this chapter shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
A.   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
B.   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
C.   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward. (Prior code §18-
38)
10.28.150: LEAVING VEHICLE DOORS OPEN:
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic
longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. (Prior code §18-40)
10.28.160: ONE-WAY STREET; DRIVING IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION:
A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drive a motor
vehicle in the opposite direction of any street within the city which has been
designated and marked by a sign as a one-way street.
B.   Any person who is convicted of the offense of driving in the opposite
direction down a one-way street shall be fined in the amount not to exceed
seventy dollars ($70.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 618 §1, 1985)
CHAPTER 10.32
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
10.32.010: Funeral Processions Or Parades
10.32.020: Driving On Sidewalks
10.32.030: Loads Extending From Vehicle
10.32.040: Backing Vehicle
10.32.050: Driving Through Service Driveways Or Private Property
10.32.060: Attaching Oneself To A Moving Vehicle; Pulling Or Towing Trailer
Coach Or Camper Containing Passengers
10.32.070: Objects In Roadway
10.32.080: Use Of Warning Devices Restricted
10.32.090: Interference With Or Obstruction To Driver's Control Or View
Prohibited
10.32.100: Injure Or Tamper With Vehicles
10.32.110: False Reports Of Vehicle Theft Or Conversion Prohibited
10.32.120: Removal Or Affixing Of License Plates
10.32.130: Certificates Of Title And Number Plates
10.32.140: Following Emergency Apparatus
10.32.150: Littering From Vehicles
10.32.160: Meeting Or Overtaking A Stopped School Bus
10.32.170: Meeting Or Overtaking A Stopped Church Bus
10.32.180: Riding In Unsafe Positions On Moving Vehicle
10.32.190: Safety Belts
10.32.200: Child Passenger Restraint System
10.32.210 : Documents Required During Operation Of Motor Vehicle
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-1101 et seq., 11-1204, 22 – 23.
10.32.010: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS OR PARADES:
A.   No person shall operate a vehicle so as to drive or cut through any
funeral procession or parade. A funeral procession shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia, by the headlights being turned on, or by such other
method as may be determined by the police department. Each driver in such
procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as
practicable and shall follow the vehicles ahead as close as is practicable and
safe.
B.   No procession or parade, excluding funerals, containing twenty (20) or
more persons or five (5) or more vehicles, except the armed forces of the
United States, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police
and fire department, shall occupy, march or proceed along any roadway, except
in accordance with the permit issued by the chief of police and such other
regulations of the city. (Prior code §18-61)
10.32.020: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk or upon any sidewalk
area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (Prior code §18-62)
10.32.030: LOADS EXTENDING FROM VEHICLE:
When vehicles are loaded with material extending more than two feet (2') in any
direction from the body of such vehicle, there shall be attached to such
material a red flag by day and a red light by night at the extreme end of such
extended material. (Prior code §18-63)
10.32.040: BACKING VEHICLE:
A.   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
B.   When a vehicle is being backed out of an angle parking space, it is the
responsibility of the driver to see that the way is clear and that no person,
vehicle or other property will be harmed or damaged thereby. (Prior code §18-
64)
10.32.050: DRIVING THROUGH SERVICE DRIVEWAYS OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No vehicle shall be driven through any service driveway or private property
except for the purpose of obtaining services or merchandise, or with
permission. (Prior code §18-65)
10.32.060: ATTACHING ONESELF TO A MOVING VEHICLE; PULLING OR TOWING TRAILER
COACH OR CAMPER CONTAINING PASSENGERS:
A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person on foot or riding upon
any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, skis, ice skates, or roller skates,
skateboard or any toy vehicle to attach the same or himself or herself to any
moving vehicle upon any street and it shall be unlawful and an offense for any
operator of a moving motor vehicle to knowingly pull such person.
B.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to knowingly pull or
tow a trailer coach or camp trailer containing any passengers.
C.   Any person who violates subsection A or B of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not to exceed seventy dollars
($70.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 624 §1, 1985)
10.32.070: OBJECTS IN ROADWAY:
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, or let fall and remain in or upon
any roadway any material or thing which is likely to injure persons or damage
property; nor shall any person throw any substance at a vehicle or any occupant
thereof, nor shall any person throw any substance at a person on or adjacent to
a roadway. (Prior code §18-67)
10.32.080: USE OF WARNING DEVICES RESTRICTED:
No person shall sound, use or operate any horn or other warning device on any
vehicle within the city limits for any purpose other than a warning device in
traffic. The use of horns, bells, whistles, sirens or warning devices as a
means of attracting the attention of persons in residences or places of
business is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance. (Prior code §18-68)
10.32.090: INTERFERENCE WITH OR OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S CONTROL OR VIEW
PROHIBITED:
A.   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is loaded, or when there are in
the front seat such a number of persons, but in no vehicle more than three (3),
so as to obstruct the view of the driver in any direction or so as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
B.   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with
the driver's view in any direction or to interfere with his control over the
driving mechanism of the vehicle. (Prior code §18-69)
10.32.100: INJURE OR TAMPER WITH VEHICLES:
A.   No person shall, with intent and without right to do so, injure or tamper
with any vehicle or in any other manner damage any part or portion of any
vehicle or any accessories, appurtenances or attachments thereto.
B.   No person, without right to do so and with intent to commit a crime, shall
climb into or upon a vehicle, whether it is in motion or at rest, attempt to
manipulate any of the levers, starting mechanism, brakes or other mechanism or
device of a vehicle while the same is at rest and unattended, or set in motion
any vehicle while the same is at rest and unattended. (Prior code §18-71)
10.32.110: FALSE REPORTS OF VEHICLE THEFT OR CONVERSION PROHIBITED:
No person shall knowingly make a false report of the theft or conversion of a
vehicle to any member of the police department. (Prior code §18-72)
10.32.120: REMOVAL OR AFFIXING OF LICENSE PLATES:
No person shall remove a license plate from a vehicle or affix to a vehicle a
license plate not authorized by law for use on it, in either case with intent
to conceal or misrepresent the identity of the vehicle or its owner. (Prior
code §18-73)
10.32.130: CERTIFICATES OF TITLE AND NUMBER PLATES:
No person shall lend to, sell to, or knowingly permit the use of, by one not
entitled thereto, any certificate of title or number plate issued to or in the
custody of the person so lending or permitting the use thereof, or alter or in
any manner change a certificate of title, registration certificate, or number
plate issued under the laws of this state or any other state. (Prior code §18-
74)
10.32.140: FOLLOWING EMERGENCY APPARATUS:
The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not
follow within six hundred feet (600') of any fire, police, ambulance or any
other emergency apparatus traveling in response to any emergency alarm; drive
into, or park such vehicle within the area where such emergency apparatus has
stopped in answer to any emergency; nor pass or obstruct roadways within three
hundred feet (300') of a fire. (Ord. 579 §1, 1983)
10.32.150: LITTERING FROM VEHICLES:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to throw or discard from any
automobile or motor vehicle being operated and driven upon and over the
streets, alleys and roadways of the city any litter, trash, wastepaper, cans or
any other substance or refuse whatever.
B.   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless it is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being
blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place.
C.   Any person who shall violate the provisions of subsections A and B of this
section shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed seventy
dollars ($70.00) plus costs. (Ord. 563 §1, 1983)
10.32.160: MEETING OR OVERTAKING A STOPPED SCHOOL BUS:
A.   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is stopped
to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red loading signals
are in operation, shall stop his vehicle before it reaches the school bus and
shall not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then shall
proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due
caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants.
B.   Any violation of this section shall be deemed unlawful and an offense and
punishable by a fine not to exceed seventy dollars ($70.00). (Ord. 601 §1,
1985)
10.32.170: MEETING OR OVERTAKING A STOPPED CHURCH BUS:
A.   A "church bus" is a vehicle operated by a nonprofit religious organization
which transports persons, including school age children to and from religious
services and activities.
B.   The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a church bus that is stopped
to take on or discharge passengers, and on which the red loading signals are in
operation, is to stop his vehicle before it reaches the church bus and not
proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed past such
bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such
occupants.
C.   Every church bus used for the transportation of persons to and from
religious services and activities shall bear upon the front and rear thereof
plainly visible signs containing the words "Church Bus" in letters not less
than eight inches (8") in height, and, in addition, must be equipped with
visual signals mounted as high and as widely spaced laterally as practicable
and which shall have sufficient intensity to be visible both to the front and
rear of the vehicle from a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') in
normal sunlight and which shall be actuated by the driver of said church bus
whenever, and only whenever, such vehicle is stopped for the purpose of
receiving or discharging passengers.
D.   Any violation of this section shall be deemed unlawful and an offense and
punishable by a fine not to exceed seventy dollars ($70.00). (Ord. 602 §1,
1985)
10.32.180: RIDING IN UNSAFE POSITIONS ON MOVING VEHICLE:
A.   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to travel in a moving
motor vehicle and with any part or portion of their torso or lower extremities
of their body protruding outside of said vehicle or to ride in or on any
portion or area of a moving motor vehicle which is not properly equipped or
designed to safely transport passengers.
B.   It shall also be unlawful and an offense for any operator of a moving
motor vehicle to knowingly permit any passenger or occupant of such a vehicle
to travel in such a manner or in an area of the vehicle not properly equipped
or designed to safely transport passengers which is prohibited under subsection
A of this section.
C.   The prohibitions prescribed in this section shall not apply to operators
of moving motor vehicles who extend a part or portion of their body for the
purpose to signal turns and the like to other drivers in a manner which
conforms with accepted safe driving practices or for the purpose of gaining a
better view of the road and oncoming traffic where conditions and due caution
would make such action reasonable. The prohibitions prescribed in this section
shall also not apply to persons traveling in moving motor vehicles or riding in
or on mobile structures or vehicles being pulled or pushed by motor vehicles in
duly recognized and authorized parades or processions through the city nor
shall they apply to any person or employee engaged in the necessary and proper
discharge of his duties, or in the case of persons riding completely within or
upon vehicle bodies in space intended for any load on the vehicle, such as
sitting within the confines of the bed of a pickup truck with the gate door
secured shut.
D.   Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A or B of this
section shall, upon conviction of said offense, be punished by a fine not to
exceed seventy dollars ($70.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 630 §1, 1985)
10.32.190: SAFETY BELTS:
A.   Every operator and front seat passenger of a passenger car operated in
this municipality shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt
system required to be installed in the motor vehicle when manufactured pursuant
to federal motor vehicle safety standard 208. For the purposes of this section,
"passenger car", including vans and pickups, means "vehicle" as defined in 47
Oklahoma Statutes section 1102, except that "passenger car" does not include
trucks, truck-tractors, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, motorized bicycles
or vehicles used primarily for farm use and licensed pursuant to the provisions
of Oklahoma Statutes section 1134.
B.   This section shall not apply to an operator or passenger of a passenger
car in which the operator or passenger possesses a written verification from a
physician licensed in this state that he is unable to wear a safety seat belt
system for medical reasons.
C.   This section shall not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle who is a
route carrier of the U.S. postal service.
D.   This section shall not apply to any passenger vehicle which was
manufactured or assembled before the 1966 models, unless such vehicle is
equipped with a properly adjusted and fastened safety seat belt system.
E.   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine
of twenty dollars ($20.00) plus CLEET fee. (Ord. 905 §1, 2000: Ord. 677 §1,
1989)
10.32.200: CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT SYSTEM:
A.   Every driver, when transporting a child under eight (8) years of age in a
motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways of this state,
shall provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child
passenger restraint system as follows:
   1.   A child under four (4) years of age shall be properly secured in a
child passenger restraint system. The child passenger restraint system shall be
rear facing until the child reaches two (2) years of age or until the child
reaches the weight or height limit of the rear facing child passenger restraint
system as allowed by the manufacturer of the child passenger restraint system,
whichever occurs first; and
   2.   A child at least four (4) years of age but younger than eight (8) years
of age, if not taller than four feet nine inches (4'9") in height, shall be
properly secured in either a child passenger restraint system or child booster
seat.
For purposes of this section, "child passenger restraint system" means an
infant or child passenger restraint system which meets the federal standards as
set by 49 CFR, section 571.213.
B.   If a child is eight (8) years of age or is taller than four feet nine
inches (4'9") in height, a seat belt properly secured to the vehicle shall be
sufficient to meet the requirements of this section.
C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
   1.   The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor
vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state or
federal laws;
   2.   The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle;
   3.   The driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in use;
   4.   The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to be
placed in such devices, provided there is written documentation from a
physician of such medical reason; or
   5.   The transportation of a child who weighs more than forty (40) pounds
and who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a
lap safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with
combination lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and
shoulder safety belts in the back seat are being used by other children who
weigh more than forty (40) pounds. Provided, however, for purposes of this
subsection C5, back seat shall include all seats located behind the front seat
of a vehicle operated by a licensed childcare facility or church. Provided
further, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a child has met the
weight requirements of this subsection C5 if at the request of any law
enforcement officer, the licensed childcare facility or church provides the
officer with a written statement verified by the parent or legal guardian that
the child weighs more than forty (40) pounds.
D.   A law enforcement officer is authorized to stop a vehicle if it appears
that the driver of the vehicle has violated the provisions of this section and
to give an oral warning to the driver. The warning shall advise the driver of
the possible danger to children resulting from the failure to install or use a
child passenger restraint system or seat belts in the motor vehicle.
E.   A person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to a fine in
the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) and all court costs. The fine shall be
suspended by the municipal court and the court costs limited to a maximum of
fifteen dollars ($15.00) in the case of a first offense upon proof of purchase
or acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system. (Ord. 1162, 2015)
10.32.210: DOCUMENTS REQUIRED DURING OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in division B. of this section, at all
times while a vehicle is being used or operated on the roads of this state, the
operator of the vehicle shall have in his or her possession, or carry in the
vehicle and exhibit upon demand to any police officer, either a:
      1.   Registration certificate or an official copy thereof;
      2.   True copy of rental or lease documentation issued for a motor
vehicle;
      3.   Registration certificate or an official copy thereof issued for a
replacement vehicle in the same registration period;
      4.   Temporary receipt printed upon self-initiated electronic renewal of
a registration via the internet; or
      5.   Cab card issued for a vehicle registered under the International
Registration Plan.
   B.   The provisions of division A. of this section shall not apply to the
first thirty (30) days after purchase of a replacement vehicle. (Ord. 1195,
2019)
CHAPTER 10.36
INTOXICATING SUBSTANCES; TRANSPORT AND USE
SECTION:
10.36.010: Driving Under The Influence
10.36.020: Driving While Impaired
10.36.030: Penalty For Violation Of Sections 10.36.010 And 10.36.020 Of This
Chapter
10.36.040: Transporting Nonintoxicating And Intoxicating Alcoholic Beverages
10.36.050: Driving Under The Influence While Underage
10.36.010: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE:
It is unlawful for any person within this city to drive, operate or be in
actual physical control of any motor vehicle, who is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, or who is a habitual user of or who is under the influence
of any substance included in the uniform control of dangerous substances act as
adopted by the Oklahoma legislature, or who is under the influence of any other
drug or substance to a degree which would render him incapable of safely
driving a motor vehicle. The fact that any person charged with a violation of
this section is or has been lawfully entitled to use such controlled dangerous
substance or any other drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge
of violating this section. (Ord. 388 §1, 1976)
10.36.020: DRIVING WHILE IMPAIRED:
It is unlawful for any person within this city to drive or operate a motor
vehicle while his ability to operate such motor vehicle is impaired by the
consumption of alcohol or intoxicating liquor which renders the person's
driving ability affected by the consumption of alcohol to the extent that the
public health and safety is threatened, or if the person has violated a state
statute or city ordinance in the operation of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 388 §2,
1976)
10.36.030: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 10.36.010 AND 10.36.020 OF THIS
CHAPTER:
Every person who violates the provisions of section
10.36.010 or
10.36.020 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by
payment of a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus
court costs. (Ord. 1000 §10, 2004: Ord. 966 §1, 2002: Ord. 610 §1, 1985: Ord.
530 §1, 1982)
10.36.040: TRANSPORTING NONINTOXICATING AND INTOXICATING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
A.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport, in any moving
vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley or within any park within the
city limits, any nonintoxicating beverage containing more than one-half of one
percent alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2 percent alcohol by volume or
any intoxicating alcoholic beverage, except in the original container which has
not been opened and from which the original cap or seal has not been removed,
unless the opened container is in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which
includes the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck or any
outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person
in the vehicle while it is in motion.
B.   Any person violating the provisions of subsection A of this section is
guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 610 §2,
1985: Ord. 550 §1, 1983)
10.36.050: DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE WHILE UNDERAGE:
A.   It is unlawful, and punishable as provided in subsection C of this
section, for any person under twenty one (21) years of age to drive, operate,
or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within this state who:
   1.   Has any measurable quantity of alcohol in the person's blood or breath
at the time of a test administered within two (2) hours after an arrest of the
person;
   2.   Exhibits evidence of being under the influence of any other
intoxicating substance as shown by analysis of a specimen of the person's
blood, breath, saliva, or urine in accordance with the provisions of sections
752 and 759 of title 47 of the Oklahoma Statutes; or
   3.   Exhibits evidence of the combined influence of alcohol and any other
intoxicating substance.
B.   As used in this section, the term "other intoxicating substance" means any
controlled dangerous substance as defined in the uniform controlled dangerous
substances act, section 2-101 et seq., of title 63 of the Oklahoma Statutes, or
any other substance, other than alcohol, which is capable of being ingested,
inhaled, injected, or absorbed into the human body and is capable of adversely
affecting the central nervous system, vision, hearing, or other sensory or
motor function.
C.   1. Any person under twenty one (21) years of age who violates any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of driving under
the influence while underage. A violator shall be punished by a fine of not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), excluding court costs, or by
completion of twenty (20) hours of community service, or by requiring the
person to attend and complete a treatment program, or by any combination of
fine, community service, or treatment.
   2.   The court may assess additional community service hours in lieu of any
fine. (Ord. 1000 §11, 2004: Ord. 813 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 10.40
SPEED LIMITS 1
SECTION:
10.40.010: Regulations
10.40.020: Maximum Speed Limits Designated
10.40.030: Minimum Speed Limit
10.40.040: Temporary Speed Zones Established
10.40.050: Vehicles With Solid Rubber Or Metal Tires
10.40.060: Reduced Speeds Required
10.40.070: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-801 et seq., 11-803.
10.40.010: REGULATIONS:
A.   No person shall drive any vehicle in violation of the posted speed limits
on any street, road or highway within the city or on any street, road or
highway that forms the boundary line of the city and any other adjacent
political subdivision or otherwise in violation of the speed limit provisions
of this chapter.
B.   No person shall drive a vehicle on any street or roadway within the city
or on any street or roadway that forms the boundary line of the city and any
other adjacent political subdivision at a speed greater or less than is
reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, considering, among
other factors, the condition of the vehicle, roadway, weather, visibility,
traffic, presence of pedestrians, and any obstruction of view. No person shall
drive any vehicle upon a street or roadway within the city or on any street or
roadway that forms the boundary line of the city and any other adjacent
political subdivision at a speed greater than will permit him to bring said
vehicle to a safe stop within the assured clear distance ahead under the
conditions then existing. (Ord. 657 §7, 1987)
10.40.020: MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS DESIGNATED:
Unless otherwise posted by action of the council, the maximum speed at which a
motor vehicle may be operated upon the streets of the city shall be limited as
follows:
A.   On NW 39th Street, forty (40) miles per hour;
B.   On NW 50th Street, forty (40) miles per hour east of MacArthur and thirty
five (35) miles per hour west of MacArthur;
C.   On NW 63rd Street, forty (40) miles per hour east of MacArthur and forty
(40) miles per hour west of MacArthur;
D.   On MacArthur Street anywhere within the city limits, forty (40) miles per
hour;
E.   On Grove Street for NW 50th Street to NW 58th Street, thirty (30) miles
per hour;
F.   In all school zones as required, twenty five (25) miles per hour;
G.   On all other streets, twenty five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 897 §1, 2000:
Ord. 508 §1, 1980: Ord. 503 §1, 1980: Ord. 436 §1, 1976: Ord. 299 §1, 1969:
prior code §18-48)
10.40.030: MINIMUM SPEED LIMIT:
No vehicle shall be driven at such an unreasonably slow speed as to constitute
a hazard to or interfere with the normal movement of other traffic, except when
such speed is unavoidable. (Prior code §18-49)
10.40.040: TEMPORARY SPEED ZONES ESTABLISHED:
The police department shall have the authority to temporarily establish posted
speed zones, reducing or increasing the speeds as set forth in section
10.40.020 of this chapter, if in the judgment of the department the speed limit
set forth is such as will constitute a hazard to life, limb or property, and to
provide for the orderly movement of traffic, such action to be reviewed as
provided by ordinance. (Ord. 437 §1, 1976: prior code §18-50)
10.40.050: VEHICLES WITH SOLID RUBBER OR METAL TIRES:
No person shall drive any vehicle or combination of vehicles with solid rubber
or metal tires at a speed greater than the maximum of ten (10) miles per hour.
(Prior code §18-51)
10.40.060: REDUCED SPEEDS REQUIRED:
The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of this
chapter, drive at an appropriately reduced speed when approaching and crossing
an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when driving upon any narrow or winding
roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic, or by reason of weather or street conditions. (Prior code §18-52)
10.40.070: PENALTY:
A.   Every person who violates the provisions of section
10.40.020 of this chapter, except subsection
10.40.020F of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be required to pay
a fine in an amount not in excess of four dollars ($4.00) for each mile per
hour over the applicable or posted speed limit, plus court costs.
B.   Every person who violates the provisions of subsection
10.40.020F of this chapter, pertaining to school zone speed limits, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be required to pay a fine in an amount not in excess of six
dollars ($6.00) for each mile per hour over the speed limit, plus court costs.
(Ord. 1000 §12, 2004: Ord. 657 §7, 1987)
CHAPTER 10.44
ONE-WAY AND THROUGH STREETS; INTERSECTIONS 1
SECTION:
10.44.010: Authority To Designate; Signs Required
10.44.020: Sign Installation
10.44.030: Stop Sign Procedure
10.44.040: Slow And Yield Right Of Way Signs Procedure
10.44.050: Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building
10.44.060: Entering Intersections Or Crosswalks
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 11-308; 1-102; 15-108.
10.44.010: AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE; SIGNS REQUIRED:
The council, by motion or resolution, may designate certain streets and alleys
or parts of streets and alleys as one-way streets, or through streets and
alleys, and may determine the direction of traffic thereon. Signs giving notice
thereof shall be placed and maintained, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of
traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Prior code §18-53)
10.44.020: SIGN INSTALLATION:
Whenever a through street is designated as provided in section
10.44.010 of this chapter, a stop sign, slow sign or yield right of way sign,
as the council deems appropriate, shall be placed and maintained on every
street intersecting such through street, except at an intersection where
traffic control signals are operating. (Prior code §18-54)
10.44.030: STOP SIGN PROCEDURE:
When a stop sign is erected at or near the entrance to any intersection, every
driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked
stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by
a police officer or traffic control signal. After stopping, the driver may
proceed cautiously, and shall yield the right of way to vehicles not so obliged
to stop which have entered the intersection from the other street or which are
approaching so closely thereon as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Prior
code §18-55)
10.44.040: SLOW AND YIELD RIGHT OF WAY SIGNS PROCEDURE:
When a slow or a yield right of way sign is erected as provided in section
10.44.020 of this chapter at or near the entrance to any intersection, every
driver of a vehicle shall slow such vehicle to a speed of not more than ten
(10) miles per hour by the time the vehicle is even with the sign, except when
directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control signal. The driver
may then proceed cautiously and shall yield the right of way to vehicles not
obliged to stop or to slow down, which have entered the intersection from the
other street or which are approaching so closely thereon as to constitute an
immediate hazard. (Prior code §18-56)
10.44.050: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop
such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across the alleyway, driveway or exit, yielding the right of way
to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and, upon entering
the street, shall yield the right of way to all vehicles on the street which
are approaching or are near enough to constitute an immediate hazard. (Prior
code §18-57)
10.44.060: ENTERING INTERSECTIONS OR CROSSWALKS:
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection, in the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed. (Prior code §18-58)
CHAPTER 10.48
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 1
SECTION:
10.48.010: Prohibited In Specified Places
10.48.012: Adjacent To Schools, Hazardous Or Congested Places
10.48.015: Definitions
10.48.020: General Regulations
10.48.030: Parking Within Marked Spaces
10.48.031: Parking For Disabled
10.48.032: Enforcement
10.48.033: Penalties
10.48.040: Double Parking
10.48.050: Parking Time Limits And Prohibitions
10.48.060: Parking Commercial Vehicles In Residential Areas
10.48.070: Violations
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1101 et seq.
10.48.010: PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle, except in emergencies and when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places:
A.   On a sidewalk or sidewalk area, or in such manner as to obstruct or
interfere with pedestrian traffic thereon;
B.   In front of a public or private driveway or alley;
C.   In or within forty five feet (45') of an intersection;
D.   Within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant or within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of the entrance to a fire station, except in parking spaces marked off
on the surface of the roadway, or on any street which is posted as a fire lane;
E.   On a crosswalk;
F.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk, except in parking spaces marked
off on the surface of the roadway, or on any street which is posted as a fire
lane;
G.   Within thirty feet (30') of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic
control signal or device;
H.   Within any bus loading or taxicab zone when such zone has been officially
designated and appropriately marked, except that the driver of a private
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein while actually engaged in
loading or unloading passengers, provided such stopping does not interfere with
any bus or taxicab about to enter such zone;
I.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
J.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation, construction or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic, interfere with the
work, or create a hazard;
K.   On the paved or surfaced area of any highway without curbing and having a
graded or improved shoulder area intended for use of vehicles in case of a
necessity;
L.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking,
or in any manner that will interfere with the orderly, free movement of
traffic, including, but not limited to:
   1.   Either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property,
together with other places as designated by the chief of police, where parking,
standing or stopping of vehicles would interfere with the flow of traffic or
create a hazardous situation.
M.   Upon a street in such manner or under such condition as to leave available
less than ten feet (10') of width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic;
N.   Within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free
movement of traffic; and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within
an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property. No person shall park a vehicle in any alley except for the purpose
of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading merchandise or other
materials;
O.   On any street for a period of time longer than seventy two (72) hours;
P.   Upon any street for the principal purpose of:
   1.   Displaying such vehicle for sale, or
   2.   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except as necessitated by
an emergency; or
Q.   Upon the posted property of another without first obtaining permission
from the landowner or the person in charge of such property, except where said
placing or parking is casual or involuntary. (Ord. 1037 §1, 2007: Ord. 867 §1,
1998: prior code §18-90)
10.48.012: ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS, HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES:
In addition to the traffic commission, the police chief is hereby authorized to
determine and designate by proper signs, places, including sides of streets
adjacent to any school property, when in his or her opinion such parking,
standing or stopping of vehicle would create any hazardous condition or would
cause a delay to traffic. After such signs are so erected and in place, no
person shall park, stand or stop a vehicle in any such designated place, and a
violation thereof shall constitute an offense. (Ord. 1037 §2, 2007)
10.48.015: DEFINITIONS:
The words "vehicle" or "motor vehicle" shall include any automobile, truck,
bus, motor home, recreational or hauling trailer, any trailer, boat or boat
trailer, camper, golf cart, go-cart, motorcycle, motorbike or motor scooter.
(Ord. 911 §1, 2000)
10.48.020: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than next to the
edge of the roadway, on the right side thereof, and with the right hand wheels
of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway,
except as otherwise provided in this title. No driver of a vehicle shall leave
the vehicle with the motor running while parked. (Prior code §18-88)
10.48.030: PARKING WITHIN MARKED SPACES:
In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the
roadway, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as
thus marked off, and not on or across the lines delimiting the spaces. (Prior
code §18-89)
10.48.031: PARKING FOR DISABLED:
It is unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking
space that is designated and posted as a reserved area for parking of motor
vehicles of a physically disabled person unless such vehicle is eligible for a
detachable insignia or reflective insignia is displayed as provided in
accordance with state law or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The
provisions of this section and sections
10.48.032 and
10.48.033 of this chapter shall apply to any such designated or posted area on
public or private property accessible to the public and where the public is
invited. (Ord. 545 §1, 1982)
10.48.032: ENFORCEMENT:
The chief of police and persons under his authority are authorized to enforce
the provisions of this section and sections
10.48.031 and
10.48.033 of this chapter on private property where the public is invited.
(Ord. 545 §1, 1982)
10.48.033: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of violation of section
10.48.031 of this chapter shall pay a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00)
including court costs. (Ord. 545 §1, 1982)
10.48.040: DOUBLE PARKING:
No driver shall double park or double stop a vehicle upon any street, except
along the south side of 40th Street, between Grove and MacArthur, during normal
school hours, and then only when loading and unloading passengers; provided the
driver must not leave the vehicle unattended for any period of time. (Prior
code §18-91)
10.48.050: PARKING TIME LIMITS AND PROHIBITIONS:
The council by motion or resolution is authorized to have established parking
time limits or to prohibit parking on designated streets or parts of streets.
Whenever any parking time limit or prohibition is thus imposed, appropriate
signs or markings giving notice thereof shall be placed, and no such time limit
or prohibition shall be effective unless such signs or markings are in place at
the time of any alleged offense. (Prior code §18-92)
10.48.060: PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
It is an offense for any commercial vehicle in excess of three-quarter ton
rating to park on the streets within the residential areas of the city for a
period greater than one hour, except during periods of loading and unloading.
(Prior code §18-93)
10.48.070: VIOLATIONS:
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, such officer is authorized to move
such vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to
move the same to a position off of the paved or main traveled part of the
street. (Prior code §18-94)
CHAPTER 10.52
LOADING ZONES AND PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS
SECTION:
10.52.010: Loading Zones
10.52.020: Public Carrier Stops
10.52.010: LOADING ZONES:
The council, by motion or resolution, may have established passenger and
freight curb loading zones. Appropriate signs indicating the same and stating
the hours during which the respective zones are to be reserved for loading
zones shall be placed and maintained. (Prior code §18-95)
10.52.020: PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS:
The council, by motion or resolution, is authorized to have established bus and
taxicab stops or other passenger common carrier vehicle stops on such public
streets, in such places, and in such manner as it determines to be of the
greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus and taxicab stop
or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (Prior code §18-96)
CHAPTER 10.56
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
SECTION:
10.56.010: Right Of Way
10.56.020: Eluding Police Officer Prohibited
10.56.030: Violation; Penalties
10.56.010: RIGHT OF WAY:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, the driver of
every other vehicle shall yield the right of way, and shall immediately drive
to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right hand edge of
curb of the roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in
such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer. (Prior code §18-22)
10.56.020: ELUDING POLICE OFFICER PROHIBITED:
A.   No person operating a motor vehicle who has received a visual and audible
signal (a red light and a siren in the case of a clearly designated police
vehicle driven by a police officer) directing the operator to bring his vehicle
to a stop shall wilfully increase his speed or extinguish his light or in any
other manner attempt to or actually elude such police officer. (Ord. 537 §2,
1982: Ord. 477 §1, 1978)
10.56.030: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A.   Any person who shall violate section
10.56.010 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by the
payment of a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court
costs.
B.   Any person who shall violate section
10.56.020 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by the
payment of a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), plus
court costs. (Ord. 1000 §8, 2004: Ord. 966 §2, 2002: Ord. 650 §2, 1987)
CHAPTER 10.60
TRUCK ROUTES
SECTION:
10.60.010: Definitions
10.60.020: Application
10.60.030: Exceptions
10.60.040: Routes Established
10.60.050: Truck Traffic In The City
10.60.060: Enforcement
10.60.070: Penalty
10.60.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the
meanings given herein. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
CITY: The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
DEVIATING TRUCK: A truck which travels upon a route other than a truck route
while traveling inside the city.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
TRUCK: Any vehicle exceeding two (2) axles designed or operated for the
transportation of property; provided, truck shall not be construed to include
recreational vehicles or vehicles towing trailers transporting recreational
vehicles and recreational equipment.
TRUCK ROUTE: A way over certain streets as designated herein over and along
which trucks must operate. (Ord. 523 §1, 1982)
10.60.020: APPLICATION:
All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck
routes established herein or other designated streets over which truck travel
is permitted. (Ord. 523 §1, 1982)
10.60.030: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not prohibit:
A.   Operation On Street Of Destination: The operation of trucks upon any
street where necessary to the conduct of business of delivering or picking up
materials, merchandise or property at a destination point, provided streets
upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection
nearest the destination point;
B.   Emergency Vehicle: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in
the city;
C.   Public Utilities: The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city,
public utilities, franchise holders, any contractor or material man, while
engaged in the repair, maintenance, or construction on public easements or
rights of way. (Ord. 523 §1, 1982)
10.60.040: ROUTES ESTABLISHED:
The following streets are designated as truck routes within the city:
A.   All officially designated federal and state highways;
B.   North MacArthur from the southern to northern limits of the city;
C.   Northwest 39th Street from the eastern to western limits of the city;
D.   Northeast Highway from the eastern to western limits of the city;
E.   Northwest 63rd Street east of MacArthur to eastern limits of the city;
F.   Northwest 50th Street east of MacArthur to eastern limits of the city.
(Ord. 523 §1, 1982)
10.60.050: TRUCK TRAFFIC IN THE CITY:
All trucks operating in the city shall proceed only over established truck
routes. Provided for destination points of such truck routes, the truck shall
deviate only along the shortest route between destinations, and only when such
shortest route is significantly shorter than a route utilizing a return to the
truck route. Upon leaving the final destination point, a deviating truck shall
return to the truck route the shortest permissible route. (Ord. 523 §1, 1982)
10.60.060: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   The city clerk shall keep and maintain maps setting out truck routes which
shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and available to the public.
B.   The chief of police shall cause all truck routes and streets upon which
such traffic is permitted to be posted by appropriate signs providing notice of
the ordinance codified in this chapter. In addition, he shall post such signs
as he deems necessary to provide notice of streets where truck traffic is
prohibited. (Ord. 523 §1, 1982)
10.60.070: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than thirty five dollars
($35.00). (Ord. 523 §1, 1982)
CHAPTER 10.64
INSPECTION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
10.64.010: Vehicle Defined
10.64.020: License Plate
10.64.030: Headlights And Taillights
10.64.040: Vehicle Equipment
10.64.050: Radios On Law Enforcement Agency Or Fire Department Frequency
10.64.060: Television Sets Visible From Driver's Seat Prohibited
10.64.065: Sound Amplification Systems
10.64.070: Authority; Vehicles Suspected Of Being In Violation
10.64.075: Lamp Restrictions
10.64.080: Penalties For Violating Section 10.64.075 Of This Chapter
10.64.010: VEHICLE DEFINED:
Within the meaning of this chapter, a "vehicle" is defined to be any device in,
upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon
a roadway, excepting devices moved by human powers. (Prior code §18-12)
10.64.020: LICENSE PLATE:
All vehicles shall have displayed the current year's license plate assigned to
it, in compliance with the laws of the state, and the same shall be kept in a
clean condition and lighted in such manner as to be visible and easily read at
all times during the day or night. (Prior code §18-8)
10.64.030: HEADLIGHTS AND TAILLIGHTS:
All vehicles, except motorcycles, must have two (2) headlights and two (2) red
taillights, with a white light illuminating the license plate. All headlights
must have a high and a low beam in proper working condition. Driving with
blinding lights such as to impair or hinder the ordinary vision is prohibited.
The use of red or blue lights and/or lenses showing from the front, a bell or
siren on any vehicle, with the exception of authorized emergency vehicles (and
school buses, i.e., red lights), is prohibited. Motorcycles and bicycles must
have one headlight and one red taillight. All types of trailers, including, but
not limited to, hauling, utility, boat, motorcycle and semitrailers, must be
equipped with at least one red taillight which is visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the rear and located at heights of not more than
seventy two inches (72") and not less than twenty inches (20"). All trailers
required to have a license must also have a white light to illuminate the
license plate. Additionally all trailers shall be coupled with stay chains or
cables to the vehicle by which they are being drawn. Such chains or cables
shall be of sufficient size and strength to prevent parting from the drawing
vehicle should the regular coupling device break or become otherwise
disengaged. (Ord. 934 §1, 2001: Ord. 856 §1, 1998: prior code §18-9)
10.64.040: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT:
All vehicles shall be equipped with the following:
A.   Mirrors: Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with: 1) a mirror mounted
on the left side of the vehicle and so positioned and located as to reflect to
the driver a view of the highway or street to the rear of the motor vehicle;
and 2) an additional mirror mounted either inside the vehicle in approximately
the center or outside of the vehicle on the right side and so positioned and
located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway or street to the rear
of the vehicle;
B.   Brakes: Brakes, adequate to control the movement, to stop and hold such
vehicle within a reasonably safe distance under the conditions;
C.   Steering Apparatus: Steering apparatus, maintained in good condition so as
to be secure and free from excessive wear and/or play;
D.   Windshields And Windows: Windshields and windows shall be kept clean so
that the vision of the driver, in any direction shall not be impaired. No
person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster, or other
nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, or side or rear
windows of such vehicle, which obstructs the driver's clear view of the
highway/roadway or any intersecting highway/roadway. The windshield on every
motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other
moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. Every windshield wiper
upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order;
E.   Mufflers: Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a
muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or
unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout,
bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle in any manner which will amplify
or increase the noise or sound emitted louder than that emitted by the muffler
originally installed on the vehicle;
F.   Horn: A horn, in good working order capable of emitting a sound under
normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'), but
no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud, harsh sound or
a whistle. (Ord. 1064 §1, 2009: Ord. 934 §1, 2001: prior code §18-10)
10.64.050: RADIOS ON LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR FIRE DEPARTMENT FREQUENCY:
No vehicle shall be equipped with a radio capable of transmitting or receiving
on any law enforcement agency or fire department radio frequency unless
properly licensed and authorized. (Prior code §18-11)
10.64.060: TELEVISION SETS VISIBLE FROM DRIVER'S SEAT PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to operate a vehicle upon the
streets of the city in which there is installed a television set, the screen of
which can be seen by any person sitting in the seat from which such vehicle is
operated. (Ord. 434 §1, 1976: prior code §18-13)
10.64.065: SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS:
A.   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway,
alley, parking lot, or driveway shall operate or permit the operation of any
sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly
audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the vehicle.
B.   "Sound amplification system" means any radio, tape player, compact disc
player, loudspeaker, or other electronic device used for the amplification of
the human voice.
C.   "Plainly audible" means any sound produced by a sound amplification system
from within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance of fifty feet
(50') or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based
upon the direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and
bass reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing,
parked or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway.
D.   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification system, and that any of the following apply:
   1.   The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
   2.   The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
   3.   The vehicle was owned and operated by the city or public or private
utility company;
   4.   The vehicle was used in authorized public activities, such as parades,
fireworks, sports events, or other activities which are approved by the city
council, mayor, or police chief.
E.   Any person who violates any provision of this section, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord.
715 §1, 1991)
10.64.070: AUTHORITY; VEHICLES SUSPECTED OF BEING IN VIOLATION:
Police officers shall have authority to stop, inspect and test vehicles upon
the streets of the city at any time, upon belief that such vehicle is being
operated in violation of any provision of this title, to determine whether it
is safe, whether it is properly equipped and/or whether its equipment is in
proper operating condition, adjustment or repair. (Prior code §18-7)
10.64.075: LAMP RESTRICTIONS:
A.   No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway,
street, or other public roadway with any lamp or device thereon displaying a
red or blue light visible from directly in front of the center thereof. This
section shall not apply to any vehicle, which a red or blue light visible from
the front is expressly authorized or required by this or any other title.
B.   Flashing lights are prohibited except on an authorized emergency vehicle,
school bus, or "church bus" as defined by this title and state law, snow
removal equipment, wreckers and tow vehicles while at the scene of an
emergency, or any vehicle as a means of indicating a right or left turn, or the
presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching,
overtaking or passing. Flashing red or blue lights or a combination of flashing
red and blue lights may be used on authorized emergency vehicles, or on
vehicles or machinery owned or operated by any agency of the state, or by any
county or city while engaged in the performance of emergency work or on the
construction or maintenance of highways or bridges, or on wreckers and tow
vehicles at the scene of an emergency.
C.   Blue lights are prohibited except as allowed in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 958 §1, 2002)
10.64.080: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING SECTION 10.64.075 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Any person who violates the provisions of section
10.64.075 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 958 §1,
2002)
CHAPTER 10.68
UNLAWFUL VEHICLES
SECTION:
10.68.010: Vehicles Capable Of Injuring Street
10.68.020: Construction Or Load Of Vehicle Causing Hazard Or Delay
10.68.030: Oversized Vehicle
10.68.040: Toy Vehicles
10.68.010: VEHICLES CAPABLE OF INJURING STREET:
No vehicle or object which injures or would injure the surface of a street
shall be driven or moved on any roadway. (Prior code §18-24)
10.68.020: CONSTRUCTION OR LOAD OF VEHICLE CAUSING HAZARD OR DELAY:
No person shall drive any vehicle in such condition, so constructed or so
loaded as to cause delay or to be likely to cause delay in traffic, or as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property, except by permit issued by the
chief of police and in accordance with the terms of such permit. (Prior code
§18-25)
10.68.030: OVERSIZED VEHICLE:
No person shall drive upon any roadway any vehicle the width, height, length,
weight or load of which exceeds that authorized by state law, except in
accordance with a permit issued by state authority or by the chief of police.
(Prior code §18-25(a))
10.68.040: TOY VEHICLES:
A.   No person shall operate a golf cart, go-cart, scooter, minibike or an all-
terrain vehicle upon the streets of the city except as provided in this
subsection. Such vehicles shall be permitted if:
   1.   The street is designated for speeds of twenty five (25) miles per hour
or less; and
   2.   The operation of the vehicle occurs not less than one hour prior to
sunset and not earlier than one hour after sunrise; and
   3.   The vehicle has not been modified from the basic factory
specifications; and
   4.   The vehicle is operated in a safe and reasonable manner consistent with
public safety and in compliance with all applicable rules of the road.
B.   Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense and assessed a fine of
not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 1019 §1,
2006)
CHAPTER 10.72
PEDESTRIANS 1
SECTION:
10.72.010: Traffic Control Devices
10.72.020: Crosswalks; Right Of Way
10.72.030: Crossing Roadways
10.72.040: Crossing At Other Than Crosswalk
10.72.050: General Regulations
10.72.060: Drivers To Exercise Due Caution
10.72.070: Soliciting Rides Or Business
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-501 et seq.
10.72.010: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control devices as heretofore provided
in this title, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted the rights
and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter. (Prior code §18-75)
10.72.020: CROSSWALKS; RIGHT OF WAY:
A.   When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of a roadway as to be in danger; but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a
curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which
is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
B.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the
driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and
pass such stopped vehicle. (Prior code §18-76)
10.72.030: CROSSING ROADWAYS:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (Prior code §18-77)
10.72.040: CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALK:
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (Prior code §18-78)
10.72.050: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A.   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control devices are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
B.   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
C.   No pedestrian shall cross a street designated as a through street, as
provided in this title, other than in a crosswalk. (Prior code §17-79)
10.72.060: DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CAUTION:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter relative to pedestrians, every
driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when
necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any
confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. (Prior code §18-80)
10.72.070: SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS:
A.   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
donation, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
B.   Any person who violates the provisions of subsection A of this section,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than seventy
five dollars ($75.00), plus court costs. (Ord. 952 §1, 2001)
CHAPTER 10.76
MOTORCYCLES AND MOTOR SCOOTERS 1
SECTION:
10.76.010: Short Title
10.76.020: General Regulations
10.76.030: Speed Limitations
10.76.040: Equipment
10.76.050: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS §§ 22.12 et seq., 11-1103, ch. 40.
10.76.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be cited as the MOTORCYCLE AND MOTOR SCOOTER REQUIREMENTS of
the city. (Prior code §18-108(c))
10.76.020: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
No driver of a two (2) wheel or three (3) wheel motor vehicle shall carry any
person on, upon or within such vehicle on any street or highway in the city,
except as provided in this section; provided, however, that if any two (2)
wheel or three (3) wheel motor vehicle with a wheel diameter of twelve inches
(12") or greater has either a double seating device with double footrests or a
sidecar attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar
attachment for each person riding therein so that such person is seated
entirely within the body of the sidecar, then it shall be permissible for an
operator who has attained the age of sixteen (16) years or older to carry a
passenger. A demonstration ride by a licensed dealer or his employee is
excepted from the provisions of this section. No motorcycle or motor scooter
shall be ridden upon any sidewalk of the city. Handlebars on motorcycles and
motor scooters shall not exceed twelve inches (12") in height, measured from
the crown or point of the attachment. No rider of a motorcycle or motor scooter
shall hold to any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled. (Prior
code §18-105)
10.76.030: SPEED LIMITATIONS:
No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor scooter at a speed greater than
the speed limit legally posted; provided however, in no event nor at any time
may an operator under the age of sixteen (16) years operate a motorcycle or
motor scooter at a speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. (Prior code
§18-106)
10.76.040: EQUIPMENT:
A.   Rear View Mirrors: All vehicles covered under this section shall be
equipped with two (2) mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than
three inches (3") in diameter, mounted one on each side of the vehicle and
positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway for a
distance of two hundred feet (200') to the rear of such vehicle.
B.   Windshield: All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with
a windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator
from foreign objects, except that in lieu of such windshield the operator shall
wear goggles or a face shield of material and design to protect him from
foreign objects.
C.   Brakes: All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with
brakes adequate to control the movement of the same to stop and hold such
vehicle, including two (2) separate means of applying the brakes. One means
shall be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel and one means shall
be effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels.
D.   Speedometer: All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped
with a properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least thirty
five (35) miles per hour.
E.   Fenders: All vehicles covered under this chapter shall be equipped with a
fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the
manufacturer.
F.   Lights: All vehicles covered under this chapter shall carry at least one
headlamp capable of showing a white light visible at least three hundred feet
(300') in the direction in which the same are proceeding, and one taillamp
mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible
from at least three hundred feet (300') to the rear; and such lights required
by this chapter shall be burning whenever such vehicles are in motion during
the period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before
sunrise and at any time when due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the streets are not clearly
discernible at a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') ahead.
G.   Headgear: No person shall operate or ride upon any vehicle covered under
this chapter unless such person is equipped with and wearing on the head a
crash helmet of the type and design manufactured for use by the operators of
such vehicles. All crash helmets shall include lining, padding and chinstraps.
(Prior code §18-107)
10.76.050: PENALTY:
Any person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of an offense, and
each violation shall be considered a separate offense; and upon conviction of
any offense, any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding seventy dollars ($70.00) for each offense. (Ord. 943
§1, 2001: prior code §18-109)
CHAPTER 10.80
BICYCLES 1
SECTION:
10.80.010: Traffic Regulations
10.80.020: Equipment
10.80.030: Clinging To Vehicles
10.80.060: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS § 11-1201 et seq.
10.80.010: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
Traffic laws and regulations shall apply to persons riding bicycles. Every
person riding a bicycle upon a roadway or street in the city shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of any vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road
applicable to vehicles, or the ordinances of the city applicable to drivers of
vehicles, except as to special regulations therein which by their nature can
have no application. (Prior code §18-81)
10.80.020: EQUIPMENT:
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') to the front and with red reflector on the rear of the
bicycle of a type which shall be visible from distances from fifty feet (50')
to three hundred feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used instead of or in
addition to the red reflector. Every person operating a bicycle shall equip the
same with a bell or horn for giving a signal audible for a distance of one
hundred feet (100'). Sirens and whistles are prohibited as signal devices.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to
make the braked wheels skid on a dry, level, clean pavement. (Prior code §18-
82)
10.80.030: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person riding on any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any other
vehicle which may be in motion upon any street or roadway. (Prior code §18-83)
10.80.060: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation, either as principal or agent, who violates any
provision of this chapter is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be
fined not to exceed nineteen dollars ($19.00) and one dollar ($1.00) costs, and
upon conviction of two (2) or more violations of this chapter the municipal
judge, in his discretion, may order the impoundment of such convicted person's
bicycle for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days. Any person who aids,
abets, or assists in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not to exceed nineteen dollars ($19.00) and one dollar ($1.00)
costs. (Prior code §18-86)
CHAPTER 10.84
ABANDONED VEHICLES 1
SECTION:
10.84.010: Short Title
10.84.020: Definitions
10.84.030: Public Property; Nuisance
10.84.040: Private Property; Nuisance
10.84.045: Additional Requirements; Off Street Parking
10.84.050: Notice Of Removal
10.84.060: Notice Of Procedure
10.84.070: Hearing Procedures
10.84.080: Removal Of Vehicles Or Trailers
10.84.090: Notification Of Removal
10.84.100: Disposition Of Motor Vehicles Or Trailers
10.84.120: Alternative Sales Procedure
10.84.130: Redemption Of Motor Vehicle Or Trailer Prior To Sale
10.84.140: Liability For Towing And Storage Expenses
10.84.150: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS ch. 71.
10.84.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE OR HAULING TRAILER ORDINANCE. (Ord. 866
§1, 1998)
10.84.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
CITY: The city of Warr Acres.
COSTS: The expense of removing, transporting, storing and selling an impounded
vehicle or trailer including the costs of notification.
INOPERABLE HAULING TRAILER: A hauling trailer, the condition of which is
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, incapable of being pulled behind an
automobile or truck upon a public street, or from a wheel or wheels or any
substantial part thereof have been removed.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: A motor vehicle, the condition of which is wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled, incapable of operation by its own power upon
a public street, or from which the wheel(s), engine, transmission or any
substantial part thereof have been removed, which lawfully has affixed thereto
an unexpired license plate and a current motor vehicle inspection certificate.
LIEN HOLDER: Those persons shown as lien holders on the vehicle title.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along
the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts
or recreational vehicles (RVs).
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city of Warr Acres.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not public property as defined in this section.
PROPERTY: Any street, right of way or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every such way and shall also mean any
other publicly owned property or facility.
TRAILER, HAULING: "Hauling trailer" means a conveyance transport with an axle
and tongue designed to be pulled behind an automobile or truck to haul animals,
produce goods, commodities, boats, watercraft, motorcycles, trash, etc.
WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed
thereto both an unexpired license plate and a current motor vehicle safety
inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled,
partially dismantled, incapable of operation by its own power on a public
street, or from which the wheel(s), engine, transmission or any substantial
part thereof have been removed. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.030: PUBLIC PROPERTY; NUISANCE:
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of
any motor vehicle or hauling trailer of any kind which is in an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled condition
whether attended or not, upon any public property within the city for a period
of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours. The presence of an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or
hauling trailer or parts thereof, on public property is declared a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.040: PRIVATE PROPERTY; NUISANCE:
A.   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any wrecked or inoperable motor vehicle or hauling trailer of any
kind, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city,
except that, with respect to an inoperable motor vehicle or hauling trailer,
such vehicle may be parked, stored or left on such property for a period of
time not to exceed seventy two (72) hours. The presence of such vehicles or
hauling trailer, or parts thereof, on private property is declared a public
nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B.   This section shall not apply to:
   1.   Any motor vehicle or hauling trailer parked or stored within a
building, private garage, or behind a sightproof fence meeting the fencing
requirements as set out in title 16,
chapter 16.40 of this code;
   2.   Any motor vehicle or hauling trailer held in connection with a business
enterprise lawfully licensed by the city for the servicing and repair of such
vehicles and properly operated in an appropriate business zone pursuant to the
zoning ordinances of the city;
   3.   Any motor vehicle for which a permit has been obtained, said permit to
be obtained from the office of the city clerk at a cost of one hundred dollars
($100.00) each; provided, that no such permit may exceed a period of ninety
(90) days and shall not be renewable, extended or reissued on any one vehicle.
(Ord. 1026 §1, 2006: Ord. 921 §1, 2001: Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.045: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS; OFF STREET PARKING:
A.   Noncommercial Vehicles: No operator or owner of any noncommercial motor
vehicle or trailer, nor owner or person exercising dominion over any real
property within the city shall park or allow the parking of any motor vehicle
or trailer upon any property in the city of Warr Acres except upon an
artificial surface meeting adopted design specifications as set out in title 12
of this code. In particular, the surface shall always meet the following
requirements:
   1.   A Portland cement concrete pavement surface with a minimum depth of
four inches (4") and wide enough to extend from side to side of the vehicles or
trailers parked on said surface and of sufficient length to extend from bumper
to bumper of the vehicle parked on said surface; or
   2.   Asphalt-concrete pavement of uniform thickness of two inches (2") and
meeting all other requirements of subsection A of this section.
B.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not be
applicable to the following situations:
   1.   To real property under active construction and improvement pursuant to
a valid and duly issued building permit.
   2.   To legally nonconforming off street parking surfaces.
   3.   To vehicles parked completely to the rear of the front wall of the main
building on the property.
   4.   In any case where a variance from the provisions of this section has
been granted by the board of adjustment of the city of Warr Acres and the
parking is in accordance with the terms of the variance.
C.   Vacant Or Undeveloped Lot Requirements: No vacant or undeveloped lot shall
be used for temporary or permanent storage or parking of any vehicle, whether
operable or inoperable, motorized or designed to be towed, unless such lot is
within a zoning district that permits such activity. Adjoining lots, owned by
the same person, one of which is residential in nature, shall be considered as
one.
D.   Specific Vehicles Prohibited: In no instance shall truck tractors,
semitrailers, or any commercial vehicles in excess of two (2) axles or in
excess of twenty five feet (25') in length, be permitted to be parked, stored
or displayed on residential lots or any tracts which are not zoned to permit
such use regardless of the type of parking surface. No residentially zoned
vacant or undeveloped lot shall be interpreted as permitting such activity.
E.   Additional Vehicle Parking: The front yard of a lot containing a single-
family residence or duplex may be used for the parking of motor homes,
recreational vehicles, boat trailers, travel trailers, or utility trailers or
parts thereof for over seventy two (72) hours in any one week's time provided
either of the two (2) requirements listed below are met:
   1.   The vehicles are parked on a driveway, which conforms to standards set
forth in title 12 of this code;
   2.   There is no access to the side or rear yard for such parking; provided,
that a corner lot shall always be deemed to have such access.
F.   Variances: Any person subject to the provisions of this section may apply
for, and the city council may grant, a variance from the provisions of this
section to any property, where the city council finds that due to unusual or
particular circumstances of the case, the strict application of the provisions
of this section would result in an undue hardship. The variance shall be
limited to the time during which the hardship exists.
G.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court
costs and fees. Each day a violation is allowed to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 1011 §1, 2005: Ord. 923 §1, 2001)
10.84.050: NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department that any nuisance,
as defined in this chapter appears to exist on a public property, the police
department shall cause a written notice to be affixed to the vehicle or
trailer, declaring the existence of the nuisance and ordering whomsoever has an
interest in the vehicle or trailer to comply with this chapter by removing the
vehicle or trailer within seventy two (72) hours of the notice. If such
nuisance is found to exist on private property, the police department shall
cause the notice to be affixed and, in addition to the affixed notice, a copy
thereof shall be delivered to the owner or occupant of the property; if a copy
of the notice cannot be delivered to the owner or occupant, a copy of the
notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the private property, with a
duplicate copy sent to the owner or occupant of the private property by
certified mail return, receipt requested. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.060: NOTICE OF PROCEDURE:
The notice so affixed or posted shall contain the request for removal within
the time specified in section
10.84.050 of this chapter. The notice shall advise that upon failure to comply
with the notice of removal, the police department, in the case of public
property or private property, shall undertake such removal or cause to be
removed by a private wrecker service, with the cost of removal to be levied
against the owner or occupant of the property. The notice shall also advise the
person to whom the notices are applicable of his right to contest the
determination of the police department that a violation under this chapter
exists by requesting a hearing before the city council, and that, if such a
hearing is desired, the request can be made by filing a written request with
the city clerk, whose office is located in the offices of the Warr Acres city
hall. A request for a hearing must be made within the time for removal set
forth in section
10.84.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.070: HEARING PROCEDURES:
A.   Upon receiving a request for a hearing pursuant to this chapter, the city
clerk shall set the hearing before the next regular meeting of the city
council. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the person requesting the
hearing and to the police officer issuing the notice, at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. No other notices are required. A request for hearing
under this section stays all enforcement proceedings until an order of the city
council is entered.
B.   At any such hearing, the city and persons to whom the notices have been
directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems
necessary.
C.   The city council shall determine either that there exists a nuisance as
defined herein or that there does not exist a nuisance as defined herein.
D.   The city council shall issue a written order, either finding the existence
of a nuisance or finding that a nuisance does not exist. It shall state in its
order the findings of fact on which it based its decision and the order shall
indicate the vote of the council.
E.   The city clerk shall certify copies of the findings of fact and the
decision of the council, and remit copies of same to the property owners
involved and to the police department. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.080: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES OR TRAILERS:
Within the time for removal set forth in the notice for removal, or in the case
of private property within forty eight (48) hours of the date on which an order
is entered by the city council affirming the determination of the police
department, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked or inoperable vehicle or
trailer and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is
located, either or all of them, shall cause the removal of the vehicle or
trailer. If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth herein, the
police department shall have the right to take possession of the motor vehicle
or trailer and remove it from the premises or cause it to be removed by a
private wrecker service. In the event of removal and disposition of the motor
vehicle or trailer, the owner of the motor vehicle or trailer and the owner and
occupant of the private property from which the motor vehicle or trailer is
removed shall be jointly and severally liable for the expenses incurred in so
doing. The city shall possess a special lien to recover costs. It is unlawful
for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow the police
department to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a motor
vehicle or trailer under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.090: NOTIFICATION OF REMOVAL:
A.   The police department, after taking possession of any motor vehicle or
trailer pursuant to this chapter, shall furnish notice in accordance with this
section by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner of
the motor vehicle or trailer at his last known address within fifteen (15) days
of the date on which possession of the motor vehicle or trailer is taken. In
the case of removal from private property, notice shall also be given to the
owner or occupant of the property from which the vehicle or trailer was taken.
If notice cannot be accomplished through certified mailing or posting, the
police department may give notice by publishing the notice once in a newspaper
of general circulation within the city.
B.   The police department shall also contact the department of public safety,
state of Oklahoma, and such other agencies and departments of the government in
this and other states as are reasonably necessary to ascertain the names and
addresses of other persons with record interest in the motor vehicle or
trailer, including lien holders. Such other persons shall be given notice in
the same manner as stated in subsection A of this section.
C.   Notice under this section shall contain the following information:
   1.   The name and address of the last known registered owner of the motor
vehicle or trailer plus the name and address of any person claiming any
interest therein;
   2.   A full description of the vehicle or trailer, giving all available
information as to the make, year, serial and registration numbers, license tag
with year and state issuing such tag or registration;
   3.   A full statement of all the facts concerning the removal of the vehicle
or trailer including, but not limited to, the location from which the vehicle
or trailer was removed and the date(s) on which the motor vehicle was removed
and stored; and
   4.   The date, time and place of sale. The notice shall also advise the
person to whom it is given that the person who is entitled to possession of the
motor vehicle or trailer may reclaim it upon payment to the city of all charges
incurred by the city in the removal and storage of the motor vehicle or
trailer, except that if such reclamation is not made within thirty (30) days
after date of notice, the right to reclaim the motor vehicle or trailer, as
well as all right, title and interest of such person, shall be deemed to have
terminated and such person shall be deemed to have consented to the disposition
of the motor vehicle or trailer by the city.
D.   If unable to properly identify the last registered owner of any motor
vehicle or trailer, or if unable to obtain with reasonable certainty the names
and addresses of the owner or other interested parties, including lien holders,
it shall be sufficient notice under this section to publish the notice
described in subsection C of this section once in one newspaper of general
circulation in the city of Warr Acres. Such notice by publication may contain
multiple listings of motor vehicles and trailers.
E.   A copy of any notice required in this section, as well as a copy of any
certificates of sale issued hereunder by the city, or its designee, shall be
forwarded to the department of public safety, state of Oklahoma. (Ord. 866 §1,
1998)
10.84.100: DISPOSITION OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR TRAILERS:
A.   The motor vehicles or trailers shall be disposed of at public sale in
accordance with the provisions of this section, provided that no motor vehicle
or trailer shall be sold at public sale prior to thirty (30) days from the date
on which notice is given, pursuant to this section.
B.   At public sale, at least twenty one (21) days prior to the sale the police
department shall cause a notice to be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city of Warr Acres, which notice shall state:
   1.   The sale is of a motor vehicle or trailer in the possession of the city
by virtue of seizure pursuant to this chapter;
   2.   A description of the motor vehicle or trailer, including, if available,
make, model, license number, title number, vehicle or trailer identification
and any information which shall accurately identify the vehicle or trailer;
   3.   The terms of the sale; and
   4.   The date, time and place of the sale.
The chief of police shall also cause a copy of this notice to be mailed to the
last known registered owner of the motor vehicle or trailer and to the owner or
occupant of the property from which the motor vehicle or trailer was taken
(unless they are one and the same), and to any other persons known to the chief
of police to be interested in the motor vehicle or trailer.
C.   On the date, time and place set forth in the notice, the motor vehicle or
trailer shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash or certified funds,
provided that any motor vehicle or trailer which cannot be sold for an amount
at least equal to the costs of the sale and other charges owed may be summarily
disposed of in the manner set forth in subsection A of this section. At the
time of payment of the purchase price, the police department shall execute a
certificate of sale for the motor vehicle or trailer in duplicate, the original
of which to be given to the purchaser and a copy to be retained by the police
department. Any certificate of sale issued under this section shall not
guarantee title or purport to give any title to the motor vehicle or trailer
greater than that which is possessed by the city. Should the sale be invalid
for any reason, the liability of the city shall be limited to the return of the
purchase price upon return of the motor vehicle or trailer.
D.   Proceeds of any sale pursuant to this section, after payment of all
reasonable costs of the auction, including notice and publication costs, and
the expenses of the city in towing and storing the motor vehicle or trailer,
shall be held in suspense by the city for a period of thirty (30) days from the
date of the receipt of the funds, during which time, upon presentation of
proper evidence of ownership of the disposed vehicle or trailer to the chief of
police, the owner or lien holder of the motor vehicle or trailer may recover
back from the city such proceeds, less the costs and expenses as stated above.
After thirty (30) days, the proceeds may be distributed to the general fund of
the city. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.120: ALTERNATIVE SALES PROCEDURE:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the police department or a
private wrecker service from following the procedures established by applicable
laws of the state of Oklahoma governing the sale and disposition of personal
property and motor vehicles specifically, but not limited to, the provisions of
title 11 Oklahoma Statutes section 34-104 et seq., and title 47 Oklahoma
Statutes section 901 et seq., as an alternative to the procedures for disposing
of vehicles or trailers as set forth herein. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.130: REDEMPTION OF MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAILER PRIOR TO SALE:
The owner of any motor vehicle or trailer which has come into the possession of
the city under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such vehicle or
trailer after its removal, but prior to its disposition upon presentation of
proper evidence of ownership and payment to the city of all charges incurred
regarding towing, storage and expenses of the sale, if any. This right of
redemption shall expressly terminate upon disposition of the motor vehicle or
trailer by the city. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.140: LIABILITY FOR TOWING AND STORAGE EXPENSES:
Any person from whose private property a motor vehicle or trailer is removed
and stored pursuant to this chapter is liable to the city for the expenses
incurred by it in the towing, storing or disposing of the motor vehicle or
trailer. In the event of the failure to pay such charges to the city if the
motor vehicle or trailer is redeemed or if the disposition of the motor vehicle
or trailer fails to generate sufficient funds to cover the costs of towing,
storage and disposition, the person from whose private property the motor
vehicle or trailer was removed shall pay to the city any costs incurred; if
these costs are not paid to the city immediately upon redemption or within the
sixty (60) days upon sale, such obligation may be collected under the law as
provided for any other indebtedness to the city. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
10.84.150: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than
two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court cost. Each act in violation of any of
the provisions hereof and/or each day such violation is allowed to continue
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 866 §1, 1998)
CHAPTER 10.88
VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
10.88.010: Purpose
10.88.020: Definition
10.88.030: Authorized
10.88.040: Seized And Impounded Vehicle Storage
10.88.050: Notice To Owner Of Impounded Vehicle
10.88.060: Place Of Impoundment
10.88.070: Release Of Impounded Vehicle
10.88.080: Redemption Of Impounded Vehicle
10.88.010: PURPOSE:
The impoundment of vehicles under authority of the provisions of this chapter
shall be construed as an enforcement procedure for protection of the public
peace, safety and welfare, and the safeguarding of property. Such procedure
shall be used generally for the prevention and removal of traffic hazards,
prevention and abatement of public nuisances arising from traffic law
violations, protection of the public rights and privileges in the use of city
streets and thoroughfares from obstructions placed and left in derogation of
such rights, to safeguard and protect recovered stolen vehicles, and to protect
the property of persons arrested from damage or theft. (Ord. 1066 §1, 2009)
10.88.020: DEFINITION:
The word "vehicle" as used in this chapter, shall, in addition to its common
meaning, mean any vehicle, whether motorized or designed to be pulled, towed or
otherwise moved by another vehicle or power source, which is intended for use
on public roads and streets. (Ord. 1066 §1, 2009)
10.88.030: AUTHORIZED:
   A.   Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from any street, highway, private property or public property to a
storage facility as herein provided for in this chapter under the following
circumstances:
      1.   When any vehicle is left unattended, or is disabled upon any public
right-of-way, or where the person in charge of the vehicle is, by reason of
physical or mental injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for the custody or removal of the vehicle, and such vehicle is so
parked as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of
traffic, or parked where parking is prohibited;
      2.   When a derelict vehicle has been parked upon a public right-of- way
for a period of forty eight (48) hours;
      3.   When any vehicle is left unattended for forty eight (48) hours,
police officers are authorized to give the owner of such vehicle notice of
complaint by delivery or affixing such notice to the vehicle and shall direct
the owner of the vehicle to remove the vehicle within twenty four (24) hours.
After notice of complaint is issued and the vehicle is not removed from the
roadway within the time provided such failure shall constitute prima facie
evidence of abandonment; or is so parked for any period of time as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic and in
violation of this title. A vehicle will be deemed removed if it is either moved
to private property or is moved at least fifty feet (50') from its current
location;
      4.   When any vehicle has been parked for more than one (1) hour in
excess of the time allowed for parking in any place;
      5.   When any vehicle which has been involved in two (2) or more
violations of this title for which complaints have been issued and not
presented as required, is parked in violation of any provision of this title,
or when the driver or owner thereof is arrested or incarcerated as provided
herein;
      6.   When a vehicle has been parked on private property without the
consent of the owner or occupant of the property in violation of this chapter;
      7.   When any vehicle is left abandoned upon a public right-of-way in
excess of three (3) days from the date it was first reported or observed by
officers;
      8.   When officers recover a vehicle reported stolen and the owner cannot
be located, is unable or unwilling to effect the removal of the vehicle within
a reasonable amount of time not to exceed one (1) hour, or the preservation and
collection of evidence requires removal;
      9.   Where the vehicle has any evidentiary value, has directly or
indirectly been involved in the commission of a crime, has been used to
transport any person who has committed any offense involving the use of a
firearm, or was directly or indirectly associated with a drive by shooting;
      10.   When a police officer effects the arrest of the owner or operator
of a vehicle out of said vehicle, and no person immediately present can
lawfully or reasonably be given custody of such vehicle;
      11.   When the vehicle bears a license plate which has expired for a
period in excess of ninety (90) days, bears a license plate which has been
altered or tampered with, or bears a temporary paper tag which has been expired
for a period in excess of ninety (90) days, or bears no license plate which
would be in conformance with the Oklahoma Vehicle License Act; or
      12.   Any place, including place of residence, when a police officer
effects the arrest of the operator of the vehicle, out of said vehicle, and the
operator is found to have operated the vehicle under any of the following
violations: reckless driving, careless driving, driving under the influence of
drugs or alcohol, driving while impaired, driving under a suspended, revoked or
denied license, driving with no state driver's license, eluding a police
officer, duty to give information and render aid, or otherwise involved in a
hit and run accident, or where applicable under subsection B of this section;
      13.   When a police officer has issued a citation under
chapter 10.18  of this title for failure to possess a valid security
verification, if the officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle is
not insured as required by the compulsory insurance law of the state of
Oklahoma. If the operator of the vehicle produces what appears to be a valid
security verification form and the officer is unable to confirm compliance
through the state's online verification system or noncompliance by a subsequent
investigation, the officer shall be prohibited from seizing the vehicle and
causing such vehicle to be towed and stored. Further, no vehicle shall be
seized and towed under the provisions of this division if said vehicle is
displaying a valid temporary license plate that has not expired pursuant to the
provisions of Oklahoma Statutes, title 47, sections 1137.1 and 1137.3;
      14.   When the operator of a motor vehicle does not have the registration
certificate in the operator's possession or when a police officer determines
that the registration certificate has been obtained by misrepresentation of any
essential or material fact, or when any number or identifying information
appearing on such certificate has been changed, altered, obliterated or
concealed in any way, until the proper registration or identification of such
vehicle has been made or produced by the owner thereof.
   B.   Members of the police department shall remove a vehicle from any
street, highway, private property or public property to a storage facility as
provided for in section
10.88.040  of this chapter, when the person operating said vehicle fails to
produce valid security verification in addition to committing any one of the
following violations: reckless driving, careless driving, driving under the
influence of drugs or alcohol, driving while impaired, driving under a
suspended license, driving with an invalid driver's license, driving with no
state driver's license, driving with an expired, improper or no tag displayed,
avoiding a traffic stop, duty to give information and render aid or otherwise
involved in a hit and run accident, or eluding a police officer where it
involves the use of the subject vehicle. (Ord. 1102, 2011; Ord. 1195, 2019)
10.88.040: SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLE STORAGE:
Vehicles seized or impounded by the city of Warr Acres may, at the direction of
the police department, be transported to the Warr Acres storage yard or other
place of storage owned and operated by the city of Warr Acres or to such place
as the city may designate. The owner of said vehicle shall be responsible to
the city or the city's designee for the following costs prior to the city or
the city's designee releasing said vehicle to the owner. The police chief, or
his designee, may, to meet the best ends of justice or expedite ongoing
investigations, release the owner of part or all of the cost owed the city or
the city's designee.
A.   The actual cost paid by the city or the city's designee to have said
vehicle transported to the place of storage, including the actual towing
expenses.
B.   A storage charge of nine dollars ($9.00) per day, or any portion thereof,
or the amount allowed by law charged by the city's designee. For purposes of
this section, the day of receipt shall constitute the first day and the day of
release shall constitute the last day.
C.   All fees incurred by the city or the city's designee, including lien
filing fees, to either return the vehicle to the owner or sell the vehicle
pursuant to statutory authority.
Prior to releasing said vehicle, the owner shall obtain authorization to
release from the Warr Acres police department, and pay to the city clerk, or
the city's designee, all costs listed above. If said vehicle is impounded
pursuant to any lawful authority, then those provisions shall apply in addition
to the requirements of this section. If said vehicle is impounded pursuant to
the provisions of subsection
10.88.030B of this chapter, then the owner of said vehicle, or anyone
authorized by the owner of the vehicle, shall show proof of valid security
verification, valid operator's license and valid vehicle tag registration
before the police department will authorize release of the vehicle. If said
owner fails to claim said vehicle within the time prescribed by law, then the
city manager, or the city's designee, is directed to institute proceedings to
have the vehicle sold under the applicable statutes of the state of Oklahoma.
(Ord. 1066 §1, 2009)
10.88.050: NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
Whenever an officer removes an unattended vehicle from a street or highway as
authorized in this chapter, and the officer has knowledge of or is able to
ascertain from the motor vehicle registration the name and address of the last
registered owner thereof, such officer shall give or cause to be given notice
in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal, the reasons therefor and
the place to which such vehicle has been removed. (Ord. 1066 §1, 2009)
10.88.060: PLACE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
Every vehicle that is impounded hereunder shall be removed to the location that
is designated by the police chief or his designee. (Ord. 1066 §1, 2009)
10.88.070: RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
A.   Any vehicle impounded under the authority granted herein shall be stored
and held safely until a written order for its release, signed by an authorized
officer of the city, has been issued. Such order of release shall be
conditioned upon the payment of an impound fee in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) by the person to whom the release is issued. This impound fee
shall be independent of any fines, costs or fees which may be assessed from
citations issued to any person for violation of traffic laws or other ordinance
violations involving the impounded vehicle.
B.   There is hereby created within the police fund, a special account into
which all impound fees shall be deposited from which expenditures may be used
for enforcement of traffic safety. (Ord. 1066 §1, 2009)
10.88.080: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
Presentation of the order of release as provided in section
10.88.070 of this chapter at the place of impoundment, together with payment or
tender of payment of all impoundment costs and accrued storage charges due,
shall entitle the person presenting such release to obtain possession of such
vehicle. (Ord. 1066 §1, 2009)
CHAPTER 10.92
VIOLATIONS; CITATIONS; PENALTY 1
SECTION:
10.92.010: Traffic Ticket Complaints
10.92.020: Bond Posted
10.92.030: Failure To Appear
10.92.040: Prima Facie Presumption Of Vehicle Owner To Be Violator
10.92.050: Violations
10.92.060: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 47 OS ch. 16. See also title 2,
  chapter 2.24 of this code.
10.92.010: TRAFFIC TICKET COMPLAINTS:
A.   Police officers are authorized to give notice to persons violating any
provision of this title, except chapters
10.12 and
10.36, and section
10.64.080 of this title, by delivering traffic ticket complaints to violators
or, in cases where vehicles without drivers are parked or stopped in violation
of this title, except chapters
10.12 and
10.36, and section
10.64.080 of this title, by affixing such complaint to the vehicle. Such
complaint, among other things, shall indicate briefly the charge or violation,
shall bear the registration number of the vehicle, and shall direct the
violator to present the complaint at the police station or municipal court in
or before a time as may be specified thereon. Nothing in this section shall
abridge the power of a police officer to arrest any violator and to take him
into custody, or to file a complaint against him at any time.
B.   The police department shall use traffic complaints furnished by the city,
and such complaints shall be serially numbered. (Prior code §18-99)
10.92.020: BOND POSTED:
When any bond is required for appearance for any violation, as provided in this
chapter, the person charged with an offense shall be released from custody on
posting with the municipal court a bond for each offense, in the amount to be
determined by the court. (Prior code §18-100)
10.92.030: FAILURE TO APPEAR:
A.   Any person who has been charged with a violation of any provision of this
title, except chapters
10.12 and
10.36, and section
10.64.080 of this title, having been duly issued a traffic ticket complaint as
provided in this chapter, who fails to appear in accordance with the
instructions on the complaint, shall be subject to having a warrant of arrest
and a contempt citation, at the discretion of the municipal court, issued
against him or her.
B.   Any person who violates this section shall be subject to being charged
with the offense of failure to appear and, upon conviction thereof in the
municipal court, fined in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus
costs, for each complaint said person failed to appear on. In addition, if the
city has entered into a contract with a collection agency for the purpose of
collecting fines for failure to appear, and such contract authorizes the
collection of a fee of up to thirty five percent (35%) for the collection of
said fine, then the court shall order the person to pay said fee. (Ord. 1116,
2011)
10.92.040: PRIMA FACIE PRESUMPTION OF VEHICLE OWNER TO BE VIOLATOR:
In any prosecution charging a violation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was
parked in violation of any such regulation or provisions, together with proof
that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such standing or
parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a
prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time
during which, such violation occurred. (Prior code §18-102)
10.92.050: VIOLATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do any act forbidden, or
to fail to perform any act required, in this title. It is unlawful for a parent
of a child or the guardian of any ward to authorize or knowingly to permit any
such child or ward to violate any provision of this title. It is unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to authorize or knowingly to permit any vehicle
registered in his or its name to be driven or to stand or be parked in
violation of any provision of this title. (Prior code §18-103)
10.92.060: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this title,
except chapters
10.12 and
10.36 and section
10.64.080 of this title, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of an
offense and fined in a sum not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus
costs for each offense; and upon default of the payment of such fine and costs,
may be ordered held and incarcerated until he or she has served out the same at
the rate of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day for each dollar of fine and
cost, or to work on the streets, alleys, areas and public grounds of the city,
under the direction of a proper city official, at such rate, until such fine
and costs are satisfied. (Ord. 1000 §7, 2004: Ord. 657 §8, 1987)
TITLE 11
RESERVED
TITLE 12
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
General   12.01
Streets   12.02
Sidewalks   12.03
Driveways   12.04
Approaches, Curbs And Gutters   12.05
CHAPTER 12.01
GENERAL
SECTION:
12.01.010: Access To Fire Hydrants And Watergates
12.01.020: Penalty
12.01.010: ACCESS TO FIRE HYDRANTS AND WATERGATES:
Free and unobstructed access to all fire hydrants and watergates shall be
maintained at all times. No material of any kind whatsoever shall be placed
within ten feet (10') of any hydrant, no more excavations made than absolutely
necessary. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.01.020: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title, upon conviction
thereof in the municipal court, shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a
fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus court costs for each day
such person is found to be in violation of this title plus the costs of proper
replacement of streets, sidewalks, driveways, and approaches, curbs and gutters
not in compliance with the standards provided in this title. (Ord. 861 §1,
1998)
CHAPTER 12.02
STREETS
SECTION:
12.02.010: Paving Standards And Specifications
12.02.020: New Construction; Materials
12.02.030: Licensed And Bonded
12.02.040: Excavations; Permit Required
12.02.050: Deposit; Guarantee Cost Of Repair For Excavation
12.02.060: Permit And Inspection Fees For Excavation
12.02.070: Drilling; Permit, Deposit Required
12.02.080: Permit And Inspection Fees For Drilling
12.02.090: Limitations Of Permits
12.02.100: Depth; Size Of Holes; Drilling
12.02.110: Restoration Of Pavement After Paving Cuts
12.02.120: Emergency Cuts And Excavations
12.02.130: Interfering With Paving Cuts And Excavations
12.02.140: Barriers And Warning Lights
12.02.150: Sheeting And Bracing
12.02.160: Excavation Length
12.02.170: Bridges Or Walks Over Excavations
12.02.180: Passageways During Excavations
12.02.190: Least Inconvenience To The Public; Unobstructed Waterway
12.02.200: Tunneling Under Pavement
12.02.210: Open Trenches; Time Limit
12.02.220: Backfilling Generally
12.02.230: Backfilling; Unsatisfactory Work
12.02.240: Permanent Repair Standards
12.02.250: Removal Of Excavated Materials
12.02.260: Contractors
12.02.010: PAVING STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Any person, persons, firm or corporation desiring to construct or pave
dedicated streets within the city limits shall construct or pave the streets
according to the standards and specifications as set forth in this section as
follows:
A.   If hot asphalt concrete is used, it shall be six inches (6") in depth,
over eight inches (8") of stabilized soil compacted to at least ninety five
percent (95%) standard proctor density; or
B.   If portland cement concrete is used, it shall be eight inches (8") in
depth, three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi, over eight inches (8") of
stabilized soil compacted to at least ninety five percent (95%) standard
proctor density. Provided, however, that for streets in areas only zoned
residential, C-1 and/or C-2, portland cement concrete which is six inches (6")
in depth, three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi, over six inches (6") of
stabilized soil (95 percent standard proctor density) may be used unless it is
determined by the city engineer that the street in question may be used as a
collector or arterial street, or where it is determined by the city engineer
that other considerations warrant use of eight inches (8") concrete and/or
eight inches (8") stabilized soil. (Ord. 1140, 2014)
12.02.020: NEW CONSTRUCTION; MATERIALS:
In all new additions to the city, only portland cement concrete shall be
allowed according to the standards and specifications set forth in section
12.02.010 of this chapter. This requirement applies only to new addition
construction on dedicated streets and does not apply to existing roadways where
widening, reconstruction or resurfacing is needed or required. For the purposes
of this section, the term "new addition" or "new additions" shall mean any
construction on land which had not been platted for any purpose by the city of
Warr Acres as of October 6, 1998. (Ord. 1077 §1, 2009)
12.02.030: LICENSED AND BONDED:
A.   Any person, persons, firm or corporation desiring to construct or pave
streets, using asphalt, concrete and/or portland cement concrete within the
city limits must be licensed and bonded. A performance bond in the amount of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) is required to be on file with the city clerk
before a permit can be issued and work is commenced.
B.   No surety will be accepted who is now in default or delinquent on any bond
or who is interested in any litigation against the city. All bonds shall be
executed by surety companies licensed to do business in the state and
acceptable to the council. Each bond shall be executed by the contractor and
the surety. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.040: EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   Any person, persons, firm, corporation or municipality desiring to tear
up, open, drill under or push under the pavement or curbing on any street,
avenue, alley or public grounds, or to make any excavation in any street, alley
or public grounds in the city shall, before commencing any such operation, make
written application to the city clerk for permission to do so, which
application shall state the dimensions, the exact locations and any other
information that the city clerk may require, and which application shall be
made on a form to be supplied by the city clerk; and such permission shall in
all cases be granted upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B.   Notwithstanding and in addition to the provisions of subsection A of this
section, all applications for and issuance of paving cut permits shall be
approved by the city. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.050: DEPOSIT; GUARANTEE COST OF REPAIR FOR EXCAVATION:
Upon receipt of an application to make a cut into pavement, the city clerk may
issue a permit to make such pavement cut. Before such permit is issued, the
city clerk shall collect from the applicant a deposit of money to guarantee the
cost of repairing the same and restoring the street to its original condition.
The deposit required shall be a sum equal to five dollars ($5.00) per square
foot of the paving to be affected by said paving cuts or excavations. (Ord. 861
§1, 1998)
12.02.060: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES FOR EXCAVATION:
The permit fee for opening the pavement shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per
paving cut or excavation permit. The fee for the initial inspection shall be
twenty dollars ($20.00) and fifty dollars ($50.00) for subsequent inspections.
(Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.070: DRILLING; PERMIT, DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
A.   Upon receipt of an application to drill or push under any street, alley or
curbing, the city clerk may issue a permit to perform such operation. Before
such permit is issued, the city clerk shall collect from the applicant a
deposit of money to guarantee the cost of repairing any damage to the street,
alley or curbing which may result. The amount of the deposit shall be based
upon the number of square feet of the surface that might be affected, which
shall be determined from the diameter of the pipe pushed or hole drilled, plus
an additional two feet (2') for width and an extension of twelve inches (12")
for the length that the drilling or pushing operation may extend under any
street, alley or curbing. The deposit required shall be five dollars ($5.00)
per square foot, with such square footage calculated as provided for
hereinabove, with such deposit to be in addition to such permit and inspection
fees as provided in this chapter.
B.   Upon completion of drilling or pushing under operations, any person,
persons, firm, corporation or municipality having performed such operation
shall notify the city clerk, and if there has been no damage apparent upon the
expiration of thirty (30) days from that date, the city treasurer shall refund
the sum of money deposited with the city clerk to guarantee repair. Should
damage occur prior to the refund of the deposit, the person, persons, firm,
corporation or municipality performing the operation of drilling or pushing
under shall repair the damage, in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, within thirty (30) working days following the discovery of such
damages; and upon acceptance of the repair by the city, the city treasurer
shall refund the sum of money deposited. Should such repairs not be completed
within the period of thirty (30) working days, then the amount deposited shall
be forfeited and repair of damages shall be completed from the street and alley
fund. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.080: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES FOR DRILLING:
The permit fee for drilling and pushing under streets, alleys or curbing shall
be twenty dollars ($20.00) per permit. The fee for the initial inspection shall
be twenty dollars ($20.00) and fifty dollars ($50.00) for subsequent
inspections. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.090: LIMITATIONS OF PERMITS:
A record of the permits issued where a fee is charged under this chapter shall
be kept by the city clerk. Such permits issued will in no case be taken to
cover a cut, drilling or pushing at any other point nor of a dimension greater
than six inches (6") either way than that shown on the permit. In cases where
it is found necessary to make a greater opening, a new permit shall be taken
out and an additional deposit made. No permit shall be issued more than five
(5) days before the cut or excavation or drilling or pushing is to be made or
work thereon commenced. No person, persons, firm, corporation or municipality
shall allow his or its name to be used to obtain a permit or permits for any
other person, persons, firm, corporation or municipality. In no case will two
(2) parties be allowed to use the same opening except by special written
permission of the city. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.100: DEPTH; SIZE OF HOLES; DRILLING:
Any person, persons, firm, corporation or municipality having obtained a permit
to drill or push under any street, alley or curbing shall not perform any
drilling or pushing operations at a depth less than three feet (3') below the
surface of the street, alley or curbing, and shall not drill any hole for the
insertion of pipe or other object more than one inch (1") greater in diameter
than the pipe or object to be inserted therein. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.110: RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT AFTER PAVING CUTS:
Any person, persons, firm, corporation or municipality having obtained a permit
to cut into the pavement and having deposited with the city clerk a sum of
money to guarantee repair as provided in section
12.02.070 of this chapter, shall upon completion of the work for which the
paving cut was made, repair the cut in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. The paving cut repairs shall be completed within thirty (30) working
days following completion of the work for which the paving cut was made. Upon
completion of the paving cut repairs, and acceptance of the repair by the city,
the city treasurer shall refund the sum of money deposited with the city clerk
to guarantee repair. Should the repairs not be completed within the period of
thirty (30) working days, then the amount deposited to guarantee completion of
the work shall be forfeited and repair of the paving cut shall be completed
from the street and alley fund using the amount so deposited to pay for the
same. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.120: EMERGENCY CUTS AND EXCAVATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person, persons,
firm, corporation or municipality from opening any pipeline, conduit or public
utility in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public ground as may be
necessary for the preservation of life or property when necessity may arise
during such hours as the offices of this city are closed and a permit cannot be
obtained before beginning such work. However, such person, persons, firm,
corporation or municipality making such excavation shall make application and
receive from the city clerk a permit on the next working day. (Ord. 861 §1,
1998)
12.02.130: INTERFERING WITH PAVING CUTS AND EXCAVATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to remove, tear down, or in any way
interfere with the danger lights, fences or barriers provided for in this
chapter, or to drive or ride over or upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks
or other public grounds so enclosed while the same is being improved, or to in
any way damage, injure or molest any part or parts of such work. (Ord. 861 §1,
1998)
12.02.140: BARRIERS AND WARNING LIGHTS:
Any person, persons, firm, corporation or municipality making any cut in any
pavement, curbing or sidewalk, or repairing or constructing any pavement,
sewers, public utility lines or other works, or making any excavation in, upon,
under or adjoining a street, alley, sidewalk or other public grounds, whether
paved or unpaved, shall, at all times during the period in which such work is
being done, enclose such work for the protection of the same and the public
with good, substantial and sufficient barriers, placed under the supervision of
the city. Such barriers shall be not less than three feet (3') high, and such
party shall cause at least one yellow light to be securely and conspicuously
posted in or near such excavation, providing such obstruction does not extend
more than ten feet (10') in length; if more than ten feet (10') in length and
less than fifty feet (50'), two (2) yellow lights shall be placed, one at each
end; and one additional light shall be placed for each additional fifty feet
(50') or part thereof. Such lights shall be kept burning from sunset of a given
day to sunrise of the next day. No barrier shall unnecessarily obstruct traffic
and the city shall be the judge of such obstruction. All such barriers and
lights shall be promptly removed on the completion of the work as the city may
direct. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.150: SHEETING AND BRACING:
Wherever it is deemed necessary by the city, sheeting and bracing shall be used
in keeping the sides of the trenches perpendicular and to prevent unnecessary
caving. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.160: EXCAVATION LENGTH:
No excavation shall be made in any street, sidewalk, alley or other public
ground more than four hundred feet (400') in length at any one time, except by
special written permission of the city. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.170: BRIDGES OR WALKS OVER EXCAVATIONS:
In all cases where excavations are made entirely across a street, alley or
sidewalk, street or alley crossings, or any other public grounds, whether paved
or unpaved, a substantial walk or driveway bridge shall be maintained, as the
case may be, across the trench or opening by the party making the excavation,
such walk or driveway bridge at all times to be subject to the approval of the
city. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.180: PASSAGEWAYS DURING EXCAVATIONS:
All persons making excavations shall at all times keep open and maintain in the
streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public grounds a good, clear, safe and
unobstructed passageway for water, vehicles and pedestrians, and shall roof or
bridge over such passage in accordance with the direction of the city. (Ord.
861 §1, 1998)
12.02.190: LEAST INCONVENIENCE TO THE PUBLIC; UNOBSTRUCTED WATERWAY:
In making excavations or making improvements in or to any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public grounds, all material or earth removed and new material
necessary for repairs or for new work must be handled in a manner and placed
where it will cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. In no case
shall any of such material or earth be scattered over the surface of the
pavement. At all times a clear and unobstructed waterway shall be maintained
along the gutter, the cross section of which shall be not less than one square
foot in area. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.200: TUNNELING UNDER PAVEMENT:
No person, firm, corporation or municipality making openings in the pavement
shall be permitted to tunnel under any portion of the same. Should the sides or
walls of an excavation cave in at any time during the progress of the work,
leaving the foundation of the pavement surrounding the cut insufficient to
fully support such pavement, all of the pavement so undermined by such cave in
shall be broken down and the opening in the surface of the pavement increased
until the extreme edge of the insufficient foundation is reached. Such
additional repairs to the pavement thus caused shall be immediately covered by
an additional permit and deposit made in the regular manner; provided that the
permit fee charged in such case, and the additional deposit thus caused, shall
be based on the scale of a continuous cut. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.210: OPEN TRENCHES; TIME LIMIT:
No trench or opening made on any of the paved streets, alleys, sidewalks,
streets or alley crossings or other public grounds of this city shall remain
open longer than is absolutely necessary, and in no event for a longer period
than three (3) days, except by special written permission of the city. If a cut
in the pavement should remain open for a longer period than three (3) days and
the party making it has failed to secure the necessary extension of time and
has been notified to refill the same and has failed to do so, such refilling
shall be made at the direction of the city at the expense of the party making
such cut. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.220: BACKFILLING GENERALLY:
Immediately upon the completion of any job, the backfilling of cuts made
through the pavement and into the earth beneath any street, alley, sidewalk,
street or alley crossing, or other public ground under permit from the city
clerk shall be made up to the original street surface in layers of not to
exceed four inches (4") in thickness, each layer to be thoroughly rammed and
tamped with an iron rammer weighing not less than twenty (20) pounds with a
surface area of not more than thirty six (36) square inches, such procedure to
continue until the excavation is filled up to the proper line. Other methods of
backfilling approved by the city may be used. Only selected materials shall be
used in making the backfill. No broken rubble or debris shall be used as
backfill. Should the backfilling of any trench or opening settle prior to
making of permanent repairs, such trench or opening shall be immediately
brought to proper grade by the party making the cut in accordance with the
direction of the city. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.02.230: BACKFILLING; UNSATISFACTORY WORK:
In case the refilling of any excavation is not done in accordance with this
chapter and the rules and regulations of the city, and in a manner satisfactory
to the city, the city shall have the right to cause to be taken out all the
materials from the excavation and have the same refilled in a proper manner at
the expense of the party or parties originally making the excavation. (Ord. 861
§1, 1998)
12.02.240: PERMANENT REPAIR STANDARDS:
A.   Permanent repair of all concrete street cuts shall be constructed of
Portland cement concrete, three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi at twenty
eight (28) days, of a minimum depth of eight inches (8"), and shall extend
twelve inches (12") on each side of the earth excavation.
B.   Permanent repair of all asphalt concrete shall be constructed on a minimum
six inch (6") Portland cement concrete base with a minimum of two inches (2")
of asphalt surface over the concrete base, and shall extend twelve inches (12")
on each side of the earth excavation.
C.   All permanent repair shall be constructed so as to be flush with the
existing surface of the street opened. If a settlement should take place at any
time after a cut has been permanently repaired, the necessary amount of
pavement shall be removed in accordance with the direction of the city, the
proper amount of backfilling shall be done, and repairs shall be made to the
pavement at the expense of the party responsible for the original cut. (Ord.
861 §1, 1998)
12.02.250: REMOVAL OF EXCAVATED MATERIALS:
The party making the cut shall remove all of the surface material and earth
excavated and leave the surface of the street and parking perfectly clean. The
cuts so temporarily repaired shall be maintained by and at the expense of the
party making such cuts until the cuts have been permanently repaired. (Ord. 861
§1, 1998)
12.02.260: CONTRACTORS:
A.   Municipalities and political subdivisions who desire to perform any paving
cuts, excavations, drilling or pushing under any city streets, alleys or
curbing shall be required, prior to performing the same, to apply for a permit
and inspection for such work from the city clerk, except that, as to other
municipalities and political subdivisions, no permit or inspection fee nor
deposit shall be required. Backfilling and permanent repairs must meet or
exceed the standards provided for in this chapter and not be in conflict
therewith. (See also
chapter 5.04, article E, "Contractors", of this code for cross reference for
paving cuts and excavations in city streets, alleys and curbing for water line
construction and maintenance by other municipalities and political subdivisions
and by contractors hired by the same.)
B.   Where other municipalities and political subdivisions have hired
contractors to perform work involving paving cuts, excavations, drilling or
pushing under any city streets, alleys or curbing, such contractors shall be
required to meet and comply with all the requirements for permits, inspections,
deposits, and fees and for backfilling and permanent repairs provided for
hereinabove in this chapter, except that as to backfilling and permanent
repairs of city streets, alleys or curbing, the same will be deemed to be in
compliance with this code provided they meet or exceed the standards provided
for in this chapter and are not in conflict therewith. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
CHAPTER 12.03
SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
12.03.010: Standards
12.03.020: Contractor; Licensed And Bonded
12.03.030: Permit And Inspection Fees
12.03.010: STANDARDS:
All new or replacement sidewalks over right of way shall meet or exceed the
following minimum standards:
A.   Portland cement concrete, three and one-half inches (31/2") in depth,
three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi, minimum three-fourths inch (3/4")
aggregate concrete mix, over undisturbed soil or one and one-half inches (11/
2") of aggregate which has been inspected by the city prior to the pour or
placement, and
   1.   Shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width;
   2.   Should be sloped toward the street;
   3.   Shall be four feet (4') from the back of the curb;
   4.   Should have an expansion joint every one hundred feet (100') (use 1/
2 inch premolded expansion material);
   5.   Should have contraction joints every twenty feet (20') (saw cuts shall
be 1 inch deep and filled with hot poured sealer);
   6.   Saw cuts shall be made within twenty four (24) hours of placement; and
   7.   Sidewalks shall have a one-half inch (1/2") premolded joint meeting a
driveway. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.03.020: CONTRACTOR; LICENSED AND BONDED:
The contractor must be licensed and bonded. A performance bond in the amount of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) is required to be on file with the city clerk
before a permit can be issued and work is commenced. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.03.030: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
The permit fee for contractors and property owners is ten dollars ($10.00). The
fee for the initial inspection shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) and fifty
dollars ($50.00) for subsequent inspections. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
CHAPTER 12.04
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
12.04.010: Residential Standards
12.04.020: Commercial Standards
12.04.030: Contractor; Licensed And Bonded
12.04.040: Permit And Inspection Fees
12.04.010: RESIDENTIAL STANDARDS:
New or replacement driveways in all residential zoning districts, excluding R-
3 (multiple dwelling residential) district, shall meet or exceed the following
minimum standards from the right of way to the building limit line:
A.   If hot asphalt concrete is used, it shall be two inches (2") in depth over
four inches (4") of aggregate; or
B.   If Portland cement concrete is used, it shall be four inches (4") in
depth, three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi, minimum three-fourths inch (3/
4") aggregate concrete mix, over two inches (2") of aggregate; or
C.   All new or replacement driveways shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12')
wide, except circular driveways, which shall be a minimum of ten feet (10')
wide, providing the minimum parking requirement of two (2) nine foot by
eighteen foot (9' x 18') spaces per residential unit is met. (Ord. 861 §1,
1998)
12.04.020: COMMERCIAL STANDARDS:
New or replacement driveways in all commercial zoning districts, including R-3
(multiple dwelling residential) district, shall meet or exceed the following
minimum standards from the property line throughout the complex:
A.   If hot asphalt concrete is used, it shall be four inches (4") in depth
over four inches (4") of aggregate; or
B.   If Portland cement concrete is used, it shall be six inches (6") in depth,
three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi, minimum three-fourths inch (3/4")
aggregate concrete mix, over three inches (3") of aggregate or six inches (6")
of stabilized soil.
C.   All new or replacement driveways shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20')
in width.
D.   These driveway standards do not apply to parking space standards set forth
in title 19 of this code. (Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.04.030: CONTRACTOR; LICENSED AND BONDED:
The contractor must be licensed and bonded. A performance bond in the amount of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for commercial work is required to be on file
with the city clerk before a permit can be issued and work is commenced. (Ord.
861 §1, 1998)
12.04.040: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
The permit fee for contractors and property owners is ten dollars ($10.00) for
residential work. The permit fee for contractors and property owners is twenty
dollars ($20.00) for commercial work. A plan or sketch of the proposed
commercial driveway, with pertinent measurements shown, shall be provided to
the city at the time of the permit application. The fee for the initial
inspection, which must be made before the pour or placement, shall be ten
dollars ($10.00) for residential work and twenty dollars ($20.00) for
commercial work and twenty dollars ($20.00) for subsequent inspections. (Ord.
891 §1, 1999: Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
CHAPTER 12.05
APPROACHES, CURBS AND GUTTERS
SECTION:
12.05.010: Residential; Removal And Construction Standards
12.05.020: Commercial; Removal And Construction Standards
12.05.030: Contractor; Licensed And Bonded
12.05.040: Permit And Inspection Fees
12.05.010: RESIDENTIAL; REMOVAL AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
New or replacement approaches, curbs and gutters in all residential zoning
districts, excluding R-3 (multiple dwelling residential) district, shall meet
or exceed the following minimum standards from the edge of the street to the
property line (right of way):
A.   The approach shall be six inches (6") in depth of Portland cement
concrete, three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi, minimum three-fourths inch
(3/4") aggregate concrete mix, over two inches (2") of aggregate, with a
minimum slope of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot from the property line to the
street.
B.   All street or curb cuts shall be by mechanical saw. Where the standard
curb and gutter are separate from the body of the pavement, they shall be
removed and replaced with the new approach. All new or replacement approaches
will require the old curb and possibly the old gutter to be removed.
C.   Old or broken curbing and all other material removed during the project,
shall not be left on the parking area or surface of the street, but shall be
hauled away and the premises left free of debris and clean.
D.   All approaches shall maintain or improve the existing drainage and match
existing curbing.
E.   All approaches shall have a minimum radius of five feet (5'). An inside
radius of three feet (3') shall be allowed, if required, for circle drives and
small lots.
F.   The curb cut for a circle drive shall be a minimum of eighteen feet (18')
wide; for a standard drive, a minimum of twenty two feet (22') wide.
G.   All approaches shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') wide, except for
approaches on circular drives, which shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide.
(Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.05.020: COMMERCIAL; REMOVAL AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
New or replacement approaches, curbs and gutters in all commercial zoning
districts, including R-3 (multiple dwelling residential) district, as well as
any institutional use in any zoning district, shall meet or exceed the
following minimum standards from the edge of the street to the property line
(right of way):
A.   The approach shall be eight inches (8") in depth of Portland cement
concrete, three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi, minimum three-fourths inch
(3/4") aggregate concrete mix, over six inches (6") of aggregate or eight
inches (8") of stabilized soil, with a minimum slope of one-half inch (1/2")
per foot from the property line to the street.
B.   All street or curb cuts shall be by mechanical saw. Where the standard
curb and gutter are separate from the body of the pavement, they shall be
removed and replaced with the new approach. All new or replacement approaches
will require the old curb and possibly the old gutter to be removed.
C.   Old or broken curbing and all other material removed during the project,
shall not be left on the parking area or surface of the street, but shall be
hauled away and the premises left free of debris and clean.
D.   All approaches shall maintain or improve the existing drainage and match
existing curbing.
E.   All approaches shall have a minimum radius of fifteen feet (15') up to a
maximum radius of twenty five feet (25'), if available.
F.   The curb cut will be a minimum of fifty four feet (54') up to a maximum of
eighty six feet (86').
G.   All approaches shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in width for
collector streets and thirty six feet (36') in width for arterial streets.
(Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
12.05.030: CONTRACTOR; LICENSED AND BONDED:
The contractor must be licensed and bonded. A performance bond in the amount of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for residential work and fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00) for commercial work is required to be on file with the
city clerk before a permit can be issued and work is commenced. (Ord. 861 §1,
1998)
12.05.040: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
The permit fee for contractors and property owners is ten dollars ($10.00) for
residential work. If the property owner undertakes to do the work himself or
supervise the work of others, he shall be held accountable for any damage to
the city street which occurs during the project. The permit fee for contractors
and property owners is twenty five dollars ($25.00) for commercial work. A plan
or sketch of the proposed commercial driveway, with pertinent measurements
shown, shall be provided to the city at the time of the permit application. The
fee for the initial inspection, which must be made before the pour or
placement, shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for residential work and twenty
dollars ($20.00) for commercial work and twenty dollars ($20.00) for subsequent
inspections. (Ord. 891 §1, 1999: Ord. 861 §1, 1998)
TITLE 13
UTILITIES 1
Stormwater Drainage Program   13.02
Sewer Service   13.04
Emergency Medical Services   13.06
Wastes Prohibited In Sewers   13.08
Nonfranchised Public Utilities   13.10
Removal Of Public Utility Property   13.12
Franchises And Leases   13.20
Broadband Telecommunications Network Regulations   13.24
Review Of Rates And Fees   13.28
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 37-201 et seq., 37-101 et seq., 35-101 et seq.
CHAPTER 13.02
STORMWATER DRAINAGE PROGRAM
SECTION:
Article A. Overview
13.02.010: Purpose Of Chapter
13.02.020: Scope Of Overview
13.02.030: Definitions Of Chapter
13.02.040: Duties Of The Director
13.02.050: Stormwater Drainage Fund
13.02.060: Charges And Exemptions
13.02.070: Director Inspection
13.02.080: Collection Of Stormwater Charge
13.02.090: Appeal Or Adjustments Of Charge
13.02.100: City Council Discretion
Article B. General Provisions
13.02.110: Purpose Of Stormwater Management
13.02.120: Scope Of General Provisions
13.02.130: Definitions Of General Provisions
Article C. Application And Permits For Industrial, Commercial,
Institutional And Certain Residential Facilities
13.02.140: Existing Facilities Required To Obtain Permit
13.02.150: Construction Stormwater Discharge Permit
13.02.160: Permit Application Fees
13.02.170: Maintenance And Submittal Of Records
13.02.180: Transfer Of Permit
13.02.190: Signatory Requirements
Article D. Land Disturbing Activity And
Erosion And Sedimentation Control
13.02.200: General Land Disturbing Activity
13.02.210: Land Disturbing Activity Regulated
13.02.220: Permit Application
13.02.230: Sediment And Erosion Control
Article E. Stormwater Quality Management
13.02.240: Stormwater Quality Management Division Established
13.02.250: Authority Of Stormwater Quality Manager
Article F. Administration
13.02.260: Monitoring
13.02.270: Illicit Connections And Improper Disposal
13.02.280: Manager Inspections
Article G. Enforcement And Abatement
13.02.290: Unauthorized Discharge A Public Nuisance
13.02.300: Illicit Discharge And Illegal Dumping
13.02.310: NPDES Permit Required
13.02.320: Discharges
13.02.330: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
13.02.340: Declared Unlawful
13.02.350: Judicial Proceedings And Relief
13.02.360: Petition For Reconsideration
13.02.370: Hearings
13.02.380: Variances
Article H. Supplemental Permit Classifications And Requirements
13.02.390: Mobile Commercial Cosmetic Cleaning Permit And Registration Required
13.02.400: Permit Application Procedures
13.02.410: Issuance Of Permit And Registration Certificates
13.02.420: Display Of Registration Numbers And Certificates
13.02.430: Permit Conditions
13.02.440: Permit Denial And Revocation
13.02.450: Landscape Maintenance
13.02.460: Appropriation Of Funds
ARTICLE A.  OVERVIEW
13.02.010: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
It is the purpose of this chapter to address the mandates of the federal
government and establish a stormwater utility to promote public health, safety
and welfare by providing for studying, designing, operating, construction,
equipping, maintaining, acquiring and owning within the city a stormwater
drainage system. The establishment of a stormwater drainage system would:
A.   Reduce flood and storm losses and inconveniences from uncontrolled
stormwater runoff in the city;
B.   Improve the movement of emergency vehicles so that such movement is not
prohibited nor inhibited during storm or flood periods; and
C.   Preserve the city's watercourses, improve and preserve water quality,
minimize water quality degradation, and otherwise facilitate urban water
resource management techniques, including both the reduction of pollution and
the enhancement of the urban environment, including, but not limited to, the
NPDES permit requirements and such other requirements of the city, state and
federal governments. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.020: SCOPE OF OVERVIEW:
This article establishes methods to regulate the introduction of pollutants
into the municipal storm sewer system and enables the city to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws including, but not limited to, the clean
water act, the Oklahoma environmental quality act 1  and the stormwater
regulations (40 CFR part 122). The objectives of this article are to allow the
city:
A.   To regulate the introduction of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer
system by stormwater discharges by any user;
B.   To control spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater
into the municipal storm sewer system;
C.   To prohibit illicit discharges into the municipal storm sewer system;
D.   To carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with this code; and
E.   To comply with NPDES permit conditions and any other federal or state law
pertaining to stormwater quality to which the city is subject. (Ord. 1076 §1,
2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 27A OS 1-1-101 et seq.
13.02.030: DEFINITIONS OF CHAPTER:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: All property other than residential property and
undeveloped real estate.
DEPARTMENT: The street and parks department of the city of Warr Acres.
DETENTION FACILITIES: Facilities designed to hold stormwater for a short period
and then to release it to the natural watercourse.
DEVELOPED REAL ESTATE: Real property altered from its natural state by the
addition to or construction of any impervious surface such that the hydrology
of the property is affected.
DIRECTOR: The supervisor of the department and/or the designated
representative.
DRAINAGE BASIN PLAN: A plan adopted by the city for managing surface and storm
water facilities and features within an individual drainage basin.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surfaced area which prevents or retards the entry
of water into the soil in the manner and to the extent that such water entered
the soil under natural conditions, causing water to run off the surface in
greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow than was present under
natural conditions, such as, but not limited to, rooftops, asphalt or concrete
sidewalks, paving, driveways and parking lots, walkways, patio areas, storage
areas, and gravel, bituminous substances or other surfaces which similarly
affect the natural infiltration or runoff patterns of real property in its
natural state.
NPDES PERMIT: The national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued
to the city by the United States environmental protection agency and any
addition or amendment thereto.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Any tract, lot or parcel designed and used principally
for the purpose of one residential single-family house or one duplex, developed
according to and meeting the bulk and area requirements for residential single-
family or duplex zoned property as set forth in this code at the time of the
development of such property. However, multiple residential single-family
housing or multiple duplexes or any combination thereof on one tract, lot or
parcel shall not be deemed residential property.
RETENTION FACILITIES: Facilities designed to hold stormwater for a sufficient
length of time to provide for it to be consumed by evaporation, infiltration
into the immediate soil or other natural means.
STORMWATER CHARGE: The fees levied within the boundaries of the city for the
use of the city's stormwater drainage system and facilities, and shall include
a stormwater base fee and stormwater utility discharge fee. The stormwater base
fee is hereby established to meet the requirements and regulations of local,
state and federal governments, including, but not limited to, the NPDES permit.
The stormwater discharge fee is hereby established to develop a stormwater
utility to develop and maintain a stormwater drainage system.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Any facility, structure, improvement, development,
equipment, property or interest therein, or other structural or nonstructural
element made, constructed, used or acquired for the purpose of collecting,
containing, storing, conveying and controlling stormwater wherever located,
including, but not limited to, storm sewers, curbs, street drains, conduits,
natural and manmade channels, pipes, culverts and detention ponds whether
public or private.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM OR PROGRAM: An overall strategy and framework for
the stormwater management activities of the city.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the
stormwater drainage system.
UNDEVELOPED REAL ESTATE: Real estate unaltered by the construction or addition
of any impervious surface which would change or affect the hydrology of the
property from its natural state.
USER: The occupant, the owner of the real estate, the owner of any impervious
surface or improvement and/or other person or entity benefiting from the
stormwater drainage system and facilities. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.040: DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR:
The director shall exercise all lawful powers necessary and appropriate to
administer the city's stormwater management program. The director shall have
the authority to:
A.   Develop and administer all phases of a comprehensive program of stormwater
management, including studying, planning, designing, establishing, acquiring,
constructing, developing, installing, administering, maintaining, operating,
improving, repairing, replacing and reconstructing the city's stormwater
drainage system;
B.   Administer the accounting, budgeting, recordkeeping and support personnel
necessary for the efficient operation of the stormwater management program;
C.   Administer the regulations contained in the NPDES permit and in this
chapter;
D.   Perform studies, tests and analyses required to establish or modify the
stormwater management program;
E.   Provide for public information and awareness that would improve management
and reduce pollution and hazards to life and property;
F.   Establish a flood alert and early warning system as a joint effort with
emergency response agencies;
G.   Coordinate enforcement of the regulations contained in this title with
other city departments;
H.   Seek the cooperation of counties and municipalities within the
metropolitan area in reducing the contribution of all storm drainage systems to
flooding and, in particular, cooperate with other affected political
jurisdictions in preparing and implementing master drainage plans;
I.   Hear and consider challenges to the application of this chapter, the
calculation of fees, the determination of the impervious surface area and the
classification of users;
J.   Collect the stormwater charges;
K.   Provide an exchange of information between the public and city employees
and officers on flooding and stormwater drainage problems in the city;
L.   Recommend to the mayor and the city council a comprehensive stormwater
management program;
M.   Propose cooperation studies and plans for coordinated stormwater drainage
services in the city and surrounding areas; and
N.   Recommend from time to time to the mayor and the city council policies for
establishing new kinds of stormwater drainage services, preserving and
expanding existing service and making changes in service for the benefit of the
public. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.050: STORMWATER DRAINAGE FUND:
A.   A special fund or funds shall be maintained for the purpose of identifying
and controlling all revenues and expenses attributable to stormwater charges.
All stormwater charges and all loans, grants or funds received for the
administration, operation, construction and improvement of the stormwater
drainage system and facilities shall be deposited in such fund or funds.
Disbursements for costs of data collection, planning, designing, engineering,
policing, constructing, maintaining, operating, and improving drainage services
and facilities and any other activity provided for by this chapter shall be
made from the appropriate fund or funds.
B.   A special stormwater management enterprise fund shall be established to
receive all stormwater charges for the use of the city's stormwater drainage
system and facilities and to meet applicable local, state and federal
regulations, including, but not limited to, the NPDES permit.
C.   Expenditures and disbursements from the stormwater management enterprise
fund shall be at the direction and discretion of the city council. (Ord. 1076
§1, 2009)
13.02.060: CHARGES AND EXEMPTIONS:
A.   There is hereby established a stormwater charge in the amount of one
dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per month assessed and collected as herein set forth
for the use of the city's stormwater drainage system and facilities and to meet
applicable local, state and federal regulations, including, but not limited to,
the NPDES permit; provided, however, the stormwater charges shall not be
imposed on the following types of property:
   1.   City, state and federal roads, bridges, highways, streets, rights of
way;
   2.   City parks, city buildings, city facilities and open spaces owned or
operated by the city; or
   3.   Undeveloped parcels of land.
B.   The monthly stormwater charge established above shall be charged against
every residential and commercial property. In the case of duplexes and multi-
family dwelling unit complexes the service charge shall be made for each
dwelling unit. The stormwater charge for commercial property shall be based on
the size of the water meter serving the facility and shall be as follows:
 
Meter Size Fee   
(Inches)
        
   5/   $ 1.50
   1    2.95
   11   4.35
   2    6.00
   3    8.45
   4    11.25
   6    16.75
 
C.   All proceeds from the stormwater charges established herein shall be
deposited to the stormwater management enterprise fund established in section
13.02.050 of this chapter. Expenditures from said fund shall be restricted to
purposes set out in this section or other purposes deemed by the city council
as directly benefiting the stormwater drainage system of the city. (Ord. 1076
§1, 2009)
13.02.070: DIRECTOR INSPECTION:
The director shall have the right to inspect any on site detention or retention
facility at any reasonable time to determine if it is in compliance with the
approved design and is capable of functioning properly. The director shall have
the right to inspect any property within the city to determine the source,
quantity, quality or flow rate of stormwater and to determine the source and
nature of pollutants, hazards and/or activities creating or promoting same.
(Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.080: COLLECTION OF STORMWATER CHARGE:
A.   The stormwater charges herein established for the use of the city's
stormwater drainage system and facilities shall be billed monthly to each
utility user. The stormwater charges may be billed along with a bill for water
or other utility services. The deposit requirement, late charges and penalties
as are now or may hereinafter be established for water service bills shall also
apply to stormwater charges. In the event that any person, firm or corporation
shall tender as payment of water service, sewer service, collection of solid
waste service and/or service charge for the use of the city's stormwater
drainage system an amount insufficient to pay in full all of the charges so
billed, payment shall be credited proportionately among all charges.
B.   The provision for collection provided herein shall be in addition to any
rights or remedies which the city may have under the laws of the state of
Oklahoma. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.090: APPEAL OR ADJUSTMENTS OF CHARGE:
Any user who considers the stormwater charges, applicability of stormwater
charges or calculation of stormwater charges, to be inaccurate or erroneous may
request review thereof by the director. The determination by the director may
be appealed to the mayor by written notice of appeal stating the reasons or
basis for the appeal filed with the director and mayor within ten (10) days of
the director's written determination. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.100: CITY COUNCIL DISCRETION:
The determination of stormwater services to be provided and stormwater
facilities and improvements to be constructed will be made at the sole
discretion of the city council. The director shall recommend the provision of
stormwater services and construction of the stormwater facilities and
improvements to the city council based upon his engineering analysis, taking
into consideration frequency of flooding events, potential loss of life,
potential property damage, potential effect upon the general public and any
other factor affecting the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
ARTICLE B.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
13.02.110: PURPOSE OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
It is the purpose of this article to protect, maintain, and enhance the
environment of the city of Warr Acres and the short term and long term public
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Warr Acres by
controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's stormwater system and to
maintain and improve the quality of the community water into which the
stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, the lakes, rivers,
streams, ponds, wetlands, sinkholes, and groundwater of Warr Acres. (Ord. 1076
§1, 2009)
13.02.120: SCOPE OF GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This article establishes methods to regulate the introduction of pollutants to
the municipal separate storm sewer system and enables the city of Warr Acres to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws including, but not limited
to, the clean water act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), the Oklahoma environmental
quality act 1  and the stormwater regulations (40 CFR part 122). The objectives
of this article are to allow the city of Warr Acres:
A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm
sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user;
B.   To control the introduction to the municipal separate storm sewer system
of spills, dumping, or the disposal of materials other than stormwater;
C.   To prohibit illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer
system;
D.   To carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with this chapter;
E.   To comply with "NPDES municipal stormwater discharge permit" conditions
and any other federal or state law pertaining to stormwater quality which the
city of Warr Acres is subject. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 27A OS 1-1-101 et seq.
13.02.130: DEFINITIONS OF GENERAL PROVISIONS:
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE: A discharge prohibited by this article into the
"community waters" or to the "waters of the state" which occurs by chance and
without planning or consideration prior to occurrence.
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any addition or amendment
thereto.
AGRICULTURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF: Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated
crops, pastures, rangelands, and other nonpoint source agricultural activities,
but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40
CFR section 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production
facilities as defined in 40 CFR section 122.24 and any addition or amendment
thereto.
AQUATIC MONITORING ORGANISM: The fathead minnow Pimephales promelas, the
bacterium Photobacterium phosphoreum, or the daphnid Ceriodaphnia dubia.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): The best available practices or devices that,
when used singly or in combination, eliminate or reduce the contamination of
surface and/or ground waters. BMPs are divided into two (2) categories:
A.   Nonstructural best management practices are those which require modified
or additional operational or behavior practices, such as sweeping a parking lot
or having spill response equipment on site; and
B.   Structural best management practices are those which require the
construction of a structure or other physical modification on the site.
CITY: The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation, and the duly
authorized offices or agents of the city of Warr Acres.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act, as amended, codified
at 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any amendment or addition thereto.
COMMERCIAL: Property devoted in whole or in part to the commerce, that is, the
exchange and buying and selling of commodities or services. The term shall
include, by way of example but not of limitation, the following businesses:
amusement establishments, animal clinics or hospitals, automobile service
stations, new or used automobile dealerships, automobile car washes, automobile
and vehicular repair shops, banking establishments, beauty and barber shops,
bowling alleys, bus terminals and repair shops, camera shops, dental offices or
clinics, daycare centers, department stores, drugstores, funeral homes,
furniture stores, gift shops, grocery stores, hardware stores, hotels, jewelry
stores, laboratories, laundries and dry cleaning establishments, liquor stores,
medical offices and clinics, motels, movie theaters, office buildings, paint
stores or shops, parking lots, produce markets, or professional offices, radio
stations, repair establishments, retail stores, restaurants and similar
establishments serving prepared food and beverages, rooming houses, shopping
centers, stationery stores, television stations and production facilities, and
theaters.
COMMUNITY WATERS: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells, and other bodies
of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming
a part of the boundaries of the city of Warr Acres or the waters into which the
composite sample stormwater system outfalls flow.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample of stormwater runoff resulting from the
combination of individual samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION: A document or information regarding or describing a
process, product or information which has been determined by the manager to be
confidential or has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
exempt from disclosure to third parties under the Oklahoma open records act and
any amendment or supplement thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Clearing, grading, mining, and excavation activities
except: operations which are not part of a larger common plan of development or
sale.
CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: These permits are to establish
controls to the maximum extent practicable effectively prohibiting
nonstormwater discharged from construction sites to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) and where necessary, contain applicable water quality
based controls.
CONTAMINATED: Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
DEQ: The Oklahoma department of environmental quality.
DAYS: Calendar days.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works, or the person succeeding to his duties
and functions by whatever name known, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
DISCHARGE: To cause or allow to throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty,
emit, blow or pour any pollutants or harmful quantity of any substance into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into community waters, waters of
the state or waters of the United States.
DISCHARGER: Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible
for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction
site or industrial facility. Owner of commercial, residential or agricultural
property; owner or transporter of source of discharge.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing,
bathing, showers, dishwashing, and food preparation), other wastewater from
household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, or commercial properties and institutions, that is free
from industrial waste.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection agency
or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as designated for the regional
water management division director or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A written plan, including drawings or other
graphic representations, for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation
resulting from a land disturbing activity.
FIRE CODE: The fire prevention and protection chapter of this code and any
amendment or supplement thereto.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The fire department of the city of Warr Acres, or any duly
authorized representative thereof.
FIRE PROTECTION WATER: Any water, and any substances or materials contained
therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control or
extinguish a fire.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from
markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other
food products.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample of stormwater runoff which is taken on a onetime basis
without regard to the flow and consideration of time.
HARMFUL QUANTITY: The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of
water in the state, or that will cause lethal or sublethal adverse effects on
representative, sensitive aquatic monitoring organisms belonging to the city,
upon their exposure to samples of any discharge into the MS4, community waters,
or waters of the state.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR part 302 and
any amendment or addition thereto.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the
EPA pursuant to 40 CFR part 261.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any intentional discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges
pursuant to any NPDES permit, or discharges resulting from firefighting
activities.
INDUSTRIAL: A business engaged in industrial production or service, that is a
business characterized by manufacturing or productive enterprise or a related
service business. This term shall include, by way of example but not of
limitation, the following: salvage yards, wrecker services, apparel and fabric
finishers, blast furnaces, blueprint and related shops, boiler works, cold
storage plants, contractors' plants and storage facilities, foundries,
furniture and household good manufacturing, forge plants, greenhouses,
junkyards, manufacturing plants, metal fabricating shops, ore reduction
facilities, planing mills, rock crushers, rolling mills, sawmills, smelting
operations, stockyards, stone mills or quarries, textile production, utility
transmission or storage facilities, warehousing, and wholesaling facilities.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Any activity which is directly related to manufacturing,
processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The term
includes, but is not limited to, industrial plant yards; immediate access roads
and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured
products, waste material, or byproducts used or created by the industrial
facility; sites where material handling activities are performed; refuse sites;
sites used for the applications or disposal of process wastewaters; sites used
for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for
residual treatment, storage or disposal; shipping and receiving areas;
manufacturing buildings; storage areas (including tank farms) for raw
materials, and immediate and finished products.
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY OR INDUSTRY: A premises whose function is classified in the
latest edition of "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" (United States
office of management and budget).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: Regular discharges from facilities
which may control any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying
stormwater and which is directly related to material storage areas at an
industrial plant.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any airborne particulates, waterborne liquid or solid
substance that results from any process of industrial, manufacturing, mining,
production, trade, or business activities, including concrete washout.
INSTITUTIONAL: An established organization, especially of a charitable or
public character. This term shall include, by way of example but not of
limitation, the following: churches, community buildings, colleges, daycare
facilities, dormitories, drug or alcohol rehabilitation facilities, fire halls,
fraternal organizations, golf courses and driving ranges, government buildings,
hospitals, libraries, kindergartens or preschools, nursing homes, mortuaries,
schools, social agencies, synagogues, parks, and playgrounds.
MANAGER: The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of
stormwater quality management and the stormwater management system and who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly
authorized representative.
MATERIAL HANDLING ACTIVITIES: The storage, loading and unloading,
transportation or conveyance of any raw material, immediate product, finished
product, byproduct or waste product.
MONITORING: The performance of stormwater flow measurements, stormwater
sampling, sample analysis, and like procedures necessary to determine
compliance with stormwater discharge activity.
MOTOR VEHICLE FLUID: Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid,
brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol
blend, and any other fluid used in, or from within, a motor vehicle.
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL: An apartment building or other residential structure
built for three (3) or more family units, mobile home parks with three (3) or
more units or lots under common ownership, and condominiums of three (3) or
more units.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned or regulated by the
city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is
not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE: Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal,
community, commercial, institutional, or recreational activities, and includes
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles,
and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued
by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b))
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONPOINT SOURCE: Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a
"point source".
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): A written notice by a discharger or potential
discharger to the director, or his designee, that the person wishes his
discharge to be authorized under a general permit authorized by state law or
regulation.
NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT): A written notice by a discharger to the director
of the department of public works, or his designee, that the project permitted
has seventy percent (70%) revegetation of all bare areas and all soil
disturbing activities are concluded, allowing the termination of the permit
issued under this chapter, or the discharger is no longer the operator of the
facility and another has assumed the responsibility and obtained an NOI.
ODEQ: The Oklahoma department of environmental quality.
OPDES: Oklahoma pollution discharge elimination system act, 27 Oklahoma
Statutes 2-201 et seq., and any amendment or addition thereto.
OIL: Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum,
fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof, which is liquid at standard
conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with
waste.
OPERATOR: A person that: a) has operational or supervisory control over the
premises or equipment; or b) has the day to day operational or supervisory
control of activities at a work site or construction location sufficient to
comply with or to ensure compliance with plan requirements and permit
conditions (e.g., is authorized to direct workers at a work site to carry out
activities identified in an ordinance, permit or work plan).
OVERBURDEN: Any material of any nature, consolidated or unconsolidated, that
overlies a mineral deposit, excluding topsoil or similar naturally occurring
surface material that is not disturbed by mining operation.
POTW: Publicly owned treatment works.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the
plural where indicated by the context. This definition includes all federal,
state, or local governments.
POINT SOURCE: Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance including, but
not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which
pollutants are or may be discharged.
POLLUTANT: Any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, oil, grease,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste,
industrial waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
waste, and characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor).
POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A written site specific plan to eliminate or reduce
and control the pollution of stormwater through designed facilities,
sedimentation ponds, natural or constructed wetlands, and best management
practices.
PREMISES: Any plot or tract of ground, regardless of size or plat, owned by a
person or used by a person and any contiguous plots.
RELEASE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), community waters, waters of the
state, or the waters of the United States.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of:
A. Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood,
excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar
materials; and
B. Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans,
aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at
ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600°F to 1,800°F).
SANITARY SEWER (OR SEWER): The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances
which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a sewage treatment plant, POTW
(and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted).
SERVICE STATION: Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling
fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks.
SEWAGE: Industrial waste and/or domestic sewage.
SIC CODE: Standard industrial classification code of executive office of the
president of the United States, office of management and budget.
SIGNIFICANT SPILLS: Includes, but is not limited to, releases of oil or
hazardous substances in excess of reportable quantities under section 311 of
the clean water act (see 40 CFR 110.10 and CFR 117.21) or section 102 of CERCLA
(see 40 CFR 302.4) and any amendment or addition thereto.
SOLID WASTE: Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, municipal solid waste, sludge from a
waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control
facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or
contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial,
mining, agricultural operations, community and institutional activities,
including metal shavings, plastic pellets, paint chips, carpet fibers, wood
chips, sawdust, grass clippings and leaves.
SPILLS: Any release that, in the opinion of the director, negatively impacts
the quality of water within or discharges from the city's municipal separate
storm sewer system, or causes damaging or deleterious effects to the city's
municipal separate storm sewer system including all structures or
appurtenances, and/or the waters to the storm sewers.
STATE: The state of Oklahoma.
STORMWATER: Any rainwater runoff, surface runoff, and drainage related to rain
or storm events or snowmelt.
STORMWATER DISCHARGE ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Stormwater from areas
of industrial activity or areas where industrial activity has taken place in
the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and
disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this
article and its terms, including, but not limited to, measures that control the
increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused
by manmade changes to the land.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN OR SWMP: The set of drawings and other documents
that comprise all of the information and specifications for the programs,
drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts, and techniques for the control of
stormwater and which is incorporated as part of the NPDES permit for the city,
and as part of this article.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in
40 CFR part 401 promulgated by the administrator of the environmental
protection agency under the provisions of 33 USC 1317 and any amendment or
addition thereto.
UNCONTAMINATED: Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
USED OIL (OR USED MOTOR OIL): Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a
synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become
unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of
original properties, but may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in
compliance with state and federal law.
USER: Any source of direct or indirect discharge to Warr Acres's municipal
separate storm sewer system.
UTILITIES: A television, electric, gas, water, sewer, cable TV, or other
company or legal or government entity that provides service to the public.
VARIANCE: The modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements
contained in this chapter and the stormwater management plan for specific
circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in
unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
WATER QUALITY: Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the
physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of water.
WATER QUANTITY: Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the
rate and volume of the stormwater runoff.
WATERS OF THE STATE (OR WATER): Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise,
lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of the state,
and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or
nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies
of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or
inside the jurisdiction of the state.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: All waters which are currently used, were used in
the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce
including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect interstate or foreign
commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United
States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this
definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and
any waters within the federal definition of "waters of the United States" at 40
CFR 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or
lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal clean water act.
WETLAND: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes,
bogs, and similar areas.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
 
BAT   Best available technology
BCT   Best conventional technology
BMP   Best management practice
BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR   Code of federal regulations
COD   Chemical oxygen demand
EPA   U.S. environmental protection agency
gpd   Gallons per day
l     Liter
mg    Milligrams
mg/l  Milligrams per liter
NOI   Notice of intent
NOV   Notice of violation
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
OPDES Oklahoma pollution discharge elimination system
POTW  Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA  Resource conservation recovery act
RQ    Reportable quantities
SARA  Superfund amendments and reauthorization act of 1986
SCS   Soil conservation service
SWDA  Solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
TSD   Treatment, storage and disposal facilities
TSS   Total suspended solids
USC   United States code
 
(Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
ARTICLE C.  APPLICATION AND PERMITS FOR INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL
AND CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
13.02.140: EXISTING FACILITIES REQUIRED TO OBTAIN PERMIT:
A.   Any existing industrial, commercial, institutional or multi-family or
group residential facilities that discharge stormwater into community waters
and that do not have current NPDES permits issued by the DEQ authorizing a
discharge of stormwater into the waters of the state will be required to
develop a pollution prevention plan and apply for an industrial stormwater
discharge permit. The industrial stormwater discharge permit shall be required
in addition to any permits required by EPA or the state. Facilities that have
the following standard industrial classification codes must apply and receive
an industrial stormwater discharge permit:
 
SIC Code  Title
10    Metal mining
12    Coal mining
13    Oil and gas extraction
14    Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels
20    Food and kindred products
21    Tobacco products
22    Textile mill products
23    Apparel and other textile products
24    Lumber and wood products
25    Furniture and fixtures
26    Paper and allied products
27    Printing and publishing
28    Chemicals and allied products
29    Petroleum and coal products
30    Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products
31    Leather and leather products (except 311)
32    Stone, clay, and glass products
33    Primary metal industries
34    Fabricated metal products
35    Industrial machinery and equipment
36    Electronic and other electric equipment
37    Transportation equipment
38    Instruments and related products
39    Miscellaneous manufacturing industries
40    Railroad transportation
41    Local and interurban passenger transit
42    Trucking and warehousing
43    United States postal service
44    Water transportation
45    Transportation by air
5015  Motor vehicle parts, used
5093  Scrap and waste materials
5171  Petroleum bulk stations and terminals
 
B.   An application, including a pollution prevention plan, shall be submitted
to the manager. Upon approval, an industrial stormwater discharge permit shall
be issued within six (6) months of the submittal of the pollution prevention
plan. Any approved pollution prevention plan shall be incorporated into the
industrial stormwater discharge permit. The industrial stormwater discharge
permit may require the facility to implement structural and nonstructural best
management practices to reduce pollution discharge. If the application is not
approved, the manager shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies. The
applicant shall have ninety (90) days to revise and resubmit the application.
If the deficiencies noted by the manager are not corrected and the application
resubmitted for approval within the ninety (90) days or, if after being
resubmitted, is disapproved, any discharge of stormwater after that date into
waters of the community shall be unlawful. Once issued, an industrial
stormwater discharge permit shall be valid for five (5) years, unless sooner
revoked for violations of permit conditions, changes in applicable law, changes
in discharge or other good cause.
C.   The application for an industrial stormwater discharge permit for an
existing facility shall include the following:
   1.   Site map of facility showing buildings, parking, drives, materials
loading and access areas, type of each impervious surface, ditches, pipes,
catch basins, drainage basin limits, area of facility, acreage of off site
water draining into facility, discharge points to waters of the state or
community waters with name of the water or drainage basin. This map will be a
minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100');
   2.   Description of facility including the nature of work performed and type
of facility;
   3.   Narrative description of significant materials (as defined at 40 CFR
122.26) that are currently or in the past have been treated, stored or disposed
of at the facility; method of on site storage or disposal; materials management
practices used to minimize contact of these materials with stormwater runoff
currently and for the past three (3) years; materials loading and access area;
the location and description of existing structural and nonstructural control
measures to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff; and a description of any
treatment the stormwater receives;
   4.   Cleanup schedule for debris, material storage areas, garbage storage or
disposal areas, or other areas that have the potential to pollute stormwater;
   5.   Description of plan of instruction to employees at all levels in ways
to prevent pollution and spill response. The plan shall identify periodic dates
for such training;
   6.   Name of contact person for permit compliance, including job title,
address and phone number;
   7.   Maintenance schedule of sweeping or vacuuming of facility to prevent
washout of a buildup of emissions laden with hydrocarbons, oxides, salts,
metals, worn pavement particulates, hydrocarbons for leaks and spills, trash,
debris, garbage, metals, tire particles, brake lining particles and various
chemicals from the wear, deterioration and deposition of vehicles;
   8.   Description of other ways the facility plans to implement programs to
reduce the discharge of pollutants through stormwater flow. For each area of
the facility that generates stormwater discharges associated with an activity
with a reasonable potential for containing significant amounts of pollutants, a
prediction of the direction of flow and an estimate of the types of pollutants
which are likely to be present in stormwater discharges associated with
industrial activity;
   9.   Plans showing the construction of an appropriately sized grit sediment
basin and oil skimmer structure for discharge outfalls into community waters in
accordance with detailed drawings of these structures which are shown in the
stormwater management section of the "Best Management Practices Manual";
   10.   A record of available sampling data describing pollutants in
stormwater discharges;
   11.   A preventative maintenance program that includes regular inspection
and maintenance of stormwater management devices (e.g., cleaning grit chambers,
catch basins) as well as inspecting and testing plant equipment and systems to
uncover conditions that could cause breakdowns or failures resulting in
discharges of pollutants to surface waters; and
   12.   Designation of a person to keep a record of incidents such as
significant spills or other discharges that materially affect stormwater, along
with other information describing the quality and quantity of stormwater
discharges. Inspections and maintenance activities shall be documented and
recorded. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.150: CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT:
A.   All new utility, industrial, commercial, institutional and multi-family
residential facilities, and all residential subdivisions shall obtain a
construction stormwater discharge permit prior to construction activity. The
construction stormwater discharge permit shall be required in addition to any
permits required by the state or elsewhere in this code for stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity or for stormwater discharges
associated with construction activity or land disturbing activity.
B.   The minimum standards for issuance of a construction stormwater discharge
permit shall be a pollution prevention plan, and either an approved general
OPDES permit or a land disturbing permit. The application for a construction
stormwater discharge permit shall be filed with the manager and shall:
   1.   Include, if the facility is to be covered under a DEQ OPDES permit for
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, a general OPDES
permit, an industrial OPDES permit or an NOI, copies of such documents;
   2.   Demonstrate how the owner/operator or developer will ensure that
postdevelopment off site discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates;
   3.   Unless otherwise specified, include calculations of off site discharges
for the existing and developed conditions computed using the 100-year return
frequency storm and soil conservation service (SCS type II) design;
   4.   Contain plans for facilities that serve an area with ten (10) or more
disturbed acres designed to capture the design storm in a detention or
retention basin providing three thousand six hundred (3,600) cubic feet of
storage per acre drained to reduce the "first flush" pollutant load. Where
providing three thousand six hundred (3,600) cubic feet of storage per acre
drained is not attainable, small sediment basins of equivalent total volume
shall be used;
   5.   Include detention or retention ponds that shall have at least one foot
(1') of freeboard above the design storm, provide a paved emergency overflow
and the maximum level in the pond to be one foot (1') below any finished floor
level of the facility. Ponds shall also have permanent vehicle access for
maintenance purposes. A plan for the routine maintenance of the ponds will be
incorporated in the pollution prevention plan;
   6.   Include constructed wetlands if used to deal with the "first flush"
pollutant load instead of the pond of three thousand six hundred (3,600) cubic
feet per acre storage. Grit trap and oil separators must be installed upstream
of the wetlands to prevent contamination;
   7.   Include in the pollution prevention plan a demonstration of how the
facility will collect, control and treat stormwater so as to control the
quantity and quality of stormwater leaving the site. The plan shall also
include, as necessary, structural controls and nonstructural best management
practices adequate to prevent the violation of any water quality standard, and
shall meet the provisions of the clean water act (best conventional technology
and best available technology treatment requirements).
C.   The pollution prevention plan must be reviewed and approved by the manager
prior to the issuance of a construction stormwater discharge permit.
D.   The manager must receive an NOT or a certificate of occupancy for the
facility or subdivision for a final inspection. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.160: PERMIT APPLICATION FEES:
A.   Each application for the issuance of a construction stormwater discharge
permit under this article shall be accompanied by a minimum nonrefundable fee
of fifty five dollars ($55.00) plus such additional fees for land disturbing
activity or industrial activity as may be required below.
B.   Each application for the issuance of a land disturbing permit under this
article shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee of fifty five
dollars ($55.00) per location.
C.   Each application for an existing facility permit required by section
13.02.140 of this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty five dollars
($55.00). (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.170: MAINTENANCE AND SUBMITTAL OF RECORDS:
Appropriate proof and records of compliance with the provisions of a stormwater
discharge permit or land disturbing permit shall be made available for the
manager's review at any time. The owner/operator shall send a permit renewal
request annually to the manager prior to the anniversary date of the permit.
(Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.180: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
An industrial or construction stormwater discharge permit or land disturbing
permit may be transferred to a subsequent owner/operator only upon the filing
of an amended application containing all of the subsequent owner's/operator's
information required on an application providing there are no changes in the
operation of the facility which may affect the quantity or quality of the
stormwater runoff. If there are to be any changes in the operation of the
facility which may affect the quantity or quality of stormwater runoff, then
the subsequent owner/operator shall resubmit, by NOI, for a stormwater
discharge permit or land disturbing permit prior to the beginning of operation
of the facility. The filing of an amended application shall be treated as an
interim permit allowing the continued operation of the facility pending review
of the amended application by the manager, which shall remain in force until
the amended application shall be approved or denied by the manager. (Ord. 1076
§1, 2009)
13.02.190: SIGNATORY REQUIREMENTS:
A.   All applications and reports required by this article to be submitted to
the manager shall be signed:
   1.   By a responsible party (e.g., developer, owner/operator, contractor)
with operational control over the project specifications and daily operations;
   2.   For a corporation, by an officer of the corporation, as authorized and
in charge of principal business functions, or any other person as authorized to
perform similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation;
   3.   For a partnership or sole proprietorship, by a general partner or the
proprietor, respectively;
   4.   For a municipality, state, federal or other public facility, by either
a principal executive officer or the chief executive officer of the agency or a
senior executive officer having responsibility for the overall operations of a
principal geographic unit of the agency.
B.   Any person signing any document required by this article shall make the
following certification:
I certify under the penalty of law that I have personally examined and am
familiar with the information submitted in the attached document; and, based on
my inquiry of those individuals immediately responsible for obtaining the
information, I believe the submitted information is true, accurate and
complete, I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of a fine and/or civil penalty.
(Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
ARTICLE D.  LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY AND EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
13.02.200: GENERAL LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY:
All land disturbing activities shall be in compliance with and after receiving
a permit under this article. An application must be submitted to DEQ for a
general OPDES permit. If a general OPDES permit is applied for, a copy of the
NOI must be sent to the manager. To seek coverage under the general OPDES
permit, the NOI must be submitted to the DEQ. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.210: LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY REGULATED:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, or permit to be conducted,
any land disturbing activity upon any land without a land disturbing permit
issued under this article and a general OPDES permit, with a copy provided to
the manager. Such permit shall be required in addition to any building permit
or other permit required by this code for the site and shall be available for
inspection by the manager on the job site at all times during which land
disturbing activities are in progress. The phrase "land disturbing activity"
shall not include the following:
   1.   Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual
home landscaping, home repairs, home maintenance work and other related
activities which result in minor soil erosion;
   2.   The construction of single-family residences when built separately on
lots less than one acre not within a subdivision or which have been recorded in
the office of stormwater quality management, and have been issued building
permits; provided that excavation is limited to trenches for the foundation,
basements, service and sanitary sewer connections, and minor grading for
driveways, yard areas and sidewalks, with no off site discharge of pollutants;
   3.   Individual service and sanitary sewer connections for single- or two-
family residences;
   4.   Agricultural practices involving the establishment, cultivation or
harvesting of products of the field or orchard, preparing and planting of
pastureland, forestry land management practices including harvesting, farm
ponds, dairy operations and livestock and poultry management practices, and the
construction of farm buildings;
   5.   Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the soil
conservation service of the United States department of agriculture;
   6.   Installation, maintenance and repair of any underground public utility
lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard surface road, street or
sidewalk, provided the activity maintains pollution control and is confined to
the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard surfaced and a street,
curb, gutter or sidewalk permit has been obtained; and
   7.   Construction, repair or rebuilding of tracks of a railroad company.
These activities may be undertaken without the required permits; however, the
persons conducting these excluded activities shall remain responsible for
conducting these activities in accordance with the provisions of this article
and other applicable laws including responsibility for controlling
sedimentation and runoff both during the land disturbing activity and after the
land disturbing activity is complete.
B.   The minimum standards for controlling erosion and sedimentation from land
disturbing activities shall be set forth in the "Best Management Practices
Manual", as adopted and amended from time to time by resolution approved by the
city council. A copy of the manual shall be maintained on file in the offices
of the director, the city engineer and the manager. A copy of the manual shall
be maintained in the office of the city clerk and may be viewed and copied in
accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.220: PERMIT APPLICATION:
A.   An application for the issuance of a land disturbing permit under this
article shall include the following:
   1.   Name of the applicant;
   2.   Business or residence address of the applicant;
   3.   Name and address of the owner/operator of the subject property;
   4.   Address and legal description of the subject property;
   5.   Name and address of any contractor and any subcontractor(s) who will
perform the land disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and
sediment control plan;
   6.   A statement setting forth the nature, extent and purpose of the land
disturbing activity including the size of the area for which the permit shall
be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land
disturbing activity; and
   7.   A copy of the NOI and erosion and sediment control plan.
B.   Each application for a land disturbing permit shall be accompanied by a
map or plat of the premises showing the present contour lines and the proposed
contour lines resulting from the land disturbing activity in relation to all
parts of the premises and the properties immediately adjacent thereto and in
relation to all abutting street grades and elevations. Such map or plat shall
show all proposed and existing drainage facilities and the proposed permanent
disposition of surface waters upon completion of the land disturbing activity.
C.   The erosion and sediment control plan shall accurately describe the
potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from the land
disturbing activity, and shall explain and illustrate the measures which are to
be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the erosion
and sediment control plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project,
severity of the site condition and the potential for off site damage. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall contain a description of the existing
site conditions, a description of adjacent topographical features, a
description of soil types and characteristics of the area, potential problems
of soil erosion and sedimentation, stabilization specifications, stormwater
management considerations, a time schedule for completion of the land
disturbing activity and for maintenance after completion of the project,
clearing and grading limits, and all other information needed to accurately
depict solutions to potential soil erosion and sedimentation problems. Any
erosion and sediment control plan must comply with the "Best Management
Practices Manual" and shall be reviewed by the manager prior to the issuance of
the land disturbing permit. The land disturbing permit shall be issued within
thirty (30) days of the submission of the plan if the application and the plan
are approved by the manager.
D.   At any time the manager determines that an erosion and sediment control
plan does not comply with the provisions of this article, the manager shall
notify the applicant in writing of all deficiencies within the plan. (Ord. 1076
§1, 2009)
13.02.230: SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL:
No land disturbing activity shall be conducted within the city except in such a
manner that:
A.   Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall
be conducted so as to minimize erosion. Clearing and grubbing must be held to
the minimum necessary for grading and equipment operation. Preconstruction
vegetative ground cover shall not be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than
ten (10) days prior to grading or earthmoving. Construction must be sequenced
to minimize the exposure time of cleared surface area;
B.   Upon completion of land disturbing activities, will not leave slopes so
that they will erode. Such methods shall include revegetation, sodding,
mulching, riprapping or guniting. Regardless of the method used, the objective
will be to leave the site as erosion free and maintenance free as practicable;
C.   Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented;
D.   Permanent or temporary soil stabilization is applied to disturbed areas to
the extent feasible within seven (7) days on areas that will remain unfinished
for more than fourteen (14) days. Permanent soil stabilization with perennial
vegetation shall be applied as soon as practicable after final grading is
reached on any portion of the site. Soil stabilization refers to measures that
protect soil from the erosive forces of wind, raindrop impact and flowing
water, and includes the growing of grass, sod, application of straw, mulch,
fabric mats, and the early application of gravel base on areas to be paved;
E.   A permanent vegetative cover shall be established on disturbed areas not
otherwise permanently stabilized;
F.   Sediment in stormwater runoff is trapped by the use of debris basins,
sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures, but not hay bales, until the
disturbed area is stabilized;
G.   Neighboring persons and property are protected from damage or loss
resulting from excessive stormwater runoff, soil erosion or deposition upon
property or public streets of water transported silt and debris. Adjacent
property owners shall be protected from land devaluation due to exposed bare
banks;
H.   A controlled construction entrance/exit is maintained in a condition that
will prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto the public right of way;
I.   Erosion and sediment control measures must be in place and functional
before earthmoving operations begin, and must be constructed and maintained
throughout the construction period. Temporary measures may be removed at the
beginning of the workday, but must be replaced at the end of the workday;
J.   Structural controls shall be designed and maintained as required to
prevent pollution. All surface water flowing toward the construction area
shall, to the extent practicable, be diverted by using berms, channels or
sediment traps as necessary. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be
designed according to the size and slope of disturbed or drainage areas to
detain stormwater runoff and trap sediment. Discharges from sediment basins and
traps must be through a pipe or lined channel so that the discharge does not
cause erosion. Muddy water to be pumped from excavation and work areas must be
held in settling basins or treated by filtration prior to its discharge into
surface waters where practicable. Waters must be discharged through a pipe or
lined channel so that the discharge does not cause erosion and sedimentation;
K.   All control measures are inspected, and repaired as necessary, biweekly in
dry periods and within twenty four (24) hours after any precipitation of one-
half inch (0.5") or more within a twenty four (24) hour period. During
prolonged precipitation, daily inspections and repairing must be performed. The
permittee shall maintain records of such inspections and repairs;
L.   A specific individual is designated to be responsible for erosion and
sediment controls on each site;
M.   There shall be no distinctly visible floating scum, oil or other matter
contained in the stormwater discharge. The stormwater discharge must not cause
an objectionable color contrast in the receiving water. The stormwater
discharge must result in no materials in concentrations sufficient to be
hazardous or otherwise detrimental to humans, livestock, wildlife, plant life
or fish and aquatic life in the receiving stream; and
N.   When the land disturbing activity is finished and stable, perennial
vegetation has been established on all remaining exposed soil. The permittee
shall notify the manager of these facts and submit an NOT of the permit issued
under this article. The manager shall then provide a final inspection of the
site within twenty (20) days after receipt of such notice and, when advisable,
may require additional measures to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. If
such requirements are given by letter, the permittee shall continue to be
covered by the provisions of this article until a request for termination of
the permit has been accepted by the manager. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
ARTICLE E.  STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
13.02.240: STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT DIVISION ESTABLISHED:
The stormwater quality management division of the city of Warr Acres public
works department is hereby created. Its functions shall be to design and
implement compliance programs protecting the community's natural resources.
(Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.250: AUTHORITY OF STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGER:
A.   There shall be a manager of stormwater quality management who shall manage
the stormwater quality management division.
B.   With respect to the city's compliance with environmental laws, the manager
shall have the power and authority to perform the following acts:
   1.   Carry out all inspections, surveillance, enforcement and monitoring
procedures necessary to determine compliance;
   2.   Administer the city's compliance with its NPDES permit to discharge
from the municipal storm sewer system;
   3.   Inspect city and commercial properties for the presence of hazardous
substances, and develop and administer whatever remediation programs are
required;
   4.   Determine whether the city is in compliance with the federal and state
clean water acts; whether the city has obtained all permits required by federal
and state environmental laws; and whether the city is in compliance with the
permits it has;
   5.   Audit use of herbicides, fertilizers and pesticides to determine
compliance with the clean water act and to recommend alternative solutions
where practicable for the reduction of their use through education and outreach
programs;
   6.   Control the discharge of spills and the dumping or disposal of
materials other than stormwater (e.g., industrial and commercial waste, trash,
motor vehicle fluids, leaf litter, grass clippings, animal waste, etc.) into
the municipal storm sewer system; and provide technical support for HAZMAT
response;
   7.   Administer programs to identify and control pollutants from the
transportation, storage, treatment and disposal of hazardous wastes; and
monitor hazardous waste facilities that receive the city's resource
conservation recovery act hazardous waste for treatment or disposal for
compliance with NPDES permit requirements;
   8.   Assist in the protection of drinking water and surface water bodies
which are a source of the city's drinking water;
   9.   Assist the city with the collection, transportation and disposal of
solid waste, and with compliance with NPDES permit requirements;
   10.   Monitor the city's compliance with all federal, state and local laws;
except that:
      a.   Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws
relating to discharge from the POTW is the responsibility of the wastewater
department;
      b.   Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws
relating to the production and distribution of drinking water is the
responsibility of the water department;
      c.   Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws
relating to the operation of the city's transfer station, recycling efforts and
landfill programs are the responsibility of the sanitation department; and
      d.   Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws
relating to risk management and safety operations training and programs are the
responsibility of the human resources department;
   11.   Perform such other administrative duties as may be assigned by the
superintendent.
C.   With respect to enforcement, the manager shall have the authority to:
   1.   Investigate violations of and enforce those aspects of the clean water
act that are within the authority of local governments;
   2.   Investigate violations of and enforce this article;
   3.   Investigate violations of and enforce those provisions that relate to
hazardous substances and spills although primary enforcement will remain with
the city fire department;
   4.   Investigate all other violations of and enforce environmental laws
within the city and within the city's extended jurisdiction;
   5.   Perform other environmental activities as may be required to ensure
compliance of environmental regulations by the city and others within the city
and its extended jurisdiction.
D.   With respect to other programs, the manager shall have the authority to:
   1.   Monitor and coordinate with other city departments on the city's
response to releases of hazardous substances;
   2.   Review and assess the environmental hazards of real property involved
in city land transactions;
   3.   Monitor the use of city rights of way, property and easements by
persons with use agreements for environmental monitoring;
   4.   Establish and supervise a program for the collection of hazardous
household waste;
   5.   Create, promote, and publicize educational programs for environmental
awareness; and
   6.   Provide quantitative data through field screening programs. (Ord. 1076
§1, 2009)
ARTICLE F.  ADMINISTRATION
13.02.260: MONITORING:
The manager shall monitor the quantity of, and the concentration of, pollutants
in stormwater discharges from the areas and locations as designated in the city
of Warr Acres stormwater management plan. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.270: ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND IMPROPER DISPOSAL:
A.   The manager shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate illicit
connections to the stormwater drainage system, including the adoption of a
program to screen illicit discharges and identify their source or sources.
B.   The manager shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate improper
discharges, including instituting programs to screen for improper disposal and
programs to provide for public education, public information and other
appropriate activities to facilitate the proper management and disposal of used
oil, toxic materials and hazardous household waste. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.280: MANAGER INSPECTIONS:
A.   The manager, bearing proper credentials and identification, may enter and
inspect all properties for regular periodic inspections, investigations,
monitoring, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, to
effectuate the provisions of this article and the stormwater management
program. The manager shall duly notify the owner/operator and the inspection
shall be conducted at reasonable times.
B.   In the event the manager reasonably believes that discharges from the
property into the city's stormwater system may cause an imminent and
substantial threat to human health or the environment, the inspection may take
place at any place at any time and without notice to the owner/operator. The
inspector shall present proper credentials upon reasonable request by the
owner/operator.
C.   Upon refusal by any owner/operator to permit an inspector to enter or
continue an inspection, the inspector shall terminate the inspection or confine
the inspection to areas concerning which no objection is raised. The inspector
shall immediately report the refusal and the grounds to the manager. The
manager may seek appropriate compulsory process.
D.   At any time during the conduct of an inspection or at such other times as
the manager may request information from an owner/operator, the owner/operator
may identify areas of the property, facility or establishment, material or
processes which contain or might reveal confidential information. If the
manager has no clear and convincing reason to question such identification, the
inspector shall nonetheless inspect; however, the inspection report shall not
contain any of the confidential information. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
ARTICLE G.  ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT
13.02.290: UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Discharge of stormwater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any
condition of a permit issued pursuant to this article or a stormwater discharge
permit issued by the state is hereby declared a public nuisance and must be
corrected or abated by the owner/operator. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.300: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL DUMPING:
A.   The following direct or indirect discharges into community waters or
waters of the state are prohibited and shall be unlawful:
   1.   Sewage dumping or dumping of sewage sludge;
   2.   Chlorinated swimming pool discharge;
   3.   Discharge of any polluted household wastewater such as, but not limited
to, laundry wash water and dishwater, except to a sanitary sewer or septic
system;
   4.   Leaking sanitary sewers and connections, which shall have remained
uncorrected for seven (7) days or more;
   5.   Leaking water lines that shall have remained uncorrected for seven (7)
days or more;
   6.   Commercial, industrial or public vehicle wash or power wash discharge;
   7.   Garbage, rubbish or sanitary waste disposal;
   8.   Dead animals or animal fecal waste;
   9.   Nonstormwater discharges, except pursuant to a permit issued by the
state and the city;
   10.   Dredged or spoil material;
   11.   Solid waste;
   12.   Chemical waste; and
   13.   Wrecked or discarded vehicles or equipment. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.310: NPDES PERMIT REQUIRED:
A.   Every person who is or who is planning to carry out any of the activities
requiring a permit shall obtain such a permit prior to carrying out such
activities.
B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry out any of the following
activities, except in accordance with the conditions of a valid permit:
   1.   The alteration of the physical, chemical, radiological, biological or
bacteriological properties of any of the waters of the state or community
waters;
   2.   The construction, installation, modification or operation of any
treatment works or part thereof, or any extension or addition thereto;
   3.   The increase in volume or strength of any wastes in excess of
permissive discharges specified under any existing permit;
   4.   The development of a natural resource or the construction, installation
or operation of any establishment or any extension or modification thereof or
addition thereto, the operation of which will or is likely to cause an increase
in the discharge of wastes into the waters of the state or would otherwise
alter the physical, chemical, radiological, biological or bacteriological
properties of any waters of the state in any manner not already lawfully
authorized;
   5.   The construction or use of any new outlet for the discharge of any
wastes into the waters of the state;
   6.   The discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into waters,
or a location from which it is likely that the discharged substance will move
into waters; and
   7.   The discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into a well
or a location where it is likely that the discharged substance will move into a
well, or the underground placement of fluids and other substance which do or
may affect the waters of the state. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.320: DISCHARGES:
A.   In the event of a significant spill or any other discharge that could
constitute a threat to human health or the environment, the discharger, the
owner/operator or the facility shall give notice to the manager and the field
office of the DEQ as soon as practicable, but in no event later than the close
of business on the day following the significant spill or other discharge or
the day the discharger, owner/operator or the facility becomes aware of the
discharge. If an emergency response by governmental agencies is needed, the
discharger must also call 911 immediately to report the discharge. A written
report must be provided within five (5) days of the time the discharger becomes
aware of the discharge, unless this requirement is waived by the manager for
good cause shown, on a case by case basis, containing the following
particulars:
   1.   A reasonably precise description of the discharge;
   2.   The exact date and time of discharge; and
   3.   Steps being taken to eliminate and prevent recurrence of the discharge.
B.   The owner/operator shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any adverse
impact to the community waters or the waters of the state, including such
accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and
impact of the discharge. It shall not be a defense for the discharger in an
enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the
business or activity of the facility in order to maintain water quality and
minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause.
C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions
of this article. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.330: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
A.   Whenever the manager finds that any permittee or any person discharging
stormwater has violated or is violating this chapter, or a stormwater permit or
order issued hereunder, the manager may serve upon said person or permittee
written notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt date of
this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted to the manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the
discharger of liability or criminal prosecution for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
B.   The manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances
of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with the person responsible for the compliance or for the noncompliance. Such
orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger and the
owner/operator to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified
by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as
administrative orders issued pursuant to subsection D of this section.
C.   The manager has the authority to order any person who causes or
contributes to a violation of this chapter or stormwater permit or order issued
hereunder to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
Notice shall be served specifying the time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that
the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any individual or the principal
executive, general partner or manager of any legal entity or person of legal
age at the office or business address of the permittee.
D.   When the manager finds that any person has violated or continues to
violate this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the manager may
issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specified time
period, adequate structures or devices be installed or procedures implemented
and properly operated, supervised and administrated. Orders may also contain
such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate
structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring and best management
practices.
E.   When the manager finds that any person has violated or continues to
violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the manager may
issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons
in noncompliance to:
   1.   Comply forthwith; or
   2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and terminating the discharge.
F.   A person receiving an order may file a written notice of appeal with the
superintendent and manager, no later than the tenth calendar day after receipt
of the order. Such notice shall include an explanation as to why the person
believes the enforcement action should not be taken. The superintendent shall
determine whether the appeal has merit. If the superintendent determines that
the appeal has merit, he/she shall rescind the order. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.340: DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   1.   Violate any provision of this chapter;
   2.   Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter;
   3.   Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful notice to abate issued by the
manager within the time specified by such notice; or
   4.   Violate any lawful order of the manager within the time allowed by such
order.
B.   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine plus costs. Each and every day on which a violation
occurs or continues to occur shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1076 §1,
2009)
13.02.350: JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS AND RELIEF:
A.   The manager is authorized to initiate proceedings in any court of
competent jurisdiction against any person who has or is about to:
   1.   Violate the provisions of this chapter;
   2.   Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter;
   3.   Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order issued by the manager,
which has not been timely appealed to the appropriate court within the time
allowed by this chapter;
   4.   Violate any lawful order within the time allowed by such order.
B.   Any person found to have committed any act declared unlawful or failing to
perform any act required by or under this chapter shall be in violation of this
chapter and shall be punished by a fine plus costs. Each and every day on which
a violation occurs or continues to occur shall be deemed a separate offense.
C.   The manager, with consent of the city council, may also initiate civil
proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking monetary damages for
any damages caused to publicly owned stormwater facilities by any person, and
to seek injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or to enforce compliance with any lawful orders.
D.   The manager, with the consent of the superintendent, may petition the DEQ
to regulate and prosecute stormwater dischargers which cannot be adequately
controlled by municipal resources. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.360: PETITION FOR RECONSIDERATION:
A.   Any person subject to: a denial of a permit issued under this chapter; a
compliance order; a stop work order; an emergency suspension of utility
service; or any other enforcement action in this chapter which allows for
reconsideration and hearing under this article, may petition the superintendent
or manager to reconsider the basis for the action. In order for the petition to
be reconsidered, it shall be filed with the superintendent or the manager no
later than the tenth calendar day after receipt of the notice/order.
B.   Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be
deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or
review of the action.
C.   In its petition, the petitioner shall indicate the action objected to, and
the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence
that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any alternative terms of an
order that the petitioner would accept, whether the petitioner requests a
hearing on its petition and the address where notice of hearing will be
received and accepted.
D.   The effect of a compliance order or stop work order shall be stayed
pending the superintendent's or the manager's reconsideration of the petition,
and any hearing thereon, unless the superintendent or the manager expressly
makes a written determination to the contrary. The effect of an emergency
suspension of utilities shall not be stayed pending the superintendent's or the
manager's reconsideration or any hearing, unless the superintendent or the
manager expressly, and in writing, stays the emergency order.
E.   Within a reasonable time of the submittal of a petition for
reconsideration, the superintendent or the manager shall either grant the
petition and withdraw or modify the order or modify or grant the permit
accordingly; deny the petition if no material issue of fact is raised; or if a
hearing has been requested and/or a material issue of fact has been raised, set
a hearing on the petition. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.370: HEARINGS:
A.   The superintendent is authorized to set a hearing if the superintendent
determines that a show cause hearing should be conducted, if grounds exist to
revoke or suspend a permit issued under this chapter, or if grounds exist to
terminate utilities on a nonemergency basis.
B.   Written notice of the hearing shall be served on a petitioner/violator at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be served in person or
by fax or certified mail, return receipt requested.
C.   Notices shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing.
D.   Notice that is mailed shall be deemed received five (5) days after it is
placed in a mail receptacle of the United States postal service.
E.   No decision may be rendered at a hearing by reason of the petitioner's/
violator's failure to appear unless proof of service is shown.
F.   For purposes of this section, the superintendent shall be empowered to
administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the
hearing.
G.   Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls upon a Saturday,
Sunday or a city recognized holiday, the deadline shall be the next regular
city business day.
H.   The date of an order or ruling required to be made under this section
shall be deemed to be the date it is signed.
I.   Decisions shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. The city
shall have the burden of proof in all hearings except permit denial hearings.
In permit denial hearings, the burden of proof shall be on the petitioner.
J.   The superintendent shall act as the hearing officer.
K.   After the conclusion of the hearing, the superintendent shall make written
findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written decision
without undue delay.
L.   A hearing shall exhaust all administrative remedies of the petitioner/
violator. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.380: VARIANCES:
A.   The superintendent may grant a revocable variance from the requirements of
this chapter providing to do so would not result in the violation of any state
or federal law or regulation and if exceptional circumstances applicable to the
site exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter will
result in unnecessary hardship and will not result in a condition contrary to
the intent of this chapter.
B.   A written petition for a variance shall be required and shall state the
specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, why a variance
should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to
evaluate the proposed variance. The petition shall be filed with the manager.
C.   The manager shall conduct a review of the request for a variance within
ten (10) days after receipt and may either support the petition or may object
to the petition. If the manager objects to the variance, the manager shall
state the reasons therefor.
D.   Once the manager's review is complete or the ten (10) days for review have
expired, the petition shall be subject to action at the discretion of the
superintendent. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
ARTICLE H.  SUPPLEMENTAL PERMIT CLASSIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
13.02.390: MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING PERMIT AND REGISTRATION
REQUIRED:
A.   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly engages in mobile
commercial cosmetic cleaning without a valid permit issued by the
superintendent.
B.   A person commits an offense if the person knowingly operates or causes to
be operated a mobile commercial cleaning vehicle that is not registered with
the superintendent. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.400: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
A.   A person required by section
13.02.390 of this chapter to have a permit shall complete and file a permit
application on a form prescribed by the superintendent.
B.   The superintendent may require any information on an application that the
superintendent believes is necessary to ensure that best management practices
are implemented by the permittee and that the permittee does not cause
contamination of surface water, stormwater, waters of the state, waters of the
community or groundwater within the city.
C.   The application shall include a description and the vehicle license
registration number of each vehicle to be registered under the permit. All
motor vehicles and trailers used to transport cosmetic cleaning rigs shall be
registered. However, a motor vehicle which is used to tow a trailer registered
with the superintendent and which is not used to transport a cosmetic cleaning
rig itself shall not be required to be registered.
D.   Any applicant who utilizes wash water recycling units shall list all
sanitary sewer discharge locations and other disposal sites the applicant
intends to use.
E.   An industrial pretreatment permit may also be required under section 43-
288 of this code. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.410: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES:
A.   The superintendent may issue a permit and registration certificates after
the applicant pays all applicable fees, unless the superintendent has cause to
deny such permit. The superintendent shall provide for procedures to add
registered vehicles to a permit during its term.
B.   A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance, unless
suspended or revoked, and is not transferable. Registration certificates shall
be valid for the term of the permit.
C.   The annual fee for a permit and a registration certificate issued under
this article shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The fee for each
additional registration certificate shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
D.   The superintendent will issue a registration certificate for each vehicle
registered under a permit and list the registration certificate number on the
permit. A registration certificate is not transferable.
E.   The superintendent will issue a registration certificate for each vehicle
registered under a permit. The certificate shall be of a size and design
determined by the superintendent. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.420: DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION NUMBERS AND CERTIFICATES:
A.   A permit holder shall have the registration certificate numbers
permanently displayed on each of its vehicles registered under the permit as
follows:
   1.   The registration certificate number shall be placed on both sides of
the vehicle in a location approved by the superintendent.
   2.   The registration certificate number shall be in numerals of a minimum
height of three inches (3"), in a color contrasting to their background, and in
a visible location.
B.   A permit holder shall maintain a registration certificate number on each
registered vehicle in a location approved by the superintendent.
C.   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning vehicle which does not properly
display the registration certificate number assigned to the vehicle by the
superintendent.
D.   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be
operated a mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning vehicle without a valid
registration certificate in the vehicle. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.430: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
As a condition of receiving and maintaining a permit under this article, a
permit holder shall comply with the following:
A.   A permit holder shall immediately notify the superintendent of any
management changes in the business during the time the permit is in effect.
B.   A permit holder shall submit samples of wash water and/or wastewater to
the superintendent immediately upon his demand.
C.   A permit holder who utilizes wash water recycling units shall:
   1.   Notify the superintendent in writing of all changes in disposal sites
it wants to use during the permit period;
   2.   Discharge wash water into the sanitary sewer only at those sites listed
in its permit application and its notices under subsection C1 of this section;
and
   3.   Before the end of each permit period:
      a.   Test or cause to be tested a certified representative sample of its
recycled wash water against the discharge limits established by the city;
      b.   Report the results of such tests in writing to the industrial waste
monitor of the wastewater department and send a copy to the department; and
      c.   Sign and certify the report as required by this chapter.
      d.   A permit holder shall immediately notify the superintendent when it
sells or otherwise disposes of a vehicle registered under this article.
      e.   A permit holder shall ensure that all of its employees engaged in
mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning are knowledgeable of the discharge
prohibitions to the municipal storm sewer system under this chapter, and shall
require all its employees to use best management practices when engaging in
mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning. For exterior cleaning, best management
practices shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (1)   Accumulations of oil and grease, which have not dried, shall be
precleaned with absorbent clay (kitty litter) or a similar material and
properly disposed of prior to washing.
         (2)   Storm sewer entrances, which will receive the wash water, shall
be screened to catch leaves and other debris. Wash water discharge shall comply
with this chapter.
         (3)   Wash water discharged to the municipal storm sewer system shall
first pass through an oil absorbent boom or pad to absorb hydrocarbons so that
no oil sheen is present on the discharge. Wash water discharge shall comply
with this chapter.
         (4)   Wash water which does not comply with this chapter shall be
discharged into the sanitary sewer. Discharge shall be at the job site when
possible. Wash water from recycle rigs which does not comply with this chapter
shall be disposed of in compliance with subsection C3i of this section. Grit
and sludge shall not be disposed of through the sanitary sewer.
      f.   A permit holder shall ensure that all of its vehicles registered
under its permit display the registration numbers and carry certificates as
required by this article, and shall not allow unregistered vehicles or vehicles
without certificates to engage in mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning.
      g.   A permit holder shall not discharge to the municipal storm sewer
system in violation of this chapter.
      h.   A permit holder shall not discharge wastewater to the sanitary sewer
in violation of this chapter or any other provision of this code.
      i.   A permit holder shall not discharge wastewater into the sanitary
sewer, either on a job site or off a job site, without the permission of the
owner/operator of the property upon which the sanitary sewer inlet is located.
The permit holder shall provide proof of such permission to the superintendent
upon demand.
      j.   Any person operating a vehicle transporting cosmetic cleaning wash
water or wastewater which is leaking or spilling from such vehicle is hereby
declared to have committed a violation of this chapter.
      k.   A permit holder shall not create or maintain a nuisance in violation
of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.440: PERMIT DENIAL AND REVOCATION:
A.   The superintendent may deny a permit, or after notice and hearing, revoke
a permit if:
   1.   The permit application contains a false or misleading statement of a
material fact;
   2.   If the permit holder engages in operations that do not consist solely
of cosmetic cleaning; or
   3.   If the permit holder or an employee of the permit holder has violated a
permit condition.
B.   An applicant whose permit is denied will be sent notification by the
superintendent in writing of the denial and the grounds therefor. Such notice
will be sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address
listed on the application.
C.   An applicant whose permit is denied may request a reconsideration no later
than the tenth calendar day after receipt of the notice of denial stating the
reasons and basis for the denial by filing the appeal with the superintendent.
D.   A permit may also be suspended or revoked under the procedures of this
chapter. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.450: LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE:
A.   No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge,
leach, dispose of or otherwise introduce or cause, allow or permit to be
introduced any of the following substances into the municipal storm sewer
system:
   1.   Garbage;
   2.   Rubbish;
   3.   Yard waste;
   4.   Sediment; or
   5.   Floatable materials. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
13.02.460: APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS:
All fees, damages and penalties collected under the provisions of this chapter,
following adjustment for the expenses incurred in making such collections,
shall be allocated and appropriated to stormwater quality for the
administration of its stormwater management program. (Ord. 1076 §1, 2009)
CHAPTER 13.04
SEWER SERVICE
SECTION:
13.04.010: Purpose; Definitions
13.04.020: Service Mandatory; Lien
13.04.030: Application For Sewer Service
13.04.040: Security Deposits
13.04.050: Guarantees For Entities
13.04.060: Sewer Service Fees And Charges
13.04.070: Exceptions To Fee Schedule
13.04.080: Sewer Tie-On Or Tap Into System; Fee
13.04.090: Billing And Payment Of Accounts
13.04.100: Billing And Collection
13.04.110: Interest, Attorney Fees And Costs
13.04.120: Sanitary Sewer Fund
13.04.130: Termination Of Service
13.04.140: Sewer Service To Leased Property
13.04.150: Applicability
13.04.010: PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS:
A.   Purpose: The following regulations, as adopted by the City of Warr Acres,
Oklahoma, are published for the information and guidance of all users of the
public sewer system of the City and are declared to be part of the contract for
services between the City and the owner of the premises where sewer service is
furnished.
B.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply throughout this chapter
and related rules and regulations:
   CITY: The City of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
   CUSTOMER: Any person or entity who is an owner, landlord or deed holder of
property who enters into a contractual agreement with the City to receive and
pay for sewer service provided or available to be provided by the City to a
premises. Customers may, but need not be, the direct consumers or recipients of
the services provided. Customers include indirect consumers and recipients and
owners who receive benefit or whose property is directly or indirectly
benefited or enhanced by the provision or the availability of sewer services.
   DISHONORED CHECK: A check or other negotiable instrument that has been
dishonored by a bank or other financial institution on the basis of
insufficient funds, account closed or for any reason which causes a check to be
returned unpaid to the City.
   ENTITY: Any business or other organization created by or pursuant to statute
or private agreement other than a natural person, including, but not limited
to, corporations, limited liability companies, trusts, and partnerships.
   OWNER: All persons and entities with an ownership interest in the property
or premises as recorded by the Oklahoma County Assessor.
   PERSON: Any individual eighteen (18) years or older or an emancipated minor.
   UTILITY ACCOUNT: An account established in accordance with this chapter for
the providing of sewer services to a person or entity. (Ord. 1013 §1, 2006)
13.04.020: SERVICE MANDATORY; LIEN:
A.   Sewer service is a service to the property. The sewer service charges
levied and assessed by ordinances of the City shall be payable for each lot,
parcel of land, building or other premises, whether occupied or vacant, within
or without the Warr Acres corporate limits, having a connection with the
sanitary sewer system of the City. By submitting an application and
establishing an account the customer consents to a contract for services which
includes the provisions of this chapter and into which the provisions of this
chapter are deemed incorporated by reference. Any charges for sewer service to
such premises which are not paid in full when due shall become a contractual
lien against the premises serviced by the connection with the City's sanitary
sewer system. The terms of the granting of the lien and the rights of the
parties shall be set forth in the application and utility service agreement
which shall be executed by the customer and shall be a binding contract between
the customer and the City. The granting of the lien shall be subject to all
applicable provisions of title 31 Oklahoma Statutes section 1(A) concerning
homestead and exemption rights of the customer. For rental properties, a
property owner may opt out of the mandatory lien provided they post a deposit
(separate from any deposit posted by their rentor) equal to the average of four
(4) months of sewer service (approximately the number of months service could
be provided before finally cut off). This deposit is subject to forfeiture upon
a final finding of delinquency at the property and termination of service
(provided, however, that the Council may waive any claim of the City to
forfeiture and any claim as to the property owner as part of the delinquency
process).
B.   All property within or outside the City shall be subject to the monthly
service charge for sewer service if such property has a connection to the
sanitary sewer system of the City, except when the owner can establish that to
the satisfaction of the Billing Clerk the water service to the property has
been terminated. The property shall thereafter not be subject to sewer charges
until water service is restored. At the time water service is restored, the
property shall once again be subject to sewer service charges if sewer service
has not been terminated, irrespective of whether the property is occupied or
vacant. If sewer service was terminated, then the property shall be subject to
sewer service charges upon reconnection of the property to the City's sewer
system. At the request of the property owner, or at the request of a resident
with the consent of the property owner, sewer service may be disconnected with
the requesting party being responsible for posting monies equal to the
estimated cost (as determined by the Director of Public Works) of parts and
labor to effect the disconnect. In the absence of a disconnect, the customer
shall be liable for a monthly sewer service charge at all times water service
is active to the property. The burden of notifying the City and proving the
absence of or termination of water service to property within the City, and/or
property served by the City, shall at all times be with the customer. Provided,
however, nothing in this chapter waives the right of the City to reevaluate the
determination that the property or premises in question receives water or has
water service available such that sewer service charges should be or should
have been assessed and the assessment of those sewer service charges. At any
time the City may request an inspection, documentation, and/or additional
information to verify, confirm, or reconfirm the termination of water service.
The failure of the customer to prove termination of water service may be deemed
a waiver of the absence of water service exception to the assessment of sewer
service charges.
C.   By directly or indirectly accepting sewer service or the benefit or
enhancement of sewer service or the availability of sewer service from the
City, the customer shall agree to pay for such service and agree such charges
shall be charged or imposed on the property and shall be a continuing lien on
the property, paramount and superior to all liens or other subsequent
obligations of the customer secured by the property, from the date the City's
lien is recorded with the Oklahoma County Clerk. (Ord. 1171, 2016)
13.04.030: APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE:
A.   Any person or entity who owns a premises or real property to which water
service is or can be delivered shall establish a sewer service account to pay
for sewer service to the premises, or the availability of sewer to the
premises. Any person or entity to which sewer service from the City is
available shall make application to the Office of the City Clerk or Utility
Billing Clerk. The application shall be signed by all persons or entities
having an ownership interest of record in the premises to be served. At the
discretion of the City Clerk or Utility Billing Clerk, the applicant for
services may be required to provide any or all of the following information:
   1.   The official address and legal description of the premises to be
served.
   2.   The name and address to be used for purposes of billing statements.
   3.   The location of all meters serving the applicant's premises.
   4.   The applicant's social security number or Federal tax ID number.
   5.   The service address where previous utility services were provided to
the applicant.
   6.   Picture identification from a government entity.
B.   The applicant shall submit to the Utility Billing Clerk such proof of
ownership of the property to benefit from the sewer service or other personal
and financial identification to the satisfaction of the Utility Billing Clerk.
C.   The application shall constitute a general waiver on the part of the
applicant of any claim for offset, damage or breach against the City resulting
from or occasioned by any defective plumbing or appliance installed or caused
to be installed by the owner, lessee or occupant at the premises described in
the application.
D.   In addition to the utility service agreement, the application shall also
constitute and be construed as a continuing offer on the part of the customer
to purchase and be responsible for the cost of sewer service from the City, and
provision of the sewer service or the availability of sewer service shall be
deemed acceptance of the offer. The applicant shall be the customer and shall
be responsible for payment of all sewer service charges until the customer's
utilities service agreement is mutually terminated and the responsibility for
the service has been officially transferred by the City to a new applicant
notwithstanding the transfer of ownership of the property or premises and the
ability of the City to jointly or severally charge and collect sewer service
charges from another person or entity. Acceptance of a sewer charge from one
person or entity not the current applicant or customer shall not waive the
right of the City to collect any other or additional sum due for sewer service
to said same property or premises from the person or entity officially listed
as the applicant or customer.
E.   Upon satisfactory completion of the application and satisfaction of all
other requirements for sewer service, the utility account shall be opened in
the name of the applicant, thereafter known as the customer, unless:
   1.   The applicant is a person or entity who owes the City on a sewer
services account for that premises or any other premises; or
   2.   The applicant is a person or entity who has failed to cure the breach
for which any garbage or sewer service has been terminated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter; or
   3.   Conditions exist at the premises for which water or sewer services
were, will be, or would be terminated; provided, however, no person or entity
shall be denied service because of an outstanding obligation of another person
or entity, except an entity which is a successor in interest to the obligor
entity or acquired the obligor entity.
The City reserves the right to deny service to anyone for any reason.
F.   If the application is accepted and a utility account is opened, the
customer, which shall include all persons or entities having an ownership
interest in the premises to be served, shall execute a utility services
agreement agreeing to be responsible for all charges for sewer service rendered
to the premises in a form and manner approved by the Utility Billing Clerk and
authorizes the attachment of a contractual lien on the property or premises for
any unpaid sewer service charges. The utility services agreement must be so
executed prior to sewer service being established.
G.   In the event an applicant is denied the right to establish sewer service,
the Utility Billing Clerk shall give the applicant written notice of the
reasons for the denial and the right of the applicant to request a hearing
before the Utility Billing Clerk at which time the reasons for the denial may
be contested. If the denial is not rescinded by the Utility Billing Clerk and
the utility account not established, the applicant may request a hearing before
the Mayor who shall make a final determination as whether or not to grant the
application, and in appropriate circumstances, require conditions for service
that will assure all fees and charges for service to the applicant's property
will be timely paid.
H.   In all cases, the owner of the premises to be benefited by sewer service
shall be the customer and responsible for all fees and charges for sewer
services rendered to the premises. All owners, whether buying or selling the
premises served by sewer service, shall notify the City of the transfer of the
ownership of the premises and that the sewer account is paid to the date of the
transfer of title. No customer shall be relieved from any obligation for the
payment of the account until the date that a new application is approved and an
account is established for a new customer. Each customer's obligation on the
sewer account for services after the date of transfer shall terminate only if
the successor in ownership establishes a utilities account which commences on
the date the prior customer's obligation terminates, and the City has been
notified in writing of the transfer of ownership.
I.   The owner of any property may assign the right to apply for such service
to any third party who will be residing at the property. Such assignment must
include the right of the applicant to bind the owner to any applicable terms.
Such assignment must explicitly carry with it either the agreement to allow the
City to file a contractual lien against the property for non-payment of fees
and charges, or a security deposit from the owner. (Ord. 1171, 2016)
13.04.040: SECURITY DEPOSITS:
All new residential and commercial accounts will be required to have a deposit
of a minimum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for residential and fifty dollars
($50.00) for commercial, on deposit with the City. Where a account holder has
been found delinquent by the City Council, the Utility Billing Clerk may
require the customer to make an additional security deposit in an amount to be
set by the Utility Billing Clerk for each and every account prior to sewer
service being initiated or during the term of the utility service agreement to
guarantee payment of all sewer charges and fees. The security deposit will be
forfeited to the City upon the completion of termination proceedings resulting
in a final finding of delinquency and termination of service. (Ord. 1171, 2016)
13.04.050: GUARANTEES FOR ENTITIES:
In cases where the customer is an entity, the utility account established in
the entity's name must be unconditionally guaranteed by the officers of the
entity, or in the case of a partnership, by all members of the partnership,
whether general or limited, and all members of a limited liability corporation.
In lieu of an unconditional guarantee, the City may accept a surety bond issued
by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma,
conditioned upon the payment in full of all charges and fees assessed for sewer
service rendered to the premises. The amount and form of the guarantee shall be
determined by the Billing Clerk as sufficient to protect the city from
potential loss of fees and charges for sewer service to be rendered to the
premises. (Ord. 1013 §1, 2006)
13.04.060: SEWER SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES:
For the purpose of providing funds for the operation, maintenance, repair, and
replacement of the sanitary sewer system of the city, there are fixed and
established charges for the use of such system levied and to be levied against
each respective customer thereof within and without the city, as follows:
A.   Residential Rates:
   1.   All customers who discharge a domestic sewer waste into the municipal
sewer system shall be assessed a sewer use charge as hereinafter provided.
   2.   The monthly fees or charges for sanitary sewer service for residences
shall be as follows:
      a.   For a single residence, two- to four-family residences or mobile
home parks with metered water service the base rate shall be computed as
follows:
         (1)   For customers within the city, a base fee of seven dollars
twenty two cents ($7.22) per residential unit with winter average of two
thousand nine hundred ninety nine (2,999) gallons or less. For customers within
the city, a base fee of nine dollars twenty cents ($9.20) per residential unit
with winter average of greater than two thousand nine hundred ninety nine
(2,999) gallons. Plus one dollar five cents ($1.05) per thousand gallons of
water consumption based on the "winter average" as herein defined;
         (2)   For customers outside the city a base fee of eight dollars
twenty two cents ($8.22) per residential unit with winter average of two
thousand nine hundred ninety nine (2,999) or less. For customers outside the
city a base fee of ten dollars twenty cents ($10.20) per residential unit with
winter average of greater than two thousand nine hundred ninety nine (2,999)
gallons. Plus one dollar twenty five cents ($1.25) per thousand gallons of
water consumption based on the "winter average" as herein defined.
      b.   For single residence, two- to four-family residences or mobile home
parks new customers with metered service, for which a winter average cannot,
regardless of cause, be determined, the rate shall be computed as follows:
         (1)   For customers within the city, a base fee of nine dollars twenty
cents ($9.20) per residential unit plus one dollar five cents ($1.05) per
thousand gallons of equivalent usage of five thousand (5,000) gallons or total
of fourteen dollars forty five cents ($14.45) per month;
         (2)   For customers outside the city a base fee of ten dollars twenty
cents ($10.20) per residential unit plus one dollar twenty five cents ($1.25)
equivalent usage of five thousand (5,000) gallons or total of sixteen dollars
forty five cents ($16.45) per month.
      c.   For a multiple dwelling residence (apartments), with metered water
service the base rate shall be computed as follows:
         (1)   For customers within the city, a base fee of nine dollars
seventy four cents ($9.74) per residential unit. Plus one dollar five cents
($1.05) per thousand gallons of water consumption based on the "winter average"
as herein defined;
         (2)   For customers outside the city a base fee of ten dollars seventy
four cents ($10.74) per residential unit. Plus one dollar twenty five cents
($1.25) per thousand gallons of water consumption based on the "winter average"
as herein defined.
   3.   The term "winter average" shall mean the average water usage for the
three (3) winter months of December, January and February last preceding the
computation.
   4.   Winter average water usage information should be reviewed annually in
March and the sewer charge adjusted, for those customers with metered water
usage in December, January, and February, in the May billing to reflect any
changes in sewer charges based on water usage in the three (3) winter months of
December, January and February last preceding the review. Winter average water
usage volumes will then be in effect for twelve (12) months, or until reviewed
the following March.
   5.   In the event there are valid factors for an adjustment of the sewer
rate for a residence, the rate may be adjusted by the city clerk based on
criteria set forth by resolution duly adopted by the city council but in no
event shall the charge for customers within the city total less than fourteen
dollars forty five cents ($14.45) per month, and in no event shall the charge
for customers outside the city total less than sixteen dollars forty five cents
($16.45) per month.
B.   Business Rates:
   1.   The monthly fee or charge for sanitary sewer service for businesses,
eleemosynary institutions, commercial businesses, or industry shall be computed
or assessed as follows:
      a.   For customers within the city, a base fee of ten dollars twenty
cents ($10.20) per each business, institution or industry plus one dollar
twenty five cents ($1.25) per thousand gallons of water usage during the last
preceding month;
      b.   For customers outside the city a base fee of eleven dollars twenty
cents ($11.20) per each business, institution, or industry plus one dollar
forty cents ($1.40) per thousand gallons of water usage during the last
preceding month;
      c.   In instances where water usage is not available for the last
preceding month, the charge shall be the base rate plus one dollar forty cents
($1.40) per thousand gallons of the winter average, as determined by the city
for such business, institution, commercial business, or industry.
   2.   In the event there are valid factors for an adjustment in the sewer
rate for a business, institution, or industry the charge may be adjusted by the
city clerk based on criteria set forth by resolution duly adopted by the city
council but in no event shall the rate be less than the prior month's amount.
C.   Conditions For Review:
   1.   The sewer use fees provided for in subsections A1 through A5 and B1 and
B2 of this section shall be reviewed at least biannually and revised
periodically to reflect actual operation and maintenance costs of the treatment
works so as to:
      a.   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance
costs among users;
      b.   Generate sufficient revenue for total operation and maintenance
costs;
      c.   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the
operation and maintenance costs for that class of users in the next year.
   2.   All costs for treatment of toxic pollutants shall be apportioned and
charged to the dischargers of such toxic pollutants.
   3.   Users of the sanitary sewer system shall be notified at least annually
of the wastewater treatment service portion of the utility billing.
   4.   Charges for extraneous flow (I/I) shall be made on the same basis as
operation and maintenance cost charges.
   5.   The user charge system set forth in subsections A1 through A5 and B1
and B2 of this section and the provisions of this section shall take precedence
over any terms, conditions of the utility service agreement, or contracts with
customers, applicants, and users which are inconsistent with the terms hereof.
   6.   The city shall prepare and maintain all records necessary to document
compliance with the provisions of this section.
D.   Customers Outside The City Limits: For all customers outside the city,
whether residential or business, an additional sanitary sewer system use and
maintenance fee of five dollars fifty cents ($5.50) per residential unit or
business customer shall be assessed. Said sanitary sewer system use and
maintenance fee shall be deposited in the city's sewer line maintenance fund to
cover the costs of building, replacing, maintaining, improving, and repairing
of the sanitary sewer system, including, but not limited to, repairing and
replacing sewer lines servicing customers outside the city.
E.   Customers Inside The City Limits: For all customers inside the city
limits, whether residential or business, an additional sanitary sewer system
use and maintenance fee of one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per residential unit
or business customer shall be assessed. The sanitary sewer system use and
maintenance fee shall be deposited in the city's sewer line maintenance fund to
cover the costs of building, replacing, maintaining, improving, and repairing
of the sanitary sewer system, including, but not limited to, repairing and
replacing sewer lines servicing customers within the City. (Ord. 1134, 2013:
Ord. 1030 §1, 2006: Ord. 1013 §1, 2006)
13.04.070: EXCEPTIONS TO FEE SCHEDULE:
In addition to the rate adjustment provided in this chapter, the Council may
grant exceptions to the fee schedule as applied to multiple residence apartment
complexes where the customer discloses one or more residential units as
uninhabitable. Such application may be made in conjunction with an application
for a garbage and refuse exemption 1  of this Code. In any event, the
procedure, rules, standards and regulations provided in this Code shall be
applied to application for exception under this section where no conflict is
created thereby. Nothing in this section shall require the Council to approve
either or both applications and each shall be considered on its own merits.
(Ord. 1013 §1, 2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8.08.151 of this Code.
13.04.080: SEWER TIE-ON OR TAP INTO SYSTEM; FEE:
There is hereby established and levied the following sewer tie-on or tap-in
fees inside the City limits and outside the City limits of Warr Acres as
follows:
A.   Inside The City Limits: No person or entity shall connect any house,
business, building or other establishment to the sanitary sewer system within
the City limits of the City without first paying to the City Treasurer the
sewer tie-on or tap-in fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each single-family
residence, business, or establishment; and for multiple-family residences, the
fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first unit, and twenty dollars
($20.00) for each additional unit, which fee shall be in addition to other
charges which may be levied by other ordinances of the City.
B.   Outside The City Limits: No person or entity shall connect any house,
business, building, or other establishment located outside the City limits of
the City, to the sanitary sewer system of the City without first paying to the
City Treasurer the sewer tie-on or tap-in fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each single- family residence, business, or other establishment; and for
multiple-family residences, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
the first unit, and forty dollars ($40.00) for each additional unit, which fee
shall be in addition to other charges which may be levied by other ordinances
of the City.
C.   Employee Presence Required: In addition to the foregoing subsections, no
person or entity shall connect any house, business, building or establishment
to the sewer system of the City, unless a City employee is present to observe
the tap-in or tie-in. Additionally, no person or entity shall connect any
house, business, building or establishment to the sanitary sewer system of the
City without also installing a backflow preventer device and/or an accessible
cleanout/overflow line adjacent to or on the sanitary sewer riser within the
utility easement. (Ord. 1013 §1, 2006)
13.04.090: BILLING AND PAYMENT OF ACCOUNTS:
The rates, fees, and charges provided in this chapter shall be monthly rates
and shall be made for a period of one month in arrears. Statements for each
sewer service account shall be mailed to the customer on a monthly basis. The
statement is due in full upon receipt and shall become delinquent unless paid
in full on or before the fifth day of the month following the date of billing.
Failure to make payment in full by the date of delinquency shall result in an
administrative fee (late charge) of ten percent (10%) being assessed on the
account. In addition, failure to pay by the delinquency date may also be
considered the basis for termination of service or initiation of collection
procedures as established by the City. All payments on account shall be in U.S.
currency, by check, money order, or an electronic funds transfer (EFT)
transaction. All checks and EFTs will be accepted subject to collection at the
bank. In the event a check or EFT is not honored by the bank and is returned
for any reason, the utility account credit previously made to the account will
be removed and the account will be charged an additional fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) as a return check fee. When a check or EFT payment is
dishonored by the bank, the Billing Clerk shall notify the payor either in
person or in writing of the action of the bank. Upon such notification, the
payor shall immediately redeem or make restitution of the check. Restitution or
redemption of a dishonored payment shall be in the form of cash, cashier's
check or money order only. Upon the dishonoring by the bank of any two (2)
payments, all future payments on the account must be in the form of cash,
cashier's check, or money order until the Billing Clerk determines that such
payments are no longer at risk of being dishonored. (Ord. 1171, 2016)
13.04.100: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
The Utility Billing Clerk of the City of Warr Acres shall be responsible for
the billing and collection of sanitary sewer charges, which shall be assessed,
levied and collected in conjunction with the administration of the charges for
sewer service supplied by the City. The same shall be subject to and governed
by the valid and applicable rules and regulations from time to time established
by the City with respect to the collection of sewer charges. The sanitary sewer
charges shall be a lien upon all real property served by the City sewer system.
Upon payment in full to the City of delinquent sanitary sewer charges and fees,
together with all other costs and fees authorized by this chapter that have
been secured by a lien filed with the Oklahoma County Clerk, the Billing Clerk
shall file with the Oklahoma County Clerk an appropriate release of the lien.
(Ord. 1171, 2016)
13.04.110: INTEREST, ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the utility service agreement, the customer agrees
that delinquent accounts shall accrue interest on the unpaid balance until paid
in full in an amount equal to the statutory rate of interest or the rate of
interest on judgments as established by the Supreme Court, whichever shall be
the greater. In addition, the City shall be entitled to recover a reasonable
attorney fee and costs incurred in the event collection efforts are required to
recover sums due on accounts. Interest, attorney fees and other costs may be
included in and secured by the lien filed against the property as provided
herein. (Ord. 1013 §1, 2006)
13.04.120: SANITARY SEWER FUND:
The funds received from the collection of the user charges or rates authorized
by this chapter shall be deposited monthly with the City Treasury and shall be
accounted for and be known as the Sanitary Sewer Fund. Appropriate accounting
procedures shall be established for separating the revenues received from each
component part of both the user charges and debt service charges and, when
appropriated by Council, monies from such fund shall be available for the
payment of the following expenses:
A.   Operation, maintenance and replacement costs for the sewage treatment
plant and collection system, which shall include the following applicable
General Government Fund expenses pertaining to the management of the sewage
works:
   1.   Engineering;
   2.   General administration of public service and safety;
   3.   Buildings, inspections, licenses and permits;
   4.   Operation and maintenance of the City building and public lands;
   5.   Vehicle insurance.
B.   Administrative costs for billing, collection and data processing.
C.   Industrial monitoring costs.
D.   Cost for treating extra strength sewage.
E.   Debt service costs for payment of the principal and/or interest on any
debt incurred for the construction of such treatment works or for the creation
of a Sinking Fund for the payment of such debt. (Ord. 1013 §1, 2006)
13.04.130: TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
A utility billing account for sewer shall be considered delinquent upon the
failure of any customer or user to pay the full amount owed, including any
service fees, interest, penalties, and/or required deposits, after thirty (30)
days from the date on which the bill is stated to be due. In addition to the
penalties provided for within this chapter, delinquent utility billing accounts
for sewer shall be processed in the following manner:
A.   Disconnection Of Sewer: After an account has become thirty (30) days
delinquent the City may, in addition to all other remedies available to the
City for collection on open accounts, initiate termination procedures to
terminate sewer service to the described premises by entering the described
premises, pursuant to the right of ingress and egress granted by the customer
to the City in the utility service agreement, with all personnel and equipment
necessary to accomplish the disconnection of the sewer service line to the main
sewer line belonging to the City. In addition to the notice provisions
contained herein, the City may serve notice to any appropriate State agency of
its intent to terminate utility services to the described property.
B.   Termination Procedures And Stay Of Termination Proceedings: Delinquent
accounts shall be subject to termination through the process established in
title 3,
chapter 3.07 of this Code. Because billing is made for a period of one month in
arrears, any account subject to termination proceedings shall be accelerated
such that, before termination proceedings are discontinued, the portion (pro-
rated by the number of days in the month as of the date the payment is received
divided by the number of total days in the month) of the current month's bill
(the month during which a payment is received) shall be due and owing before
the account is removed from termination proceedings (i.e., the customer, owners
or any resident must pay the back due amounts, any amounts due on the last
issued bill which may not have yet become delinquent, and the pro-rated amount
due for the month during which payment is made as of the date of the payment).
C.   Reconnection Of Sewer: All disconnections shall be conducted during normal
business hours. When a disconnection of the sewer service line is accomplished
by the City, the line shall not be reconnected except at the expense of the
customer or user. In addition, the customer or user shall reimburse the City of
the expense incurred by the City in disconnecting and reconnecting the service
line prior to reconnection. Similarly, any new customer shall bear the expense
of reconnecting the service line as a condition of establishing service.
D.   Collection Of Delinquent Payment: If a user or customer's sewer service is
terminated for nonpayment or delinquent payment, the City may attempt to
collect the balance due through collection services or legal processes. All
rights and remedies available to the City pursuant to State law, this chapter,
and the utility service agreement shall be cumulative, and election by the City
to terminate the account by disconnection shall not prevent the City from
exercising all other rights and remedies it may have regarding the collection
of charges and amounts due for past services. (Ord. 1180, 2018)
13.04.140: SEWER SERVICE TO LEASED PROPERTY:
No person or entity, being the owner or other person in charge or having
control of real property, shall knowingly cause or permit such real property to
be leased, rented or otherwise occupied for human habitation purposes without
first providing water and sewer service to such premises or property. Violation
of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
such person or entity shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00), plus court cost and fees. (Ord. 1013 §1, 2006)
13.04.150: APPLICABILITY:
From and after the effective date hereof, any accounts existing on the
effective date hereof which become delinquent two (2) times, terminated one
time, new accounts for sewer service, including existing accounts being
transferred to a different person or entity or to a different location, or any
other action resulting in a change in an account, shall require execution of a
utility service agreement and be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1171, 2016)
CHAPTER 13.06
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
SECTION:
13.06.010: Legislative Findings
13.06.020: Monthly Emergency Service Utility Service Charge
13.06.010: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, makes the following
findings in consideration and adoption of this chapter:
A.   The city of Warr Acres is financially unable to provide ambulance and
emergency medical services for its citizens, and as a result has contracted
with the emergency management services agency (EMSA) to provide such services
to the citizens of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
B.   The contract for such services has a monetary cost to the city of Warr
Acres to make these services available to its citizens which meets the need of
prompt, efficient, and professional emergency medical treatment and transport
as required by Warr Acres citizens. The provision of such service is a matter
affecting the public health and safety of the citizens of the city of Warr
Acres, and is hereby declared to be a public utility subject to a recurring
availability use charge.
C.   A monthly public safety and health utility service charge should be paid
by each utility unit customer in the city of Warr Acres to defray the cost of
making this vital service available. (Ord. 1032 §2, 2006)
13.06.020: MONTHLY EMERGENCY SERVICE UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE:
A.   A monthly utility service charge or fee is levied on each utility unit
within the corporate limits of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, for providing
ambulance service for the citizens of the city, payable in advance. The amount
of this fee may be amended from time to time by resolution adopted by the city
council of the city of Warr Acres.
B.   The monthly public safety utility service fee shall be charged on the same
classification as water and sewer services. The service charge or fee shall be
as follows:
   1.   Single-family residential shall be two dollars twenty five cents
($2.25) per month per occupancy.
   2.   Multi-family residential shall be two dollars twenty five cents ($2.25)
per month per unit.
   3.   Nursing homes and assisted living centers shall be two dollars twenty
five cents ($2.25) per month per bed.
   4.   Businesses shall be one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per occupancy. (No
total care coverage.)
C.   All proceeds from the monthly emergency ambulance fee established shall be
deposited in a fund maintained exclusively to apply to charges made to or
incurred by the city in providing emergency medical services to the residents
of the city. (Ord. 1074 §1, 2009)
CHAPTER 13.08
WASTES PROHIBITED IN SEWERS
SECTION:
13.08.010: Prohibited Waters And Wastes
13.08.020: Harmful Wastes
13.08.025: Restrictions On Wastewater Strength
13.08.030: Handling Of Prohibited Or Harmful Wastes
13.08.040: Industrial Wastes Connections; Permit
13.08.050: Industrial Wastes Connections; User's Responsibilities
13.08.060: Nonconforming Sewer Connections
13.08.070: Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors
13.08.080: Control Manholes For Industrial Wastes Sewers
13.08.090: Waste Measurement, Tests And Analyses, Standards
13.08.100: Acceptance Of Extra Strength Industrial Wastes By Special Agreement
13.08.110: Injury To Sewers Or Sewage Works
13.08.120: Right Of Entry For Inspection
13.08.121: Private Meters And Adjustments For Water And Sewer Waste Disposal
13.08.130: Notice Of Violation
13.08.140: Penalty
13.08.150: Enforcement
13.08.010: PROHIBITED WATERS AND WASTES:
A.   It is unlawful and an offense for any person to connect or cause to be
connected the downspout or conduits draining storm water or rainwater from the
roofs, premises or other places or buildings, or uncontaminated cooling water
or unpolluted industrial process waters with any of the lateral or main
sanitary sewers of the city, or to in any manner conduct or cause to be
conducted any uncontaminated cooling or unpolluted industrial process water,
storm water, surface or subsurface water or rainwater whatsoever into such
sanitary sewers.
B.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance, or to create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but
not limited to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) as
cyanogen in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;
   3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or greater than 10.5 or
having any other chemical or corrosive property which are hazardous or capable
of causing damage to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
   4.   Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of sizes (will no pass
through a 1/4 inch screen) capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or
other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, storm sewers
or natural outlets, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, rubber,
unground garbage, animal grease or oil, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, meat
fleshings, entrails, bones, hooves, toenails, bristles, horns, chicken feet or
heads, yeast, spent grain, hops, whey, whole or separated milk, paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord.
414 §1, 1976)
13.08.020: HARMFUL WASTES:
A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of
the city engineer, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream,
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city engineer will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors.
B.   The prohibited substances are:
   1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) or sixty five degrees centigrade (65°C);
   2.   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l), or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0 and
65 degrees centigrade);
   3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city
engineer;
   4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
   5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage as measured at the points of discharge of the city sewers into
the outfall lines transporting sewage to the sewage treatment plant exceeds the
limits established by the city engineer for such materials;
   6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste producing or
odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city engineer as necessary, after treatment of composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
   7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration
as may exceed the limits established by the city engineer in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
   8.   Materials which exert or cause:
      a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but lot limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate),
      b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions),
      c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements (such
as, but not limited to, whey, whole or separated milk, yeast, whole blood,
etc.) in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works,
      d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs";
   9.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 414 §2, 1976)
13.08.025: RESTRICTIONS ON WASTEWATER STRENGTH:
No person or user shall discharge wastewater, which exceeds the following set
of standards (table A, "Local Discharge Restrictions", of this section) unless
an exception is permitted as provided in this chapter. Dilution of any
wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying these requirements shall be
considered in violation of this section.
 
Table A
Local Discharge Restrictions
Pollutant Daily Maximum Milligrams Per Liter
Arsenic (total)       0.424
Cadmium (total)       0.208
Chromium (total)      2.494
Copper (total)        0.472
Cyanide (total)       0.304
Lead (total)          0.319
Mercury (total)       0.039
Molybdenum (total)    0.223
Nickel (total)        3.157
Phenols (total)       60.980
Selenium (total)      0.580
Silver (total)        3.931
Thallium (total)      0.168
Zinc (total)          1.060
 
(Ord. 914 §1, 2000)
13.08.030: HANDLING OF PROHIBITED OR HARMFUL WASTES:
A.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in sections
13.08.010 and
13.08.020 of this chapter, and which in the judgment of the city engineer may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the city engineer may:
   1.   Reject the wastes;
   2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to public
sewers;
   3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
   4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
B.   If the city engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to his review and approval, and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances and laws. (Ord. 414 §3, 1976)
13.08.040: INDUSTRIAL WASTES CONNECTIONS; PERMIT:
Any person applying to the city engineer for a permit to make any connection
for industrial wastes shall furnish the following information:
A.   A plat of the property showing accurately all existing sewers and storm
drains;
B.   Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed under
the permit;
C.   A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced
or expected to be produced at the property, including a description of the
character of each waste, the daily volume and maximum rates of discharge, and
representative analyses;
D.   The name and address of the firm who will perform the work covered by the
permit. (Ord. 414 §4, 1976)
13.08.050: INDUSTRIAL WASTES CONNECTIONS; USER'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
The grantees of industrial waste connections shall cooperate at all times with
the city engineer in the inspecting, sampling and study of the industrial
wastes and any facilities provided for pretreatment. The user shall also
furnish any additional information relating to the installation or use of the
industrial sewer as may be requested by the city engineer and shall operate and
maintain any waste pretreatment facilities as may be required as a condition of
the acceptance into the public sewer of the industrial wastes involved, in an
efficient manner at all times and at no expense to the city. The user shall
notify the city engineer immediately in the event of any accident or other
occurrence that occasions discharge to the public sewers of any wastes or
process waters not covered by agreement and permit. (Ord. 414 §5, 1976)
13.08.060: NONCONFORMING SEWER CONNECTIONS:
The city engineer shall cause to be served on the owner and/or occupant of any
buildings or establishments with any sewer connections which do not conform to
the provisions of this chapter at the time of the passage of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, a notice in writing stating that the sewer
connections must be made as required, giving thirty (30) days' time in which to
make the proper connection. If, after thirty (30) days from the day of the
service of the notice, the proper connection has not been made, it is unlawful
and an offense for any person, firm, association or corporation to maintain or
use any said sewer connection not conforming to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 414 §6, 1976)
13.08.070: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
city engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the city engineer and shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be constructed under the supervision of the city inspector and shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at
all times. (Ord. 414 §7, 1976)
13.08.080: CONTROL MANHOLES FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTES SEWERS:
Where required by the city engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city
engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall
be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 414
§8, 1976)
13.08.090: WASTE MEASUREMENT, TESTS AND ANALYSES, STANDARDS:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Waste Water", published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected. (Ord. 414 §9, 1976)
13.08.100: ACCEPTANCE OF EXTRA STRENGTH INDUSTRIAL WASTES BY SPECIAL AGREEMENT:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(Ord. 414 §10, 1976)
13.08.110: INJURY TO SEWERS OR SEWAGE WORKS:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewers or sewage works. (Ord. 414 §11, 1976)
13.08.120: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
The city engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials, shall be permitted to enter all properties at reasonable
times for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 414 §12, 1976)
13.08.121: PRIVATE METERS AND ADJUSTMENTS FOR WATER AND SEWER WASTE DISPOSAL:
A.   The city is hereby authorized to permit customers to connect sanitary
sewer meters to their water system for the purpose of measuring sewage and/or
flow of potable water. The city shall prescribe the manner, type and location
of such meters. A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be established for
reading such additional or private meters and administrating these customer
accounts.
B.   When the public water supply is used exclusively, the water consumption
during the previous month, as determined from the meter records received by the
city, shall be the valid basis for computing a sewage flow, with reference to
industrial users, unless actual sewage flow is measured by a recording meter of
a type to be approved by the city. The owner shall maintain such devices in
proper condition to accurately measure such flow. Upon failure to do so, the
water consumption shall be the basis for charges.
C.   In cases where all or part of the water consumed is obtained from private
supplies, well, etc., such person shall provide and maintain at all times
suitable metering devices approved by the city, in connection with all sources
of private water unless the control manhole provided for in the preceding
section shall be equipped with an approved volume measuring device. The volume
of private water consumed during the previous month, together with the
consumption of public water as determined from the records of the city, shall
be the basis for computing the sewage volume, or the owner may install, at his
expense, an approved metering device to accurately measure sewage flow as
before mentioned.
D.   When water is contained in a product, or is evaporated, or is discharged
as unpolluted waste in an uncontaminated condition to surface drainage, an
application may be made for a reduction in the volume of waste discharge to the
public sewer, provided, that supporting data satisfactory to the city are
furnished. This data shall include a flow diagram, destination of the water
supply or waste and shall be supported by submetering data of a type
satisfactory to the city installed on such process piping at the expense of the
private owner. (Ord. 953 §1, 2001)
13.08.130: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to being served with a citation for the offense by the city and to appear on
the matter in the municipal court, whereupon being found guilty of said
offense, said person shall be subject to fine and penalty as prescribed in
section
13.08.140 of this chapter. Any person who is served by the city with written
notice stating the nature of the violation must immediately, or within the
earliest reasonable practicable time after notice thereof, as deemed in the
sole discretion of the city, and permanently cease all violations or be subject
to being charged with and prosecuted for said violations by the city in the
municipal court, with each day for which any such violation continues being
deemed a separate offense and being subject, upon conviction thereof, to
penalty as such. (Ord. 657 §9, 1987)
13.08.140: PENALTY:
Any person who commits any of the violations specified in this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, be guilty of an offense and
shall be subject to paying a fine of not less than thirty five dollars ($35.00)
nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus court costs, for each offense
said person is convicted of. (Ord. 657 §9, 1987)
13.08.150: ENFORCEMENT:
The city engineer, his duly authorized representatives, and the director of the
city-county health department are vested with full authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 414 §15, 1976)
CHAPTER 13.10
NONFRANCHISED PUBLIC UTILITIES
SECTION:
13.10.010: Purpose
13.10.020: Definitions
13.10.030: Application Of Provisions
13.10.040: Repair, Maintenance And Quality
13.10.050: Delinquent Utilities; Permit For Temporary Access And Use
13.10.060: Construction
13.10.010: PURPOSE:
It is the obligation of the city to assure the public, and in particular the
inhabitants of the city, that public utility services supplied within the city
are supplied on a consistent and equal basis, and that such utilities shall
have such access as shall be necessary to protect public health, safety,
welfare and property. (Ord. 587 §1, 1984)
13.10.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following terms are
defined:
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any entity, whether person, firm, corporation, partnership,
trust, public trust, municipality, or any other entity, furnishing power, cable
television, telephone, sewer services, light, heat, gas, electricity or water
for residential or commercial use within the city of Warr Acres, and which
uses, in whole or part, the streets, alleys, easements, public grounds or other
rights of way within this city.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSIONER: The mayor of Warr Acres.
SERVICES: The furnishing of power, cable television, telephone, sewer services,
light, heat, gas, electricity or water. (Ord. 587 §1, 1984)
13.10.030: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities within the city
which are operating without a franchise agreement granted by voters of the city
pursuant to the constitution and the statutes of the state, and pursuant to the
ordinances of this city. Those operating with a franchise agreement shall be
governed by the terms of such agreement, which shall control over any conflict
with the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 587 §1, 1984)
13.10.040: REPAIR, MAINTENANCE AND QUALITY:
Any and all utilities regulated by this chapter shall provide reasonable and
prompt repair and maintenance to and upon the equipment lines, installations
and other plant equipment and facilities which it uses, directly or indirectly,
to provide utility services. It shall have and maintain such equipment and
lines in good repair at all times, in full compliance with the laws, rules and
regulations of any regulating body of competent jurisdiction, whether federal,
state or local. It shall maintain a quality of services at all times, in full
compliance with the laws, rules and regulations of any regulating body of
competent jurisdiction, whether federal, state or local. Such utility shall, at
all times, use every reasonable precaution to ensure the safety, welfare and
convenience of all inhabitants within the city. The utility shall protect all
property within the city, real and personal, public and private, from any
damage due to defects or deficiencies in its lines, installations, plant,
equipment or other facilities. (Ord. 587 §1, 1984)
13.10.050: DELINQUENT UTILITIES; PERMIT FOR TEMPORARY ACCESS AND USE:
A.   No utility operating in Warr Acres may enter (or cause any person to
enter) onto any public easement, right of way, or property of this city, for
any purpose, unless that utility is current in all its payments to Warr Acres
of all amounts of tax due under sections
3.08.010 through
3.08.080, inclusive, of this code. If a utility has not provided all reports
and documents necessary for a determination of all amounts of tax due, or if it
has not allowed an inspection and audit of its books for a determination of all
amounts of tax due, the utility shall be considered as not current in its
payment of tax.
B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, and notwithstanding any other portion of
this code, the mayor, as public utility commissioner, upon request of any
utility, request of any interested person, or on his own initiative, may issue
a permit as herein described, which may permit such entry and access, under the
terms and conditions of that permit:
   1.   The permit may authorize a specified utility to enter onto public
easements, rights of way, and city property to the extent necessary:
      a.   To make connection or reconnection of services within Warr Acres;
      b.   To conduct maintenance of their facilities within Warr Acres; and/or
      c.   To repair their facilities within Warr Acres.
   2.   The mayor may issue such a permit should he deem it necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare of persons within Warr Acres, and/or for the
protection of property within Warr Acres. However, a permit shall not be issued
solely to protect the property of the delinquent utility itself.
   3.   Such a permit must be in writing, and must specifically describe the
particular place or places included in the permit. No single permit may be for
a period of longer than sixty (60) days, although a permit may be renewed. The
permit must state its beginning and ending dates. (Ord. 587 §1, 1984)
13.10.060: CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this chapter, nor any act or proceeding hereunder, nor any permit
granted hereunder, shall be construed to constitute the granting of a franchise
to any public utility. Only if and when a franchise shall be duly authorized by
the voters of Warr Acres, as provided by the constitution and the laws of the
state, and by the charter and ordinances of Warr Acres, shall any utility be
deemed to have a franchise within Warr Acres. (Ord. 587 §1, 1984)
CHAPTER 13.12
REMOVAL OF PUBLIC UTILITY PROPERTY
SECTION:
13.12.010: Generally
13.12.020: Notice To Owner Or Company
13.12.030: City Removal; Generally
13.12.040: Failure To Pay Costs And Expenses
13.12.050: Costs Constitute Lien
13.12.010: GENERALLY:
In case it is necessary to change or move any property of any public utility in
the performance of or carrying on any public work by the city, its agents or
servants, or any person, firm or corporation contracting with the city to
perform any public work, such public utility owner or company will, upon proper
application by the city engineer or public utility commissioner, change or move
such property within the specified time as is provided in this chapter. The
city, its agents or servants, or persons, firms or corporations contracting
with the city shall not interfere with such property until ordered to do so by
the engineer or utility commissioner. (Prior code §15-16)
13.12.020: NOTICE TO OWNER OR COMPANY:
When necessary to move or change the property of any owner or company of any
public utility, the city, its agents or servants, or any firm, person or
corporation contracting with the city shall give written notice to the engineer
or public utility commissioner, who shall immediately notify the public utility
owner or company of such notice to move or change the property of the utility
owner or company, and the utility owner or company shall move or make such
change necessary within ten (10) days thereafter. (Prior code §15-17)
13.12.030: CITY REMOVAL; GENERALLY:
Should the public utility owner or company fail or refuse to remove or change
the property within the time specified by the request and/or notice provided
for by section
13.12.020 of this chapter, the city, its agents or servants, and/or any person,
firm or corporation contracting with the city shall remove or change or cause
the property to be removed or changed without further notice to the public
utility owner or company, and all cost or expense incurred or expended in the
moving or changing of the utility property, and all damages caused or incurred
by said failure or refusal shall be charged against the utility owner or
company, and the utility owner or company shall be liable for such costs or
damages thus incurred, and the utility owner or company shall be liable to the
city, its agents or servants, and/or persons, firms or corporations contracting
with the city for all costs, expenses and/or damages incurred or suffered by
them. (Prior code §15-18)
13.12.040: FAILURE TO PAY COSTS AND EXPENSES:
Failure or refusal to pay the cost or expense incurred and/or the damages
suffered resulting from the failure, refusal or delay in removing or changing
of the public utility property when requested as provided in this chapter and
within the specified time shall be regarded as a trespass and the public
utility owner or company may be ousted from the city, and, in addition thereto,
an action may be maintained against such utility owner or company for the
amount of the cost or expense incurred or expended and/or the damages suffered
that may result from such failure, refusal or delay in removing or changing
such public utility property when requested as provided in this chapter and in
the time specified, including all expense of collection, together with
reasonable attorney fees. (Prior code §15-19)
13.12.050: COSTS CONSTITUTE LIEN:
The cost, expense or damage incurred or resulting from the failure, refusal or
delay in moving or changing such utility property shall constitute a first and
prior lien on all of the assets located within the city limits of any public
utility owner or company. (Prior code §15-20)
CHAPTER 13.20
FRANCHISES AND LEASES
SECTION:
13.20.010: Utility Franchise; Generally
13.20.020: Oklahoma County Utility Services Authority Lease
13.20.040: Oklahoma Gas And Electric Company Franchise
13.20.050: Multimedia Cablevision Franchise
13.20.010: UTILITY FRANCHISE; GENERALLY:
Ordinance 135, passed and approved by the mayor and councilmen on January 5,
1960, grants, subject to approval of the qualified electors of the city voting
at an election to be held for such purpose, to the trustees of the Oklahoma
County utility services authority, their successors and assigns, for a period
of twenty five (25) years from and after the date of acceptance thereof by said
trustees, in the manner and time specified therein, a franchise for the use of
the streets, alleys and other public grounds and ways within the city for the
furnishing of such utility services, in accordance with the constitution and
statutes of the state, and also directs the calling of a special election for
the purpose of submitting to the qualified electors residing within the city
for their approval or disapproval. (Prior code §20-1)
13.20.020: OKLAHOMA COUNTY UTILITY SERVICES AUTHORITY LEASE:
A.   There has been presented to the city council an instrument of lease,
providing for the ratification of a certain lease and amendment to lease, both
dated May 1, 1961, between the city and the trustees of the Oklahoma County
utility services authority, and further providing for the substitution of the
terms of the new instrument for those of the aforesaid instruments effective
from the date of passage of the ordinance codified in this section to be
amended regarding ownership; and it is deemed for the best interest of the city
that the new instrument of lease be executed and delivered.
B.   All of the terms and provisions of the aforesaid instrument of lease
between the city and the trustees of the Oklahoma County utility services
authority, dated on the date of the passage of the ordinances codified in this
section, are approved; and the mayor is authorized and directed to execute said
instrument of lease and to deliver the same to the trustees of the Oklahoma
County utility services authority, all for and on behalf of the city. A fully
executed duplicate of said instrument is directed to be filed with the city
clerk. (Prior code §20-2; prior code appx. III)
13.20.040: OKLAHOMA GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY FRANCHISE:
Ordinance 34, which grants a franchise to the Oklahoma Gas and Electric
Company, was passed and approved on January 15, 1952, and filed with the city
clerk. (Prior code appx. II)
13.20.050: MULTIMEDIA CABLEVISION FRANCHISE:
Ordinance 762, which grants a franchise to Multimedia Cablevision, was passed
and approved on March 7, 1995, and filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 762, 1995)
CHAPTER 13.24
BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
Article A. General Provisions
13.24.010: Short Title
13.24.020: Definitions
13.24.030: Selection Of Grantee
13.24.040: Election And Costs
13.24.050: Term Of Nonexclusive Franchise
13.24.060: Execution Of Franchise Agreement
13.24.070: Nature Of Nonexclusive Franchise And Installation Requirements
13.24.080: Territorial Area Involved
13.24.090: Compliance With Applicable Laws And Ordinances
13.24.100: Defense On Behalf Of Grantor; Insurance
Article B. The System
13.24.110: Channel Capabilities And Number Of Trunk Cables
13.24.120: Signal Quality Requirements
13.24.130: Compliance With FCC Standards
13.24.140: Erection, Removal And Common Use Of Poles
13.24.150: Operations And Maintenance Of System
13.24.160: Removal Of Facilities Upon Request
13.24.170: Rates And Charges
13.24.180: Service To Schools, Governments And Institutions
13.24.190: Subscriber Refunds On Termination Of Service
13.24.200: Carriage Of Broadcast Video Signals
13.24.210: Carriage On Nonbroadcast Video Channels
13.24.220: Program Alteration
13.24.230: Emergency Use Of Facilities
Article C. Rules Governing Grantee And Assigns
13.24.240: Other Business Activities
13.24.250: Safety Requirements
13.24.260: Amendment Powers
13.24.270: Pole Agreements; Regulations
13.24.280: Preferential Or Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
13.24.290: Transactions Affecting Ownership Of Facilities
13.24.300: Change Or Control Of Grantee
13.24.310: City Rights In Nonexclusive Franchise
13.24.320: Maps, Plats And Reports
13.24.330: Payment To The City
13.24.340: Forfeiture Of Nonexclusive Franchise
13.24.350: Transfer Or Assignment
13.24.360: Further Agreement By Grantee
13.24.370: Protection Of Privacy
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
13.24.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WARR ACRES BROADBAND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK ORDINANCE. (Ord. 761 §1, 1995)
13.24.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise defined by
federal law:
ATTORNEY: The city attorney of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (BTN): All of the component, physical,
operational and programming elements of any network of cable, optical,
electrical or electronic equipment, designed, constructed, wired or used for
the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and transmitting by coaxial
cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means audio and/or audio/visual
electrical impulses of television, radio and other intelligences either analog
or digital, including cable television for sale or by use by the inhabitants
and businesses of the city, including without limitation, antenna, cable,
fiber, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, conductors, converters, equipment and
facilities.
CITY: The city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The mayor or his/her designated representative of the city
of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
CONVERTER: A device used to convert non-VHF television signals into standard
VHF channels.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma.
FCC: The federal communications commission, or its successor agency.
GRANTEE: The person selected by the city council to hold a nonexclusive
franchise pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter together with
any person who may succeed "grantees" pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
PERMANENT PAVEMENT: Any pavement which, when installed, meets the then existing
pavement standards of the city of Warr Acres. In cases of conflict as to what
constitutes permanent pavement, the street superintendent's opinion shall
prevail.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface, airspace above the surface and the area below the
surface of any public street, sidewalk, alley, other public right of way or
public places, and public or private utility easements dedicated for compatible
use.
STREET SUPERINTENDENT: The street superintendent of the city of Warr Acres,
Oklahoma.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person whose premises or business is physically wired to
receive any transmission from the BTN and who pays a fee to receive a service
via the BTN.
SYSTEM: The broadband telecommunications network. (Ord. 761 §2, 1995)
13.24.030: SELECTION OF GRANTEE:
The selection of a grantee shall be determined by the council in accordance
with the following criteria:
A.   Installation Plan: The council shall find that grantee's installation and/
or rebuild plans provide flexibility needed to adjust to new developments,
maintenance practices, and services that would be available to subscribers and
to the city immediately and in the future.
B.   Financial Soundness And Capability: The evidence of grantee's financial
ability to complete the entire system within a minimum of two (2) years of the
date the franchise agreement is executed.
C.   Demonstrated Experience In Operating A BTN System Under City Franchise:
Evidence of grantee's experience in operating a BTN and ability of the grantee
to furnish sufficient and dependable service to public and private users shall
be determined.
D.   Character, Legal, Technical And Other Qualifications: The evidence of
character, legal, technical and other qualifications of grantee required by
state and local law to construct a BTN in the city and to extend the same as
the state of the art progresses shall be determined.
E.   Renewals: Renewals for any existing grantee shall be governed by
applicable federal law. (Ord. 761 §3, 1995)
13.24.040: ELECTION AND COSTS:
In order for the nonexclusive franchise authorized by this chapter to become
effective, an election must be held and a majority of those voting must vote in
favor of the granting of such franchise. In the event a special election is
needed, the entire cost of the election, together with all printing and
publishing costs relating thereto, shall be paid for by applicant, regardless
of whether or not the applicant is granted a franchise at said election. If the
election is held at a scheduled general election, the applicant shall pay any
additional costs which may be incurred by reason of the addition of the
franchise question to the ballot. Such costs shall be paid regardless of
whether or not the applicant is granted a nonexclusive franchise at said
election. (Ord. 761 §4, 1995)
13.24.050: TERM OF NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
The nonexclusive franchise and the rights, privileges and authority thereby
granted shall take effect and be in full force from and after final passage
thereof by the qualified electors at a special or general election thereof and
shall continue in force and effect for a term of fifteen (15) years from said
election or, in the case of a franchise renewal, from the end of the existing
term. Any such franchise may be subject to formal review at the end of the
fifth and tenth year of the franchise. Should grantee be found upon review to
be in noncompliance with the material provisions of the franchise, grantee will
be given a period of six (6) months to correct those areas of noncompliance.
(Ord. 761 §5, 1995)
13.24.060: EXECUTION OF FRANCHISE AGREEMENT:
Within thirty (30) days after the date of passage by the qualified electors of
the ordinance granting a nonexclusive franchise pursuant to the terms of this
chapter, the grantee shall execute a franchise agreement whereby the grantee
shall agree to comply with and abide by the provisions, terms and conditions of
both this chapter and any proposals submitted by the grantee to the city. (Ord.
761 §6, 1995)
13.24.070: NATURE OF NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AND INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS:
A.   There is granted by the city to the grantee the right and privilege to
construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over
and under the streets, alleys, easements, public ways and public places now
laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in
the city, poles, wires, fiber, cables and underground conduits, manholes, and
other conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in
the city of a BTN.
B.   The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, easements, public ways
and places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive and the
city reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys,
easements, public ways and places, to any person at any time, on the same terms
and conditions, during the term of this nonexclusive franchise.
C.   Grantee will provide service to all residents within the city limits with
the exception of where residents reside in a remote or relatively inaccessible
area or in annexed areas already served by another BTN. The grantee will build
to these remote and inaccessible areas and extend service inside the city
limits on the following schedule. For every one-fourth (1/4) mile of cable
plant required to serve a particular section of the city, ten (10) or more
customers must have placed orders for service. (Ord. 761 §7, 1995)
13.24.080: TERRITORIAL AREA INVOLVED:
This nonexclusive franchise relates to the present territorial limits of and
within the city and to any area henceforth added thereto during the terms of
this nonexclusive franchise. (Ord. 761 §8, 1995)
13.24.090: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES:
A.   The nonexclusive franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all
applicable provisions of the laws of the United States, and the state of
Oklahoma and city ordinances, and any amendments thereto. In the event of any
conflict or inconsistency between the terms of this franchise or any state or
local law and federal law, federal law shall govern.
B.   The grantee shall, at all times during the life of this nonexclusive
franchise, be subject to all lawful powers of the state of Oklahoma and the
city and to such reasonable regulation of general applicability as the state
and city shall hereafter provide.
C.   The grantee shall conform to all zoning and platting requirements of the
city prior to the commencement of any and all construction work.
D.   Plans for changes to the system including overhead cables, underground
cables, and headend tower shall be in accordance with the national electrical
safety code and the national electric code or any other code required for that
particular application. Any tower constructed for use in the grantee's system
shall comply with the standards contained in "Structural Standards For Steel
Antenna Towers And Antenna Supporting Structures, EIA Standards RS-222A", as
published by the engineering department of the Electronic Industries
Association, 2201 I Street NW, Washington, D.C., 20006.
E.   The grantee shall obtain building permits for all buildings constructed,
pay all building permit fees, tap charge fees, and all other fees as required
by the ordinances of the city and at the rates that are in full force and
effect at the time the building permits are applied for.
F.   Any and all pavement cuts of permanent or nonpermanent pavement, shall be
reasonably approved by the street superintendent and shall be shown on the
plans submitted to the street superintendent prior to the commencement of
construction. All pavement cuts shall be restored to the reasonable
satisfaction of the street superintendent. (Ord. 761 §9, 1995)
13.24.100: DEFENSE ON BEHALF OF GRANTOR; INSURANCE:
A.   Grantee shall, at the sole risk and expense of grantee, upon reasonable
notice and demand of the grantor, made by and through the grantor's city
attorney, without cost to the city, appear in and defend any and all suits,
actions or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial,
administrative, legislative or otherwise, brought or instituted by third
parties or duly constituted authorities, against or affecting the grantor, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, and arising out of or
pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of the franchise, or the granting
thereof by the city unless claimed to have been caused by the negligence of the
grantor, its agents or employees.
B.   Grantee shall maintain throughout the term of this nonexclusive franchise
liability insurance insuring the city and the grantee and their officers,
private subcontractors, agents and employees, whether elected or appointed,
against any and all claims, injury or damage to person or property, both real
and personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of
any aspect of the BTN. The amount of such insurance shall not be less than the
amount required by 5105 section 151 et seq., known as the governmental tort
claims act, and as amended. The grantor shall be named as an additional party
insured on all additional policies.
C.   Workers' compensation insurance shall be provided by grantee as required
by the laws of the state of Oklahoma, as amended.
D.   All said insurance coverage shall provide a ten (10) day notice to the
city clerk in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage
afforded in said policies prior to the date said material alteration or
cancellation shall become effective. In the event the grantee fails to maintain
any insurance as required herein, the city may, at its option, obtain and keep
such insurance in full force and effect and the grantee shall reimburse the
city for such insurance costs.
E.   The grantee shall, concurrently with its execution of the franchise
agreement, maintain, for the period hereinafter prescribed, a faithful
performance bond, running to the city, with good and sufficient surety,
approved by the council, in the penal sum of seven hundred thirty four thousand
five hundred dollars ($734,500.00), conditioned that the grantee shall well and
truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of this nonexclusive
franchise and that, in case of any breach of condition or terms of this chapter
or the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and
sureties thereof by the city for all damages proximately resulting from the
failure of the grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any
provisions of this nonexclusive franchise. Such faithful performance bond,
running to the city, shall be maintained by the grantee, commencing with the
execution of the franchise agreement by the grantee, and be maintained for a
period of one year, subsequent to the completion of the rebuild.
F.   Copies of all policies required hereunder shall be furnished to and filed
with the city clerk, concurrently with the acceptance of the franchise grant or
the expiration of prior policies, as the case may be. (Ord. 761 §10, 1995)
ARTICLE B.  THE SYSTEM
13.24.110: CHANNEL CAPABILITIES AND NUMBER OF TRUNK CABLES:
The grantee's system shall be capable of both one-way and two-way transmission
(in compliance with FCC return digital response requirements) and shall consist
of a 750 Mhz fiber to feeder BTN delivering, 110, 6 Mhz channels. (Ord. 761
§11, 1995)
13.24.120: SIGNAL QUALITY REQUIREMENTS:
The grantee shall:
A.   Comply with FCC rules regarding signal quality;
B.   Limit failures in the system to a minimum by locating and beginning to
correct malfunctions no longer than twenty four (24) hours after notice,
exclusive of service interruptions occasioned by weather conditions or other
conditions beyond grantee's control which result in damage to or impairment of
system receiving, originating or distribution facilities;
C.   Franchisee shall make convertors available to subscribers, which will
eliminate direct television off air pick up, in particular, ghosting caused by
strength and reception of local broadcast signals, at no charge to subscribers;
provided, franchisee shall have the right to charge a monthly fee for the use
of any other convertor specifically requested by a subscriber which also is
used for the decryption of scrambled cable signal(s), whether or not any such
subscriber actually receives such scrambled cable signal(s). (Ord. 761 §12,
1995)
13.24.130: COMPLIANCE WITH FCC STANDARDS:
A.   Grantee shall comply fully with all technical standards adopted by the FCC
as related to the system.
B.   No later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the end of each fiscal
year, or sixty (60) days following the required filing date with the FCC,
whichever is later, the grantee shall maintain and make available for public
inspection, a file containing a copy of the system's FCC forms 325 and 395.
C.   The grantee shall file with the city upon request copies of all
complaints, petitions, orders of the FCC, EEOC, FAA or other federal or state
regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction, any lawsuits or
proceedings, in which the grantee is named party, and any proceeding, or
litigation which involve the grantee's operations within the city. (Ord. 761
§13, 1995)
13.24.140: ERECTION, REMOVAL AND COMMON USE OF POLES:
A.   No poles or other wire holding structures shall be erected by the grantee
without prior approval of the city with regard to locations, height, type and
any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire holding
structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense
whenever the city engineer reasonably determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby.
B.   Where poles or other wire holding structures are already existing for use
in serving the city are available for use by the grantee, but it does not make
arrangements for such use, the city engineer may require the grantee to use
such poles and structures, if he determines that the public convenience would
be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just
and reasonable.
C.   Where a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the poles
or other wire holding structures of the grantee, but agreement therefor with
the grantee cannot be reached, the council may require the grantee to permit
such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the council shall
determine to be just and reasonable, if the council determines that the use
would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the
grantee's operations.
D.   Grantee shall comply with the pole attachment agreement provisions in
section
13.24.270 of this chapter. (Ord. 761 §14, 1995)
13.24.150: OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM:
A.   The grantee shall render fluent service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur
during periods of minimum use of the system.
B.   The grantee shall have a published telephone number, and said telephone
service shall be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustments may be received at any time. Grantee shall maintain a complete
record keeping system of all material complaints received; and, upon request,
the grantee shall furnish complaint record to the city. (Ord. 761 §15, 1995)
13.24.160: REMOVAL OF FACILITIES UPON REQUEST:
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, subject to applicable federal
law, the grantee shall promptly remove its facilities and equipment from the
premises of such subscriber upon request. There shall be no charge made to the
subscriber who voluntarily terminates or cancels service for the removal and/or
disconnection of the facilities and equipment. (Ord. 761 §16, 1995)
13.24.170: RATES AND CHARGES:
The grantee shall at all times maintain on file with Warr Acres a complete and
current schedule showing all cable television services being provided under the
grantee's franchise, the fees and charges for each of such services, the
charges for connections or disconnections, and any other subscriber charges
which may be made by the grantee in connection with the system. Such schedule
shall also show the components of the basic service and the pay service, each
on a channel by channel basis, and the monthly charge for each service package.
The grantor reserves the right to regulate grantee's basic cable rates in
accordance with FCC regulations. (Ord. 761 §17, 1995)
13.24.180: SERVICE TO SCHOOLS, GOVERNMENTS AND INSTITUTIONS:
A.   Grantee will provide one cable television drop with free installation and
free monthly basic service to city owned or controlled buildings within a
serviceable area at the time of request. This includes, but is not limited to:
   1.   Public schools;
   2.   Police station;
   3.   Fire station;
   4.   City council chamber;
   5.   Community center;
   6.   Library;
   7.   Senior citizens center;
   8.   City hall.
B.   Multimedia cable vision proposes to provide the city with its own channel.
Multimedia will also provide the city with a character generator and modulator
for digital programming of announcements and messages. (Ord. 761 §18, 1995)
13.24.190: SUBSCRIBER REFUNDS ON TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
Any advance payments of subscribers in the amount of more than one month shall
be refunded on a pro rata basis when subscriber requests discontinuation of
service except where any past due balance exists. (Ord. 761 §19, 1995)
13.24.200: CARRIAGE OF BROADCAST VIDEO SIGNALS:
In accordance with FCC requirements the grantee may receive and distribute
television and radio signals which are disseminated to the general public
without charge by broadcasting stations licensed by the FCC. The grantee may
provide various communication services to individuals or businesses, consistent
with the FCC and Oklahoma regulations and without interference with the service
of the BTN system. Additional stations may be carried as they are made
available and allowed by FCC regulations. (Ord. 761 §20, 1995)
13.24.210: CARRIAGE ON NONBROADCAST VIDEO CHANNELS:
The grantee shall provide and maintain a government access channel and an
educational access channel for the members of local government and educational
access users. Grantee shall have no editorial control over the programming on
such channels, except as may be permitted by federal law. (Ord. 761 §21, 1995)
13.24.220: PROGRAM ALTERATION:
Subject to applicable FCC or federal regulations, all programs of broadcasting
stations carried by the grantee shall be carried in their entirety as received,
with announcements and advertisements and without additions. (Ord. 761 §22,
1995)
13.24.230: EMERGENCY USE OF FACILITIES:
In the case of an emergency or disaster, declared by the mayor, governor of
Oklahoma, or president of the United States, the grantee shall, upon request of
the mayor or his/her designee, make available its facilities to the city for
use during the emergency or disaster period. The grantee shall provide, in
addition, an emergency warning system whereby a telephone can be used to make
voice announcements simultaneously over all television channels on the system.
This is to be a twenty four (24) hour "hot standby" system which will preempt
the sound on all channels. The emergency warning system is restricted in such a
way as to make it accessible to authorized personnel only. (Ord. 761 §23, 1995)
ARTICLE C.  RULES GOVERNING GRANTEE AND ASSIGNS
13.24.240: OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES:
This nonexclusive franchise authorizes only the operation of a BTN as provided
for herein, and does not take the place of any other license or permit which
might be required by law of the grantee, its employees or agents. (Ord. 761
§24, 1995)
13.24.250: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures
and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the
public.
B.   The grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and
other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the national electrical
safety code and the national electrical code, as adopted by the city, and all
applicable state and local laws, and in such a manner that they will not
interfere with any installations of the city or of a public utility serving the
city.
C.   All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, along,
across, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public ways or
places of the city, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept
and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order
and repair. (Ord. 761 §25, 1995)
13.24.260: AMENDMENT POWERS:
It shall be the prerogative of the council to liberally amend this nonexclusive
franchise, upon application and consent of the grantee, when necessary to
enable the grantee to take advantage of any developments in the provision of
telecommunications services which will afford it an opportunity to service its
subscribers more effectively, efficiently or economically. Provided, however,
that this section shall not be construed to require the council to make any
amendment. (Ord. 761 §26, 1995)
13.24.270: POLE AGREEMENTS; REGULATIONS:
A.   All transmission and distribution structures, and equipment erected by the
grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference
with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places.
B.   1. It shall be the responsibility of the grantee to obtain the necessary
pole attachment agreements from the city and/or private utility companies using
poles within the city. If requested by grantee, the city shall assist grantee
in obtaining such pole attachment agreements from public utility companies.
   2.   All pole attachment agreements with the city shall be negotiated with
the mayor or his/her designee and approved by the council.
C.   If, at any time during the period of this nonexclusive franchise, the city
shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city,
shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.
D.   Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the grantee shall
be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such
public way.
E.   The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving
permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the
moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or
lowering of wires to permit the moving of buildings shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than forty eight (48)
hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
F.   The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways and places of the city so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the grantee.
G.   In all sections of the city where any cables, wires or other like
facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place
its cables, wires or other like facilities underground. (Ord. 761 §27, 1995)
13.24.280: PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
Subject to FCC regulations the grantee shall not, as to rates, charges,
service, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make
or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, or subject any person
to any prejudice or disadvantage. (Ord. 761 §28, 1995)
13.24.290: TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING OWNERSHIP OF FACILITIES:
A.   The grantee, except as required for its reasonable financing, shall not
make, execute or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, conditional
sales contract, or any loan, lease, pledge, sale, gift or similar agreement
concerning any of the facilities and property, real or personal, of the BTN
system without prior approval of the council upon its determination that the
transaction proposed by the grantee will not be inimical to the rights of the
city under this nonexclusive franchise. Provided, however, that this section
shall not apply to the disposition of worn out or obsolete facilities or
personal property in the normal course of carrying on the BTN system.
B.   Grantee shall at all times be the full and complete owner of all
facilities and property, real and personal, of the BTN system unless loaned,
leased or pledged pursuant to council authorization under subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 761 §29, 1995)
13.24.300: CHANGE OR CONTROL OF GRANTEE:
Prior approval of the council, which shall be not unreasonably withheld, shall
be required where ownership or control of more than thirty percent (30%) of the
right of control of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting
in concert, none of whom already own or control thirty percent (30%) or more of
such right of control, singularly or collectively. By its execution of the
franchise agreement, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that any such
acquisition occurring without prior approval of the council shall constitute a
violation of this chapter by the grantee. (Ord. 761 §30, 1995)
13.24.310: CITY RIGHTS IN NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
A.   The right is reserved to the city or the council to adopt, in addition to
the provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such
additional regulations of general applicability as it shall find necessary in
the exercise of its lawful police powers. However, such regulations, by
ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights
herein granted.
B.   The designated city official shall have the right to inspect the books,
records, maps, plans and other like materials pertaining directly to the
nonexclusive franchise granted hereunder, of the grantee at any time upon
reasonable notice and during normal business hours. Each party shall be
responsible for its own costs attributable to such inspection.
C.   The city shall have the right, during the life of this nonexclusive
franchise, to install and maintain for a reasonable fee upon the poles of the
grantee any wire and pole fixtures that do not interfere with the BTN operation
of the grantee.
D.   The city shall have the right to supervise all construction or
installation work performed subject to the provisions of this nonexclusive
franchise and other pertinent provisions of the state and local law. In the
event such inspection(s) reveal(s) that the grantee has failed, in the city's
reasonable judgment, to fulfill its obligation under the terms of this
nonexclusive franchise, the city shall notify the grantee, in writing, of its
specific deficiencies. Absent commencement of corrective action by the grantee
within forty eight (48) hours of receipt of said notification, the city, upon
the direction of the council, may undertake the necessary repairs or
restoration at the grantee's sole expense.
E.   At the expiration of the term for which this nonexclusive franchise is
granted, or upon its termination or cancellation, as provided herein, and
absent a franchise renewal the council may require the grantee to continue
operations for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months from the date of the
council's decision. In the event of such nonrenewal, the grantee shall have two
(2) years from the date it ceases operations to remove, at its own expense, all
portions of its system from all public ways within the city and to restore said
public ways to a condition reasonably satisfactory to the city.
F.   Upon the nonrenewal or forfeiture of this franchise as provided for
herein, the city, at its election and upon the payment of a sum equal to the
fair market value to the grantee as provided by subsection G of this section,
shall have the right to purchase and take over the cable system in its
entirety. Upon the exercise of this option and the payment of the above sum by
the city and its service of an official notice of such action upon the grantee,
the grantee shall immediately transfer to the city possession and title to all
facilities and property, real and personal, of the cable system, free from any
and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the city in lieu of
some portion of the purchase price set forth above, and the grantee shall
execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the city as
shall be necessary for this purpose.
G.   Upon the exercise of the option by the city to purchase and take over the
cable system in its entirety, the fair market value to the grantee of the
system shall be determined by three (3) disinterested parties, one of such
parties to be selected by the city, another to be selected by the grantee, and
the two (2) parties so selected shall mutually agree upon a third party. When
all three (3) parties have been selected, they shall proceed to appraise the
system and determine the fair market value to the grantee, which determination
shall be binding upon the city and the grantee. The fair market value shall not
include and the grantee shall not receive anything for the valuation of any
right or privilege appertaining to it under the grant of the franchise. In the
event the two (2) parties selected by the city and grantee are unable to agree
upon a third party, then the presiding district judge of Oklahoma County,
Oklahoma, or his designee shall serve as the third party. The party selected by
the city shall be with approval of the council. However, if the city no longer
desires to acquire the system after its value is determined, the city may,
without penalty or waiver of future rights to acquire the system, abandon its
intention to acquire the system. The cost of the appraisal shall be shared
equally between the city and grantee. (Ord. 761 §31, 1995)
13.24.320: MAPS, PLATS AND REPORTS:
A.   The grantee shall file, upon request, with the city clerk, maps or plats
of all existing and proposed installations. Grantee shall, simultaneously with
the execution of the franchise agreement, file a map of the city showing the
proposed construction schedule of grantee.
B.   Grantee shall file annually with the city its annual report to
shareholders. (Ord. 761 §32, 1995)
13.24.330: PAYMENT TO THE CITY:
The grantee shall pay to the city quarterly an amount equal to three percent
(3%) of the annual gross revenues received from operations within the city from
monthly cable television subscriptions. Payment due under this provision shall
be payable forty five (45) calendar days after the end of each calendar
quarter. (Ord. 761 §33, 1995)
13.24.340: FORFEITURE OF NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
A.   In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by
virtue of this nonexclusive franchise or otherwise, the city reserves the right
to terminate and cancel this nonexclusive franchise and all rights and
privileges of the grantee hereunder in the event that the grantee:
   1.   Wilfully violates any material provision of this chapter or any rule,
order or determination of the council made pursuant to this nonexclusive
franchise, except where such violation is without fault or through excusable
neglect;
   2.   Becomes insolvent, or unable to pay its lawful debts, or is adjudged
bankrupt;
   3.   Wilfully violates or attempts to evade any of the material provisions
of this nonexclusive franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city
or its citizens.
B.   Such termination or cancellation shall be by ordinance duly adopted and
published after sixty (60) days' prior written notice to grantee of its
proposed adoption; provided, however, before this nonexclusive franchise may be
terminated and canceled under this section, grantee must have been provided
with at least sixty (60) days' prior written notice of the alleged franchise
violation and an opportunity to cure or attempt to cure such alleged violation
and an opportunity to be publicly heard before the council. In the event that
such termination or cancellation depends upon a finding of fact, such finding
of fact as made by the council or its representative shall be conclusive. (Ord.
761 §34, 1995)
13.24.350: TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT:
This franchise shall not be transferred or assigned by the grantee without the
prior written consent of the council which shall not be unreasonably withheld
provided grantee may upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the council
transfer this franchise to an entity controlling, controlled by or under common
control with grantee. (Ord. 761 §35, 1995)
13.24.360: FURTHER AGREEMENT BY GRANTEE:
The grantee agrees to abide by all provisions of this chapter, and further
agrees that it will not at any future time set up, as against the city, the
claim that the provisions of this ordinance are unreasonable, arbitrary or
void, except to the extent federal or state law supersedes such provisions.
(Ord. 761 §36, 1995)
13.24.370: PROTECTION OF PRIVACY:
Grantee shall not, under penalty of forfeiture of its nonexclusive franchise
rights and privileges, without the express prior approval of the council, give,
sell or exchange to any person any information concerning subscribers,
subscriber viewing habits or preferences except for normal business practices.
The purpose of this section is to ensure that the right of privacy of each
subscriber shall be fully protected. (Ord. 761 §37, 1995)
CHAPTER 13.28
REVIEW OF RATES AND FEES
SECTION:
13.28.010: Annual Review Of Utility Rates And Other Fees
13.28.010: ANNUAL REVIEW OF UTILITY RATES AND OTHER FEES:
In order to assure that the rates and charges established for utility services,
and other fees and charges for other services provided by the city to the
public, are adequate to maintain sufficient funds to fully pay the cost of
providing such services, the council shall, from time to time, but not less
than annually, review such rates and charges made to the public for services.
Specifically, the review shall include charges made pursuant to the provisions
of this title and title 8 of this code. The annual review shall be conducted as
a part of the process of the adoption of the annual budget. (Ord. 1059 §1,
2008)
TITLE 14
RESERVED
TITLE 15
SIGNS
General Provisions   15.04
Definitions   15.06
Sign Contractors   15.08
General Sign Regulations   15.10
General Accessory Sign Standards   15.14
Additional Standards For Freestanding Ground Signs   15.16
Additional Standards For Canopy, Combination, Fascia, Parapet Wall, Projecting,
Roof, And Wall Signs   15.20
Temporary Signs   15.24
Portable And Mobile Signs   15.28
Miscellaneous Sign Provisions   15.29
CHAPTER 15.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15.04.010: Purpose; Interpretation; Conflict
15.04.020: Compliance
15.04.030: Permit Required
15.04.040: Maintenance And Changing Copy
15.04.050: Application For Permit
15.04.060: Issuance Of Permit
15.04.070: Fees For Permits
15.04.080: Revocation Of Permit
15.04.090: Electrical Signs
15.04.095: Pole Signs
15.04.100: Unsafe Or Noncomplying Signs
15.04.110: Variance
15.04.120: Penalty
15.04.130: Electronic Digital Signs
15.04.010: PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION; CONFLICT:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held
to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health,
convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not
intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate or annul any ordinance,
rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued and not in conflict
with any of the provisions of this title, or which shall be adopted or issued
pursuant to law relating to the erection of signs or other advertising devices,
and likewise not in conflict with this title, nor is it intended by this title
to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, restrictions
or other agreements between parties; except that if this title imposes a
greater restriction, this title shall control. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.020: COMPLIANCE:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, it is unlawful and an offense for
any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, establish, maintain or
permit to exist in the city any signs, signboards, billboards, bulletin boards,
message boards, graffiti, murals or any other device for advertising or
artistic purposes, regardless of the manner in which the display is
accomplished. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.030: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter, construct,
establish, or permit to exist within the city any sign or other advertising
structure, as defined in this title, without first obtaining a permit from the
city clerk and making payment of the fee required unless the regulations for
such sign contained specifically exempt the permit requirement. In addition,
all illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the electrical
code, and the inspection and permit fees required thereunder. No person other
than a duly authorized contractor shall be issued such required permit. (Ord.
1147, 2015)
15.04.040: MAINTENANCE AND CHANGING COPY:
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that all sign
structures located on their property be maintained in a proper manner conducive
to the health, welfare and beauty of the city of Warr Acres and to comply with
the ordinances of the city. While property owners may authorize tenants to
erect and pay for signs, this shall not relieve the owner of the property of
their responsibility to ultimately be in compliance with this code.
A.   Regular maintenance of all legally permitted signs shall be permitted
without the requirement that a new permit be issued.
B.   The message or advertising copy of a sign may be altered, including
replacement of sign panels, without obtaining a permit, provided that there are
no structural or electrical alterations or additions.
C.   Upon the closing, relocation or eviction of a business with an existing
sign, the property owner must, within ninety (90) days, update the sign in one
of the following manners:
   1.   Cover or replace sign face with a suitable, similar material, resulting
in a blank sign face. The sign may be updated to indicate that the location is
for lease or for sale provided the sign copy is constructed of similar
material.
   2.   Remove the sign structure and/or module completely.
   3.   Once the sign face has been covered or replaced or the sign structure
has been removed following the closing, relocation or eviction of a business, a
new permit shall be required to install a new sign or sign face.
D.   All sign structures must be maintained in a condition that is
aesthetically appealing and stylistically cohesive with the area and
neighboring businesses and signs. All cracks, dents, splits or chipped material
as well as any rust, chips and cracked or faded paint (including faded or
weather damaged sign copies) must be repaired.
E.   Backlit or front lit lighting for signs must be maintained at least
seventy five percent (75%) of original illumination when lit. Signs with less
than seventy five percent (75%) of illumination must be repaired to comply with
the seventy five percent (75%) illumination or may be disconnected or switched
off to maintain compliance until maintenance is completed.
F.   Signs and structures which contain a condition which is in violation of
any provision listed herein must be repaired or covered within sixty (60) days
of receipt of notice of a violation from the city unless the condition was
caused by an act of God at which point the owner will be provided with one
hundred twenty (120) days to repair or cover the condition. In the event that
the owner (or tenant with owner's permission) wishes to repair or replace the
violating condition with a new structure or material not originally approved by
the city, the owner (or tenant with owner's permission) will apply for a new
sign permit. The new permit will be processed but any denial thereof shall not
be construed as revoking the original sign permit. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.050: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a sign erection permit shall be made upon forms provided by the
city clerk and shall contain and have attached thereto the following
information:
A.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. The applicant must be
the owner of the property but the owner may execute a delegation of application
authority form provided by the city delegating their application authority only
to a tenant or other representative;
B.   Location of building, structure or lot, including the legal description of
the property to which or upon which the sign or other advertising structure is
to be attached or erected;
C.   Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby
buildings or structures;
D.   Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications and
method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.
Information shall also be furnished showing the weight of such sign and any
attachments to such sign. Additionally, one set of plans will be submitted
showing all of the following:
   1.   A site plan/survey signed by a surveyor or engineer licensed by the
state of Oklahoma within the last two (2) years showing scaled dimensions of
street centerline(s), property boundaries, building(s), existing sign(s) and
the location of the proposed sign. No portion of the proposed sign may hang
over any public rights of way. The proposed sign must meet minimum clearance
from any power lines as required by the owner of said power lines;
   2.   Elevation detail of proposed sign with dimensions;
   3.   Construction details with the proposed sign's structural members signed
by an engineer licensed by the state of Oklahoma;
   4.   Anchor or footing detail with dimensions and load calculations/
reactions signed by an engineer licensed by the state of Oklahoma;
   5.   Information contained on the sign; and
   6.   Simulation drawing of sign with illumination details if applicable.
E.   Name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the
structure;
F.   If, in the judgment of the building inspector, further information is
required to show safe and proper construction of the sign and the erection of
the sign, evidence must be presented by the applicant to show substantial and
safe construction thereof;
G.   Such other information as the building inspector shall require to show
full compliance with this title and all other laws and ordinances of the city
including, but not limited to, proof of current city business license and all
additional licenses required by the state of Oklahoma including a permit for
the collection and remittance of sales and use tax to the Oklahoma tax
commission where applicable. Permits issued to a business for a sign
advertising for that business shall be automatically suspended and subject to
revocation in the event the business license for said business expires, is
suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.060: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector, upon the filing of an
application for a sign erection permit, to examine such plans and
specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to
erect the sign or other advertising structure, and if it appears that the
proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this title and
all other laws of the city, he shall then approve issuance of the sign erection
permit. If the work authorized under a sign erection permit has not been
completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall
become null and void. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.070: FEES FOR PERMITS:
There is levied a schedule of fees for permits to erect signs and similar
overhanging structures, the amounts of which are set out as follows:
 
Legally nonconforming nonaccessory sign  $200.00 annual permit fee
(billboard), placements and structures
Inspection of all signs                  $20.00 plus $10.00 reinspection
Accessory sign                           $50.00
Accessory sign, per square foot area     2.00
Temporary sign                           10.00
Temporary sign, per square foot area     2.00
Sign face change                         50.00
 
(Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.080: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The building inspector is authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued
by the city upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provision of
this title. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.090: ELECTRICAL SIGNS:
All signs or other advertising structures in which electrical wiring and
connections are to be used shall be inspected by the building inspector. The
inspector shall also examine all of the plans and specifications respecting all
wiring and all connections to determine if the same comply with the electrical
code of the city. The inspector shall then approve the application for permit
if the plans and specifications comply with the electrical code, or disapprove
the application for permit if noncompliance with the electrical code is found.
This action shall be taken prior to the submission of the application for final
approval or disapproval of the sign erection permit, and upon payment of the
required inspection fees as set forth in this title. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.095: POLE SIGNS:
All exposed pole signs, including nonaccessory signs, shall be prohibited
within the city limits except for improved pole signs as defined in this title
provided that all of the following conditions are present:
A.   Meets the definition of an improved pole sign;
B.   Approved pole or beam covering material:
   1.   Material used must be listed under section 19.40.130 of this code as
approved commercial building facades;
   2.   Coverings cannot display any advertising logos or insignia except the
display of the building address;
C.   Pole signs can only be erected on properties that front the NW Expressway
and 39th Street;
D.   Shall only advertise for a single business;
E.   Shall maintain a maximum height of forty feet (40') and a maximum size of
two (2) square feet of sign area for each linear foot of property fronting on
the street but not to exceed a total of four hundred (400) square feet of area
per sign face;
F.   Shall maintain the sight triangle setbacks as defined in this title; and
G.   Shall adhere to ground sign zoning and size restrictions as specified in
chapter 15.14 of this title. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.100: UNSAFE OR NONCOMPLYING SIGNS:
The building inspector shall inspect at such times as he deems necessary all
signs or other advertising structures regulated by this title for the purpose
of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in
need of removal or repair. If, after inspection, the building inspector finds
that any sign or other advertising structure regulated by this title is unsafe
or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected
or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this title, he shall
give written notice to the permittee or owner thereof and to the city council.
If the permittee or owner fails to commence actions to remove or alter the
structure so as to comply with the provisions of this title within ten (10)
days after such notice, the city council may order such sign or other
advertising structure be removed or altered to comply, by the city and the
building inspector, at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property on
which it is located. The city shall refuse to issue further permits to any
permittee or owner who refuses to pay the cost so assessed. The building
inspector may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is in
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without
notice. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.110: VARIANCE:
A.   The city council may grant a variance to the strict application of the
terms, standards and/or criteria found in this title. Such variance shall be
reduced to writing and shall outline specifically the provision or provision of
this title which is subject to the variance, the precise relief granted
(whether it be a complete waiver of the provision(s) or the imposition of a
modified requirement) and any conditions which may be attached to the granting
(and possible revocation) of such variance. A variance shall only be granted
upon a finding, by the council, that:
   1.   Strict application of the particular provision or provisions in this
title create a hardship by reason of unusual lot size, shape or topography, or
where a building has been erected in an unconventional manner or location, or
where some other unusual physical feature exists; and
   2.   The variance, if granted, conforms to the spirit of these regulations
and that substantial justice will be done; and
   3.   The variance, if granted, would be the minimum necessary to alleviate
the hardship.
B.   A notice of a public hearing before the city council shall be given by
publication in a legal newspaper having general circulation within the city and
by mailing a notice to all owners of property within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the proposed variance. A copy of the published notice may be
mailed to the owners of property in lieu of a written notice; however, the
notice by publication and written notice shall take place at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain:
   1.   The street address or approximate location of the requested variance.
   2.   The nature of the variance requested.
   3.   The date, time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.04.120: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
title or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this title, is guilty
of an offense and upon conviction is punishable by fines and costs not to
exceed the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and each day such
violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. In addition to
other remedies, the building inspector, at the direction of the city council,
may institute any proper action in the district court in the name of the city
to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this title. (Ord. 1147,
2015)
15.04.130: ELECTRONIC DIGITAL SIGNS:
This section outlines the requirements for accessory signs which utilize
electronic digital technology to create a static sign which can have changeable
copy or display a variable message and/or feature a graphic display. Such signs
may be all or a portion of an allowed ground sign or wall sign, provided that
the following conditions are met:
A.   Digital signs are only allowed in areas that are zoned as C-4 and C-5.
B.   No digital sign shall be located within fifty feet (50') of the driving
surface of a signalized intersection, measured in a straight line from the
leading edge of the sign structure to the nearest edge of pavement. Such sign
may not be located closer than twenty feet (20') from the edge of any other
street. Such signs must also comply with the setback provisions of this title,
which may result in a greater setback.
C.   Digital signs shall only display a static message or messages. There shall
be no effects of movement, blinking, animation, scrolling, flashing, or similar
effects in the individual images.
D.   Digital signs which display more than one static message shall do so
sequentially, with each static message having a dwell time of no less than
eight (8) seconds and a transition time between static messages of no more than
one second. Changes of image shall not be instantaneous as seen by the human
eye, and shall not use blinking or similar effects as part of the change.
E.   Digital signs shall not display an illuminative brightness exceeding three
hundred (300) NITs at any time between one-half (1/2) hour before sunset until
sunrise of the next day or five thousand (5,000) NITs between sunrise until
one-half (1/2) hour before sunset.
F.   Digital signs shall not display an illuminative brightness of such
intensity or brilliance that they impair the vision or endanger the safety and
welfare of any cyclist or person operating a motor vehicle.
G.   Digital signs shall not resemble or simulate any warning or danger signal,
or any official traffic control device, sign, signal, or light.
H.   All digital signs shall have installed ambient light monitors or
photocells, and shall at all times allow such devices to automatically adjust
the brightness level of the sign based on ambient light conditions. Each sign
shall be equipped with a default mechanism that will automatically freeze the
sign in one position or display a static message if a malfunction occurs.
I.   If a digital sign is visible from a nearby residential zoning district, it
shall be located no closer than two hundred feet (200') from the closest point
of that residential zoning district, measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the sign structure to the nearest point of the residential
district.
J.   The requirements of subsections C, D, E, F, and H of this section shall be
certified by an electrical engineer licensed in the state of Oklahoma. (Ord.
1147, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.06
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
15.06.010: General Terms
15.06.010: GENERAL TERMS:
The following terms and words contained in this title are defined as follows:
ACCESSORY SIGN: Any advertising device which identifies or displays information
concerning the proprietor or the business conducted on the premises.
ATTACHED SIGN: An accessory sign attached to, or in any other way represented
on a building or the structural element of a building. Attached signs shall
include canopy sign, combination sign, fascia sign, marquee sign, module sign,
parapet wall sign, projecting sign, roof sign and wall sign.
CANOPY OR AWNING: A fixed shelter of any material and of any length projecting
from a building and supported by columns or posts from the ground, or a
freestanding shelter supported by columns or posts from the ground.
CANOPY SIGN: An accessory sign painted on or attached to the vertical side of,
or erected on the roof surface of, a canopy.
COMBINATION SIGN: Any single accessory sign incorporating any combination of
the features of the projecting, parapet wall, canopy, wall, fascia and marquee
signs.
DIGITAL ELECTRONIC DISPLAY BOARD: An LCD, LED, silver screen, or other type of
sign display that can be electronically manipulated from a local or remote
source.
DIRECTIONAL AND INFORMATION SIGN: Any sign which directs attention to the
location of a facility or group of facilities on the same property on which the
sign is located or which display brand name information as herein provided.
Such signs may include entrance and exit signs, restroom signs, license or
permit information signs and other similar groups. This also shall include the
following specific signs: telephone booth or service signs, brand name on
petroleum products pumps or other dispensing apparatus located outside of
buildings, identification and informational signs on public utility apparatus,
U.S. Postal Service signs on postal apparatus.
DISPLAY SURFACE: The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the
message is displayed or illustrated.
DISPLAY SURFACE AREA COMPUTATION OF SIGN AREA: The area of a sign shall be
measured in conformance with the following regulations:
A. In computing the area of a sign, standard mathematical formulas for common
regular geometric shapes (triangle, parallelogram, circle and ellipse, or
combinations thereof) shall be used.
B. In the case of an irregularly shaped sign or a sign with letters and/or
symbols directly affixed to the wall of a building, the area of the sign shall
be the entire area within a single continuous rectilinear perimeter of not more
than eight (8) straight lines enclosing the extreme limits or writing,
representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any
material or color forming an integral part or background of the display or used
to differentiate such sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed.
C. That portion of the sign structure which is visible and viewed in the same
plane as the sign face, and which is made an integral part or background of the
display, shall be included in computing the total sign area.
D. The total surface area of multiple-unit signs shall include the vertical and
horizontal spacing between the letters which comprise the word or words that
convey the sign's message.
E. Where three-dimensional figures are used as signs, the area shall be the
total area, as projected on a vertical plane, of each side of the figure. For
purposes of this regulation, a figure shall be considered to have not less than
one nor more than four (4) sides and be determined by the intended location and
visibility of the figure.
All riders or attachments to signs or sign structures (whether temporary or
permanent) shall be included as part of the total sign area for the sign to
which they are attached.
ELECTRIFIED SIGN: A sign structure or part of a sign structure that contains
electrical components including, but not limited to, ballasts, transformers,
light bulbs, neon tubes that use electricity to operate, whether line voltage
or battery powered.
EXPOSED POLE SIGN: (Prohibited) Any pole signs in which the support pole(s) or
beam(s) are exposed.
FASCIA: A continuous translucent panel illuminated from within which may extend
around one or more corners, and is designed as a part of the building.
FASCIA SIGN: A wall, canopy or parapet wall sign attached to or printed on a
fascia surface. Unless specifically provided in this title, a fascia sign shall
be subject to the standards covering the type of sign it represents.
FREESTANDING SIGN: An accessory sign which is attached to or a part of a
completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure is not attached
to any building or any other structure, and is anchored firmly to or below the
ground surface. (See also definitions of ground sign, improved pole sign,
exposed pole sign and pole mounted sign.)
GROUND SIGN: A type of freestanding, low profile monument style accessory sign
that incorporates the design or theme of the primary building and use of the
property, which is secured to a fixed base, usually masonry, whereas the base
of such sign shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the dimension of the
width of the sign at the widest point of the structure.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or
outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes whether such sources
of illumination are a part of a sign or not.
ILLUMINATION, DIRECT: Illumination which is performed by electrical apparatus
from within the sign structure or which is otherwise a part of the sign
structure.
ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT: Illumination which is performed by spotlights or other
lighting devices and which is not a part of the sign proper.
ILLUMINATION, INTERMITTENT: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign, message,
lighting or frame or portion thereof that exhibits changing light or color
effect by any means at intervals of less than eight (8) seconds. Examples
include illumination that changes light color intensity in transitory bursts,
illumination that creates the illusion of light changes by streaming, graphic
bursts showing movement, or any mode of lighting which resembles zooming,
twinkling, or sparkling.
IMPROVED POLE SIGN: Any pole sign whereas the supporting pole(s) or beam(s) are
covered with an approved material making the base and riser section of the sign
with a minimum thirty percent (30%) width of the sign face.
INFLATABLE SIGNS: (Prohibited) Portable or fixed mannequins, characters,
dummies, or other shapes that are inflated by any method with any type of gas
that may or may not contain or include logos, text or any other insignia
designed to attract attention.
MARQUEE: A permanent, fixed roof attached to, wholly supported by and
projecting from a building.
MARQUEE SIGN: An attached accessory sign painted on or attached to the vertical
side of, or erected on the roof surface of, a marquee.
MEMORIAL SIGN: A nonaccessory structure, sign or item to commemorate the loss
of a loved one, including, but not restricted to, flowers, silk flowers,
crosses, candles, placards, signs or other religious, nonreligious or spiritual
memorabilia. This sign can in no way display information pertaining to goods,
services, or entertainment offered by a business.
MURAL: A painting or work of art directly painted on a wall or other structure
including streets, sidewalks, fences or buildings. Depictions shall not contain
words, logos, emblems, trademarks or other similar depictions. Allowed only in
Warr Acres Town Center Cultural District and contains no advertising message.
NONACCESSORY SIGN (BILLBOARD): A sign or advertising device which directs
attention to an activity, service or product sold or offered elsewhere than on
the premises on which the sign is located.
PAINTED GRAFFITI SIGN: (Prohibited) All signs, writings, drawings,
inscriptions, figures or marks of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar
substance on public or private buildings, sidewalks, streets, structures and
fences including drawings, writings, markings or inscriptions regardless of the
content or nature of materials.
PARAPET WALL: That part of any wall which extends through or above the
roofline.
PARAPET WALL SIGN: An accessory sign erected on the top surface of a parapet.
POLE MOUNTED SIGN: A type of freestanding accessory sign supported by uprights
or braces placed upon or into the ground and detached from any building
intended to identify an aggregate commercial or industrial use of property, or
a primary use which is the sole occupant of a building or property.
PORTABLE SIGN: (Prohibited) Any sign ordinarily but not necessarily supported
on a base, wheels, skids or vehicles and which is in no way attached or affixed
to the ground or other structure or object.
PROJECTING SIGN: An accessory sign which projects from and which has one end
attached to a building, and which does not employ ground support in any manner.
ROOF SIGN: An attached accessory sign designed to permit, but not necessarily
be limited to, the erection of a shield, symbol, or similar trademark or brand
name. Such sign shall be located immediately and entirely over the roof of a
building and attached to a wall or pylon or similar physical support that is
part of the physical and architectural design of the building. This definition
shall apply only to a building of six (6) stories or less in height. Roof signs
permitted only in C-4 and C-5 Zones.
SIGHT TRIANGLE: A clear area created by an equal measure of distance in either
direction from intersecting street right-of- way lines, or the intersection of
a street right-of-way line and the edge of a driveway or alley, within which no
object shall be erected or otherwise placed on either a temporary or permanent
basis.
SIGN: Any structure or part thereof, or any device permanently or temporarily
attached to, painted on, supported by or represented on a building, fence, post
or other structure which is used or intended to be used to attract attention.
The term "sign" shall not include a flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation,
state or city.
SIGN STRUCTURE (FREESTANDING): The entire sign assembly including all building
and construction materials from the point at which the structure meets the
ground and above. The sign structure shall be calculated by using the following
methods:
A. A sign structure eighteen inches (18") in depth or less with a maximum of
two (2) advertising sides shall be calculated by enclosing the perimeter of the
structure (starting at the point where the structure meets the ground) within a
rectilinear geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the structure
and measuring the area within the perimeter and multiply the sum by two (2).
B. A sign structure greater than eighteen inches (18") in depth or contains
three (3) or more advertising sides shall be calculated by enclosing the
perimeter of the structure (starting at the point where the structure meets the
ground) within a cubical geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of
the structure and measuring the area within the cubical perimeter and multiply
the sum by two (2) or the number of advertising sides whichever is greater.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, balloon, animate or
inanimate facsimile or model, such as mannequins, dummies, figurines, including
other items placed outside a business structure meant to attract attention to
the business with or without any message, logo, symbol, etc., or similar device
or display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wood,
wallboard, or other light materials, with or without frames, which is intended
to be displayed or used for a short period of time only and in connection with
and for the purpose of a commercial promotion or as an advertising device.
WALL SIGN: An accessory sign painted on or attached to the wall or surface of a
building or fence with a display surface which is parallel to the supporting
surface.
WIND SIGN: (Prohibited) A sign with or without text, lettering, logo or any
other type of insignia including banners, streamers, pennants, string flags
that attract attention by moving freely in the wind.
WINDOW SIGN: An accessory sign located on the interior of a display window.
(Ord. 1170, 2016)
CHAPTER 15.08
SIGN CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
15.08.010: License Requirements
15.08.020: Bond
15.08.010: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
No person, firm or corporation, except a licensed sign contractor, shall engage
in the business of installing, erecting, repairing, altering, servicing or
removing signs which require issuance of a permit. A sign contractor's license
may be obtained from the city clerk, and a fee in the amount of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid to the city treasurer therefor. Such
license shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance, and no
reduction in fee for the partial year shall be made. Employees of duly licensed
sign contractors shall not be required to obtain such license or pay such fee
in order to engage in the work of installing, erecting, repairing, altering,
servicing or removing signs in the regular course of such employment. Duly
licensed electrical contractors shall not be required to obtain a license
hereunder where said contractors are only installing electrical signs in the
course of their business as electrical contractors. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.08.020: BOND:
No sign contractor's license shall be issued until the applicant therefor has
deposited with the city clerk a surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), to be known as a "sign contractor's bond". Such bond shall be
executed by the sign contractor, and the surety thereon shall be a corporate
surety authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be in favor of
the city and conditioned that the licensee shall faithfully and properly
conduct his business in compliance with all of the ordinances of the city
relating to signs and sign contractors; and for the payment of all fines and
penalties imposed for the violation of such laws; and for the protection and
indemnification of the city against all damages resulting directly or
indirectly from any injury to persons or property on account of the negligence
or unskilled work of the licensee. Such bond shall be renewed annually, and no
person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of a sign contractor
unless the bond as provided in this section is on file with the city clerk.
(Ord. 1147, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.10
GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
15.10.010: Material And Construction Standards
15.10.020: Signs Not To Create Traffic Hazard
15.10.030: Indecent Material Or Advertising Prohibited
15.10.040: Signs In Right Of Way
15.10.050: Reserved
15.10.060: Signs Or Advertising On Public Property
15.10.070: Signs Not To Obstruct Ingress Or Egress
15.10.080: Signs Or Advertising On Bus Stops, Shelters And Parking Structures
15.10.010: MATERIAL AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
All signs for which a permit is required under this title shall be constructed
in a workmanlike manner, well braced, and constructed out of firm and
substantial building material. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.10.020: SIGNS NOT TO CREATE TRAFFIC HAZARD:
No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this title shall be
erected at the intersection of any streets or at any other location along
public streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any
location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere
with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic signal,
signal or device, or any other word, phrase, symbol or character, in such
manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. In no case shall any
sign be placed within a twenty five foot (25') sight triangle formed by the
intersection of street right of way lines with other streets, alleys or
driveways. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.10.030: INDECENT MATERIAL OR ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person to advertise upon any sign or
other advertising device or structure any indecent or obscene matter or any
matter offensive to good morals, nor shall any sign or other advertising device
or structure be used for the advertising of any article or commodity in an
indecent manner or in any way offensive to good morals. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.10.040: SIGNS IN RIGHT OF WAY:
It is unlawful and an offense for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, establish, maintain or permit to exist, any sign, signboard,
billboard, bulletin board or any other advertising structure or device, or any
part thereof, in, upon or over any street, right of way, avenue, alley,
sidewalk or any part thereof, within the city except as provided in this title;
provided, however, that the provisions of this title shall not apply to any
official sign authorized by law or ordinance or provided all of the following
exceptions:
A.   Monument or memorial signs or structures not to exceed four (4) cubic feet
in total structure shell size meaning the sign must fit inside a four (4) cubic
foot area made up of one foot by two foot by two foot (1' x 2' x 2') cubes.
B.   Person(s) erecting the structures have written permission from the
property owner giving explicit permission for the placement of the structure
for the entire permitted time.
C.   The said sign or structure is to be removed within the ten (10) days
allowed by the temporary sign restrictions. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.10.050: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.10.060: SIGNS OR ADVERTISING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful to erect or maintain any sign, poster handbill, bulletin board,
bill, card, notice, signboard, billboard or other advertising of any kind
whatever upon any telegraph, telephone, electric light or power pole or post,
or official street sign, or on, over or across any street, alley or public
property within the city limits, except as specifically authorized. (Ord. 1147,
2015)
15.10.070: SIGNS NOT TO OBSTRUCT INGRESS OR EGRESS:
No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free
ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.10.080: SIGNS OR ADVERTISING ON BUS STOPS, SHELTERS AND PARKING STRUCTURES:
It is unlawful to erect or maintain any sign, poster, handbill, bulletin board,
bill, card, notice, signboard, billboard or other advertising of any kind
whatever upon any bench, shelter, parking structure on private or public
property within the city limits with the following exceptions:
A.   One per location, bus stop route map not to exceed two hundred fifty (250)
square inches total area, which the primary purpose is to instruct the public
as to the routes and times of the public transit system such bench or structure
is serving, provided it is mounted on a permitted pole or on the inside of a
permitted weather shelter structure.
B.   One per location, bus stop identification sign not to exceed one hundred
forty four (144) square inches total area, mounted on a permitted pole or
permitted weather shelter structure.
C.   No such signs shall contain advertising, logos or insignia except those of
the public transit company or organization providing the bus service. (Ord.
1147, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.14
GENERAL ACCESSORY SIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
15.14.010: Location Requirements
15.14.020: Number Permitted
15.14.030: Freestanding Ground Sign And Pole Sign Dimensions
15.14.035: Attached Sign Dimensions
15.14.040: Lighting Restrictions
15.14.050: Additional Or Larger Size Freestanding Ground Signs
15.14.010: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
No accessory sign, signboard, bulletin board, or other advertising structure or
device shall be erected, constructed, established, maintained or otherwise
permitted to exist except as permitted in individual zoning districts codified
as title 19 of this code, in another regulatory section of this sign code, or
as follows:
A.   Churches, schools and other institutions permitted in the FE, R-1, R-2, R-
3 and C-1 zoning districts shall be permitted to have one freestanding sign or
one sign attached to a building per street frontage which shall not exceed
fifty (50) square feet in area per sign, shall not be located on public right
of way, and shall observe a twenty five foot (25') sight triangle requirement
at all street, alley and driveway intersections.
B.   Churches, schools and other institutions permitted in other zoning
districts shall be subject to the sign regulations governing those districts.
C.   Bulletin boards or signs in the FE, R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-1 zoning districts
pertaining to the lease, rental or sale of the building or premises shall be
permitted, provided said signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area,
shall be limited to one such sign per street frontage, and shall be removed as
soon as the premises are leased, rented or sold.
D.   Bulletin boards or signs in the C-2 and C-3 zoning districts pertaining to
the lease, rental or sale of the building or premises shall be permitted,
provided said signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, shall be
limited to one such sign per street frontage, and shall be removed as soon as
the premises are leased, rented or sold.
E.   Bulletin boards or signs in the C-4 and C-5 zoning districts pertaining to
the lease, rental or sale of the building or premises shall be permitted,
provided said signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area, shall be
limited to one such sign per street frontage, and shall be removed as soon as
the premises are leased, rented or sold.
F.   One bulletin board or sign per street frontage advertising lots or
structures for sale in a new subdivision development shall be permitted
provided such sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
G.   Such signs permitted in subsections A through F of this section may be
lighted only in conformance with the regulations of the individual zoning
district.
H.   There shall be no limit to the number, size or type of signs located
within an enclosed building or erected in a location where said signs cannot be
viewed from the exterior of the premises.
I.   The city council may authorize placement of permanent signs identifying
entrances to a neighborhood area. Design and location of said signs should be
in harmony with the surrounding area and should not constitute a traffic
hazard. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.14.020: NUMBER PERMITTED:
Commercial developments shall be permitted to have accessory signs according to
the following standards:
A.   A townhouse or multiple-family dwelling complex containing twenty (20) or
more units may have one freestanding ground sign per street frontage
identifying the complex, provided said sign shall have a maximum height of six
feet (6'), shall have a maximum area of ten (10) square feet, and shall be
lighted from within a translucent face. No flashing or intermittent lighting
shall be permitted.
B.   In the C-1 suburban office and C-2 restricted commercial zoning districts,
the following signs are permitted:
   1.   One ground sign per street frontage; and
   2.   One nameplate for each occupant, which shall be mounted on the
building.
C.   In the C-3, C-4 and C-5 zoning districts, the following signs are
permitted:
   1.   One ground sign or freestanding sign per street frontage;
   2.   One of the following per freestanding structure with only one occupant:
canopy sign, combination sign, fascia sign, parapet wall sign, projecting sign,
or wall sign advertising the business conducted on the premises;
   3.   Where a group of businesses occupies the same structure, each of the
occupants having street or outside exposure shall be permitted to have one of
the sign types listed in subsection C2 of this section per occupant; provided
that the occupant of an enclosed shopping facility with no street frontage or
exposure shall be permitted to place a wall sign which shall not exceed thirty
six (36) square feet in area on the outside wall of the structure in
conformance with the general location standards of this title. (Ord. 1147,
2015)
15.14.030: FREESTANDING GROUND SIGN AND POLE SIGN DIMENSIONS:
A.   Freestanding ground signs in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts shall have a
maximum height of six feet (6') and a maximum size of ten (10) square feet.
B.   Freestanding ground signs in the C-3 zoning district shall be subject to
the following:
   1.   Maximum height: Twenty feet (20');
   2.   Maximum size: Two (2) square feet of sign structure for each linear
foot of property fronting on the street, but not to exceed a total of two
hundred (200) square feet of area per sign face.
C.   All pole signs are prohibited except as provided for in section
15.04.095 of this title.
D.   Freestanding ground and improved pole signs in the C-4 and C-5 zoning
districts shall be subject to the following:
   1.   Maximum height: Forty feet (40');
   2.   Maximum size: Two (2) square feet of sign area for each linear foot of
property fronting on the street, but not to exceed a total of four hundred
(400) square feet of area per sign face. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.14.035: ATTACHED SIGN DIMENSIONS:
In the C-3, C-4 and C-5 zoning districts, the following standards shall be used
to permit a larger display surface area for attached signs in proportion to
increased setback and building width, subject to the occupancy provisions of
section
15.14.020 of this chapter:
 
Building Width In Feet Building Setback In Feet
                       0 - 24.99 25 - 39.99 40 - 59.99 60 or more
Less than 25 feet 60 (sq. ft.) 70 (sq. ft.) 80 (sq. ft.) 85 (sq. ft.)
25 - 35.99        95           115          125          135
36 - 45.99        130          155          170          180
46 - 55.99        165          200          215          230
56 - 65.99        200          240          260          280
66 - 75.99        235          280          305          330
76 - 85.99        270          325          350          380
86 - 95.99        305          365          400          430
96 - 105.99       340          410          440          475
106 - 115.99      375          450          490          525
116 - 124.99      410          490          530          570
Over 125          445          535          580          625
 
(Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.14.040: LIGHTING RESTRICTIONS:
Permitted signs may be illuminated by direct or indirect lighting. Flashing or
intermittent lighting shall only be permitted in the C-4 and C-5 zoning
districts, and shall remain within the restrictions of section
15.04.130 of this title, and no rotating or any form of moving sign shall be
permitted; provided, however, that a time-temperature sign may be permitted by
the approval of the city council in the C-3, C-4 and C-5 zoning districts when
it will be operated as a part of a permitted sign by a business occupying a
structure on the premises. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.14.050: ADDITIONAL OR LARGER SIZE FREESTANDING GROUND SIGNS:
A.   In the C-3 neighborhood shopping district, where a property is under one
ownership and a street frontage exceeds two hundred feet (200'), additional or
larger freestanding ground signs shall be permitted according to the following
standards:
   1.   One additional freestanding ground sign shall be permitted for each two
hundred (200) linear feet of frontage or portion thereof, up to the permitted
maximum size of two hundred (200) square feet; or
   2.   If the property is a corner lot, or has frontage on two (2)
intersecting streets, and exceeds four (4) acres in area, the street frontage
calculations may be combined to locate one freestanding ground sign of up to
four hundred (400) square feet in area on either frontage;
   3.   Any frontage above two hundred feet (200') utilized in calculations to
permit an additional freestanding ground sign location shall not also be
included in calculations to permit a larger sign, nor shall frontage used in
calculations to permit a larger sign also be used to permit an additional sign
location.
B.   In the C-4 and C-5 districts, where a property is under one ownership and
a street frontage exceeds two hundred fifty feet (250'), additional or larger
freestanding ground signs shall be permitted according to the following
standards:
   1.   One additional freestanding ground sign shall be permitted for each two
hundred (200) linear feet of frontage or portion thereof, up to a maximum size
of three hundred (300) square feet; or
   2.   If the property is a corner lot, or has frontage on two (2)
intersecting streets, and exceeds four (4) acres in area, the street frontage
calculations may be combined to locate one freestanding ground sign of up to
five hundred (500) square feet in area on either frontage;
   3.   Any frontage above two hundred fifty feet (250') utilized in
calculations to permit an additional freestanding ground sign location shall
not also be included in calculations to permit a larger sign, nor shall
frontage used in calculations to permit a larger sign also be used to permit an
additional sign location. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.16
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR FREESTANDING GROUND SIGNS
SECTION:
15.16.010: Application Of Regulations
15.16.020: Standards
15.16.030: Wind Resistance
15.16.040: Relation To Property Lines
15.16.050: Minimum Height; Pole Mounted
15.16.010: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The following regulations are established for freestanding ground signs in
addition to the other regulations contained in this title. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.16.020: STANDARDS:
A.   A freestanding ground sign shall be securely built, as follows:
   1.   When erected as a ground sign, said sign shall be secured to a concrete
footing which has been poured to a depth below the frost line.
   2.   Base of such sign shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the
dimension of the width of the sign structure.
B.   A pole mounted sign shall be securely built as follows:
   1.   Shall be sunk at least three feet (3') below the natural surface of the
ground and placed in concrete. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.16.030: WIND RESISTANCE:
All freestanding ground signs shall be constructed to withstand a wind pressure
of not less than forty (40) pounds per square foot. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.16.040: RELATION TO PROPERTY LINES:
A.   No part or position of any freestanding ground sign shall be located on or
over public street right of way;
B.   No freestanding ground sign shall be erected, constructed, placed or
replaced closer than fifty feet (50') to the nearest property line of
residentially developed and residentially zoned property. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.16.050: MINIMUM HEIGHT; POLE MOUNTED:
A pole mounted sign shall have a minimum height from ground level to the base
of the sign of fourteen feet (14') in a traffic area and ten feet (10') in a
nontraffic area. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.20
ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR CANOPY, COMBINATION, FASCIA, PARAPET WALL, PROJECTING,
ROOF, AND WALL SIGNS
SECTION:
15.20.010: Height
15.20.020: Clearance
15.20.030: Location
15.20.040: Structural Requirements
15.20.050: Additional Roof Sign Requirements
15.20.060: Additional Wall Sign Requirements
15.20.010: HEIGHT:
No sign in this chapter shall extend more than six feet (6') above the top of
the surface to which it is attached. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.20.020: CLEARANCE:
The clearance above ground for such signs shall be not less than nine feet
(9'), or fourteen feet (14') if there will be vehicular access below them;
provided:
A.   Where there is no pedestrian access below a wall sign, there shall be no
clearance requirement;
B.   No sign shall extend below the bottom level of a canopy to which the sign
is attached; provided, however, that a nonflashing identification sign of not
more than four (4) square feet in area and having a clearance of eight feet
(8') above ground level shall be permitted to hang below a canopy to identify
the entrance to and name of each business covered by the canopy. (Ord. 1147,
2015)
15.20.030: LOCATION:
Regardless of building setback requirements, a canopy, combination, parapet
wall, projecting or wall sign may project from the supporting surface to a
distance not to exceed ten feet (10') or to within two feet (2') of the
property line, whichever is the lesser, nor shall the sign be placed on the
gable end of any building's roof structure. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.20.040: STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
All structural supports shall be constructed of noncombustible material; and
said signs must be constructed in a workmanlike manner, well braced and
constructed out of firm and substantial material. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.20.050: ADDITIONAL ROOF SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
Roof signs shall be permitted only in the C4 and C5 zoning districts. (Ord.
1147, 2015)
15.20.060: ADDITIONAL WALL SIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A wall sign may be attached to a building by a nonlicensed person on a property
he owns or leases, provided:
A.   There is no alteration to the structural elements of the building to
support such sign;
B.   Illumination shall be by indirect lighting only, and any electrical wiring
installed shall be subject to the permit requirements of the city electrical
code;
C.   Such sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area and shall
conform to all other regulations in this title and in the zoning code;
D.   A sign permit shall be applied for and issued in accordance with the
requirements of this title.
E.   In C4 and C5 zoning districts additional wall signs shall be permitted on
sides or rear with an approved plan showing that the total display area not
exceed the maximum allowed by this title. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.24
TEMPORARY SIGNS
SECTION:
15.24.010: Requirements
15.24.020: Location Restrictions
15.24.030: Obstruction Of Exits; Attachment To Public Property
15.24.040: Support Materials
15.24.050: Advertising Restrictions
15.24.060: Area Of Combustible Signs
15.24.010: REQUIREMENTS:
A.   No "temporary sign" as defined in this title shall be erected without
being authorized by this title and the approval of the city inspector or
designated agent. Where an application for a temporary sign permit has been
denied by the city inspector or designated agent, the applicant may appeal to
the city council. The city council shall have the authority to review the
application and will either grant or deny a permit. No appeal shall be heard
unless the applicant files the appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30)
days of being denied by the city inspector or designated agent.
B.   Permits for temporary signs shall authorize the erection of said sign and
their maintenance for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of
issuance. The total area of any sign to be erected and displayed per permit
shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet. The fee for the permit shall be
ten dollars ($10.00) plus two dollars ($2.00) per square foot. A two (2) faced
sign is permitted and will not "double" the cost. No more than four (4)
temporary sign permits shall be allowed per property parcel per business per
calendar year.
C.   The following temporary signs are permitted:
   1.   Framed banners: The retaining of a licensed contractor to erect a
temporary sign for which a permit has been granted shall not be required,
however the following erecting requirements remain:
      a.   Setback is to be fifteen feet (15') from the curb or outside the
right of way, whichever is greater.
      b.   Steel, or aluminum or other metal poles must be used when erecting
temporary signs.
      c.   Signs and poles must be removed when the temporary ten (10) day sign
permit has expired.
      d.   Temporary signs are not permitted on buildings, fences, or other
structures except those allowed under the new business exceptions below.
   2.   Official governmental notices and notices posted by governmental
officers or agents in the performance of their duties, governmental signs to
control traffic or any other regulatory purposes, or to warn of hazardous
conditions. No permit shall be required.
   3.   The official flag, pennant, or insignia of the United States Of
America, the state of Oklahoma, or the city of Warr Acres. No permit shall be
required.
   4.   Temporary decorations or displays, when such are clearly incidental to,
customarily and commonly associated with, and intended as part of any official
national, state, or local holiday or celebration, and not used in connection
with or intended as a commercial promotion or as an advertising device. No
permit shall be required.
   5.   Temporary signs erected by public utility companies or construction
companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating
the presence of underground cables, gas lines, and the like. No permit shall be
required.
   6.   Merchandise, pictures, signs, banners, models, or similar device or
display which is incorporated as an integral part and within the confines of a
window display. No permit shall be required.
   7.   Temporary political signs, from the date of filing for office until two
(2) days after the election(s) that:
      a.   Do not extend over twenty four inches (24") above the ground.
      b.   Are at least three feet (3') from the curb.
      c.   Do not obstruct the view of drivers on adjoining streets or
roadways.
No permit shall be required.
Temporary political signs that are larger than five hundred (500) square inches
in size and/or extend over twenty four inches (24") above the ground are
prohibited.
D.   Exceptions for new businesses:
   1.   All new businesses shall be granted, in addition to their permanent
business sign permit at no additional charge, a forty five (45) day temporary
permit to remain erected while the permanent sign is being constructed.
   2.   A temporary sign is allowed to be erected on a building in the place of
the permanent sign that is being constructed but shall be removed within the
forty five (45) days or within ten (10) days of the completion of the permanent
sign whichever is greater. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.24.020: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A.   No temporary sign shall extend over or into any alley, street, sidewalk,
or public thoroughfare and/or a distance greater than four inches (4") from the
wall upon which it is erected.
B.   No temporary sign shall be placed or project over any wall opening. (Ord.
1147, 2015)
15.24.030: OBSTRUCTION OF EXITS; ATTACHMENT TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No temporary sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress and egress
from any door, window, or fire escape, nor shall such sign be attached to any
property classified as public property. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.24.040: SUPPORT MATERIALS:
Ground signs (banners) shall be supported by steel, aluminum or other metal
pipe firmly embedded into the ground in a reasonably substantial manner and
method so as to ensure their staying in place and not posing a threat to public
safety. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.24.050: ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS:
The advertisement contained on any temporary sign shall pertain only to the
business, industry, or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on which the
sign is erected and maintained. This provision shall not apply to signs of a
civic or religious nature. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.24.060: AREA OF COMBUSTIBLE SIGNS:
Except by special permission of the city council, no temporary sign of
combustible material shall be allowed. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.28
PORTABLE AND MOBILE SIGNS
SECTION:
15.28.010: Purpose; Scope
15.28.020: Portable And Mobile Signs Prohibited
15.28.010: PURPOSE; SCOPE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted establishing rules and
regulations for the use and control of illuminated rollaway, portable or mobile
signs in the city. This chapter shall be an addendum or addition to the
existing provisions found in this title, and shall in no way be construed as
being in conflict therewith. This chapter shall control and regulate rollaway,
portable or mobile signs insofar as it pertains to the use of such signs,
illumination of such signs, establishment of a user's fee, the issuance of a
permit, and mandatory inspection by the building inspector or his
representative prior to the use thereof. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.28.020: PORTABLE AND MOBILE SIGNS PROHIBITED:
All portable and mobile signs, with or without wheels shall be prohibited
including, but not limited to, vehicles that are used expressly for the intent
of advertising and attracting attention to businesses. This paragraph's intent
is not to prohibit vehicles that are used regularly for transportation that
contain advertising, but rather to prohibit the use of a vehicle to take the
place of a permanent advertising structure. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
CHAPTER 15.29
MISCELLANEOUS SIGN PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15.29.010: Painted Graffiti Signs
15.29.020: Wind Signs
15.29.030: Inflatable Signs
15.29.010: PAINTED GRAFFITI SIGNS:
All signs painted or drawn directly on any building or structure as defined in
this title shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.29.020: WIND SIGNS:
All wind signs as defined in this title shall be prohibited except on
properties that front the 39th Street Expressway. (Ord. 1147, 2015)
15.29.030: INFLATABLE SIGNS:
All inflatable signs as defined in this title shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1147,
2015)
TITLE 16
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 1
Building Code   16.04
Electrical Code   16.08
Fire Prevention Code   16.12
Fire Safety And Prevention Miscellaneous Provisions   16.14
Mechanical Code   16.15
Plumbing Code   16.16
Manufactured Housing Permanent Installation Code   16.18
Flood Damage Prevention   16.20
Property Maintenance Code   16.30
Fences   16.40
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS §§ 43-101, 22-113, 14-107; charter section 2.14.
CHAPTER 16.04
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
16.04.010: Adopted
16.04.020: Amendments To Building Code
16.04.030: Amendments To Residential Code
16.04.120: Permit Fees
16.04.130: State Permit Fees
16.04.010: ADOPTED:
A.   Building Code: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file
in the office of the city clerk of the city of Warr Acres being marked and
designated as the BOCA national building code, the 1993 edition thereof, as
published by the Building Officials And Code Administrators International,
Inc., is adopted as the commercial building code of the city of Warr Acres in
the state of Oklahoma for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided;
B.   Residential Code: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on
file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Warr Acres being marked and
designated as the international residential code, the 2009 edition thereof, as
published by the Building Officials And Code Administrators International,
Inc., is adopted as the residential building code of the city of Warr Acres in
the state of Oklahoma for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and
C.   Amendments: Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of each code, are referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in sections
16.04.020, "Amendments To Building Code", and
16.04.030, "Amendments To Residential Code", of this chapter. (Ord. 1109, 2011)
16.04.020: AMENDMENTS TO BUILDING CODE:
The following sections of the BOCA national building code are revised as
follows:
A.   Section 101.1 (page 1, line 2). Insert: "city of Warr Acres."
B.   Section 108. Subsection 108.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
108.1 Action On Application: The code official shall examine or cause to be
examined all application for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable
time after filing. If the application or construction documents do not conform
to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the code official shall reject such
application, in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and
all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue a
permit as soon as practicable unless the following conditions exist:
   1.   The proposed work requires major structural alterations.
   2.   The proposed work requires changes in existing landscape requirements.
   3.   The proposed work requires changes in vehicle parking and loading.
   4.   The proposed work requires changes in drainage.
   5.   The proposed work requires demolition of an existing site and new
construction is to be erected on the demolished site.
   6.   Total combined cost of items 1-5 must exceed $500,000 dollars. If item
number six is exceeded by the proposed work, the code official shall forward
the application to the planning commission for approval. The recommending
actions of the planning commission shall be submitted to the city council for
approval at their next meeting. Approval requires a simple majority of the city
council. Following approval by the city council, the code official shall issue
a permit as soon as practicable.
C.   Section 112.3.1 (page 5, line 4). Insert: "As set forth in title 16,
section 16.04.120 of the Warr Acres city code."
D.   Section 116.4 (page 6, lines 6 and 7). Insert: "misdemeanor and twenty
(20) dollars."
E.   Section 116.4 (page 6, lines 7 and 8). Delete: "or by imprisonment not
exceeding (number of days), or both such fine and imprisonment."
F.   Section 117.2 (page 6, line 5). Insert: "ten (10) dollars and twenty (20)
dollars."
G.   Section 3408.2 (page 310, line 1). Insert: "February 7, 1995."
H.   Sections 102.2, 3400.1.7, 3400.1.7.1, 3401.2 and 3408.3.2 and any other
references to the BOCA national property maintenance code. Delete in their
entirety.
   (Ord. 828 §1, 1997: Ord. 778 §1, 1996: Ord. 756 §3, 1995)
16.04.030: AMENDMENTS TO RESIDENTIAL CODE:
The following sections of the international residential code are revised as
follows:
A.   Chapter 1, section R101.1 insert: "city of Warr Acres" as the name of
jurisdiction.
B.   Chapter 3 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section R302.1 table R302.1 exterior walls has been modified for minimum
fire separation distance for walls and projections. Walls have been changed
from 5 feet to 3 feet. Projections have been changed from greater than or equal
to 2 feet to 5 feet to greater than or equal to 2 feet to 3 feet.
(2) Section R311.7.4.1 Riser Heights. This section has been modified and now
requires initial measurements to take place at rough-in and allows for a top
and bottom riser height variance at the final inspection. This section shall
read: The maximum riser height shall be 73/4 inches (196 mm). The riser shall
be measured vertically between leading edges of the adjacent treads. The
greatest riser height within any flight of stairs shall not exceed the smallest
by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) at rough-in. Top and bottom riser may vary by 3/
4 inch at final inspection, not to exceed 73/4 of an inch (196 mm).
(3) Section R313.2 One- And Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems. This
section has been moved to appendix R, Automatic Fire Systems of the IRC 2009
and is not adopted as a minimum standard for residential construction within
the state of Oklahoma.
(4) Section R313.2.1 Design And Installation. This section has been moved to
appendix R, Automatic Fire Systems of the IRC 2009 and is not adopted as a
minimum standard for residential construction within the state of Oklahoma.
(5) Section R315.1 Carbon Monoxide Alarms. This section has been modified to
include the following exception: If a residence with an attached garage has a
sealed door between the residence and the garage; and no fuel burning
appliances in the residence, then carbon monoxide detection is not required
within the residence.
(6) Section R323.1 General. This section has been modified to provide for more
than one standard to be utilized to build a storm shelter. This section has
been modified to read: This section applies to the construction of storm
shelters when constructed as separate detached buildings or when constructed as
safe rooms within buildings for the purpose of providing safe refuge from
storms that produce high winds, such as tornados and hurricanes. In addition to
other applicable requirements in this code, storm shelters shall be constructed
in accordance with one of the following:   ICC/NSSA 500 or FEMA 320 or other
equivalent engineered system.
C.   Chapter 4 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section R402.2 Concrete. This section has been modified to include the
following exception: Interior concrete slabs on grade and enclosed garage slabs
are not required to be air entrained.
(2) Section R403.1.6 Foundation Anchorage. This section has been modified to
include the following exception: Wood sole plates of braced wall panels at
building interiors on monolithic slabs may be anchored using connector(s) with
a shear capacity of 2300 pounds and a tensile capacity of 800 pounds over a
maximum span of 6 feet.
(3) Section R406.2 Concrete And Masonry Foundation Waterproofing. This section
has been modified to include an additional option for waterproofing: Bentonite.
D.   Chapter 5 is adopted with modifications as follows:
Section R506.2.3 Vapor Retarder. This section has been modified to allow for
other industry accepted vapor retarders installed according to the
manufacturer's specifications. This section has been modified to read: A 6 mil
(0.006 inch; 152 micrometers) polyethylene sheeting, other industry accepted
vapor retarder products installed per manufacturer specifications or approved
vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) shall be
placed between the concrete floor slab and the base course or the prepared
subgrade where no base course exists. The remainder of this section, including
exceptions, is adopted without modification.
E.   Chapter 6 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section R602.4 Interior Load-Bearing Walls. This section has been modified
to clarify that the section is limited to stud spacing and heights per tables
R602.3(5) and R602.3.1. This section has been modified to read: Interior load-
bearing walls shall be constructed, framed and fireblocked as specified for
exterior walls. Table R602.3(5) shall be used to establish stud spacing of
walls up to 10 feet (3048 mm) high, and table R602.3.1 shall apply to walls
over 10 feet (3048 mm) high.
(2) Section R602.10.6 Braced Wall Panel Connections. This section has been
modified to include the following addition: Wood sole plates of braced wall
panels at building interiors on monolithic slabs may be anchored using
connector(s) with a shear capacity of 2300 pounds and a tensile capacity of 800
pounds over a maximum span of 6 feet.
F.   Chapter 7 is adopted with modifications as follows:
Section R703.8 Flashing. This section has been modified to clarify that 6-mil
polyethylene sheeting is an approved corrosion-resistant flashing in certain
circumstances. The first paragraph of this section has been modified to read:
Approved corrosion-resistant flashing shall be applied shingle-fashion in a
manner to prevent entry of water into the wall cavity or penetration of water
to the building structural framing components. 6-mil polyethylene sheeting is
an approved corrosion-resistant flashing when not exposed to UV rays. Self-
adhered membranes used as flashing shall comply with AAMA 711. The flashing
shall extend to the surface of the exterior wall finish. Approved corrosion-
resistant flashings shall be installed at all of the locations listed in IRC
2009, section R703.8 Flashing. The remainder of this section is adopted without
modification.
G.   Chapter 8 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section R801.3 Roof Drainage. This section has been stricken from the code.
(2) Section R802.3 Framing Details. This section has been modified to provide a
definition of a brace and provide an exception to the section. It has been
modified to read: Rafters shall be framed to ridge board or to each other with
a gusset plate as a tie. Ridge board shall be at least 1-inch (25 mm) nominal
thickness and not less in depth than the cut end of the rafter. At all valleys
and hips there shall be a valley or hip rafter not less than 2-inch (51 mm)
nominal thickness and not less in depth than the cut end of the rafter. Hip and
valley rafters shall be supported at the ridge by a brace to a bearing
partition or be designed to carry and distribute the specific load at that
point. Definition of brace includes: 1. A triangular configuration of framing
members with a horizontal tie and rafter members, 2. King post or similar.
Where the roof pitch is less than three units vertical in 12 units horizontal
(25-percent slope), structural members that support rafters and ceiling joists,
such as ridge beams, hips and valleys, shall be designed as beams. Exception:
This exception helps address many situations where due to the design, building
bracing is not achievable. This exception shall read: The use of a "Blind
Valley", also known as a "Farmers Valley" or "California Valley" will be
allowed. In this type of valley the main roof is framed as usual, it may or may
not be sheathed, and the intersecting roof is framed on top of the main roof.
The two valley plates or sleeps lie on top of the main roof rafters or
sheathing and provide a nailing base for the jack rafters and ridge board of
the intersecting roof.
(3) Section R802.5.1 Purlins. This section has been modified to include the
following exception: Braces may be spaced not more than 6 feet (1829 mm) on
center if: 1. The purlin brace is 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 153 mm) 2. Purlins
shall be sized one nominal size larger than the rafter they support, and 3.
Unbraced length of braces shall not exceed 8 feet (2438 mm).
H.   Chapter 11 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section N1101.9 Certificate. This section has been moved to the appendix S
of the IRC 2009 and is not adopted as a minimum standard of residential
construction within the state of Oklahoma.
(2) Section N1102.4.3 Fireplaces. This section has been modified to remove the
requirement of gasketed doors and will now read: New wood-burning fireplaces
shall have outdoor combustion air.
(3) Section N1103.1.1 Programmable Thermostat. This section has been stricken
from the code.
(4) Section N1103.2.2 Sealing. This section has been modified to include the
following exception: Visual inspection may be used instead of the rough-in test
and post construction test.
(5) Section N1103.8.3 Pool Covers. This section has been modified to remove the
requirement for heated pools to have a vapor retardant pool cover on or at the
water surface. This section will now read: Pools heated to more than 90 degrees
Fahrenheit (32 degrees Celsius) shall have a pool cover with a minimum
insulation value of R-12.
(6) Section N1104.1 Lighting Equipment. This section has been modified to
include the following exception: Can or recessed lights are exempt from this
section of the code.
I.   Chapter 15 is adopted with modifications as follows:
Section M1502.3 Duct Termination. This section has been modified and a
requirement that exhaust ducts not terminate within 3 feet of condensing units
has been added. This section has been modified to read: Exhaust ducts shall
terminate on the outside of the building. Exhaust duct terminations shall be in
accordance with the dryer manufacturer's installation instructions. If the
manufacturer's instructions do not specify a termination location, the exhaust
duct shall terminate not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in any direction from the
openings into buildings. Exhaust duct terminations shall be equipped with a
backdraft damper. Additionally, exhaust shall not terminate within 3 feet (914
mm) of condensing units. Screens shall not be installed at the duct
termination.
J.   Chapter 24 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section G2406.3 (303.6) Outdoor Locations. This section has been modified
to require protection for outdoor appliances be approved. This section has been
modified to read: Appliances installed in outdoor locations shall be either
listed for outdoor installation or provided with approved protection from
outdoor environmental factors that influence the operability, durability and
safety of the appliance.
(2) Tables G2413.4(3), G2413.4(4). These tables have been stricken from the
code.
(3) Section G2414.5.2 Copper Tubing. This section has been modified to read:
Copper tubing shall be prohibited for natural gas installations, but shall be
allowed for liquefied petroleum gas installations.
(4) The International Code Council emergency amendment dated September 27, 2010
has been adopted. This amendment replaces in their entirety sections 406.7 of
the IFGC and G2417.7 of the IRC 2009.
K.   Chapter 25 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) P2503.4 Building Sewer Test. This section has been modified to note that
the building sewer test is only necessary when the local authority having
jurisdiction requires the testing to be done. This section has been modified to
read: When required by local authority having jurisdiction, the building sewer
shall be tested by insertion of a test plug at the point of connection with the
public sewer and filling the building sewer with water, testing with not less
than 10-foot (3048 mm) head of water and be able to maintain such pressure for
15 minutes.
(2) P2503.6 Shower Liner Test. This section has been modified to require this
test at plumbing final. This section has been modified to read: Where shower
floors and receptors are made water tight by the application of materials
required by section P2709.2, the completed liner installation shall be tested
at plumbing final. The pipe from the shower drain shall be plugged water tight
for the test. The floor and receptor area shall be filled with potable water to
a depth of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) measured at the threshold. Where a
threshold of at least 2 inches high does not exist, a temporary threshold shall
be constructed to retain the test water in the lined floor or receptor area to
a level not less than 2 inches deep measured at the threshold. The water shall
be retained for a test period of not less than 15 minutes and there shall be no
evidence of leakage.
(3) P2503.7 Water-Supply System Testing. This section has been modified to
delete the word "plastic" and replace it with the terms "PVC" and "CPVC." This
section shall read: Upon completion of the water-supply system or a section of
it, the system or portion completed shall be tested and proved tight under a
water pressure of not less than the working pressure of the system or, for
piping systems other than PVC or CPVC, by an air test of not less than 50 psi
(345 kPa). This pressure shall be held for not less than 15 minutes. The water
used for tests shall be obtained from a potable water source.
L.   Chapter 26 is adopted with modifications as follows: Section P2603.6.1
Sewer Depth. This section has been modified to include a depth for the septic
tank connection unless otherwise approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
This section has been modified to read: Building sewers that connect to private
sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) or as approved
by the authority having jurisdiction below finished grade at the point of
septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305
mm) below grade.
M.   Chapter 27 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section P2704.1 General. This section has been modified to allow
installation of slip joints anywhere between the fixture and trap outlet. It
has been modified to read: Slip joints shall be made with an approved
elastomeric gasket and shall be installed from fixture to trap outlet. Fixtures
with concealed slip-joint connections shall be provided with an access panel or
utility space at least 12 inches (305 mm) in its smallest dimension or other
approved arrangement so as to provide access to the slip connections for
inspection and repair.
(2) Section P2709.2 Lining Required. This section has been modified and it has
been noted that it is only effective where required. The first paragraph of
this section has been modified to read: Where required, the adjoining walls and
floor framing enclosed on-site built-up shower receptors shall be lined with
one of the materials listed in IRC 2009, section P2709.2 Lining Required. The
remainder of this section is adopted without modification.
(3) Section P2715.1 Laundry Tray Waste Outlet. This section has been modified
and the word tub has been replaced with the word tray. This section has been
modified to read: Each compartment of a laundry tray shall be provided with a
waste outlet not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter and a strainer or
crossbar to restrict the clear opening of the waste outlet.
N.   Chapter 28 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section P2801.5 Required Pan. This section has been modified to specify
that a pan is required for tank type water heaters or hot water storage tanks
only. This section has been modified to read: Where tank type water heaters or
hot water storage tanks are installed in locations where leakage of the tanks
or connections will cause damage, the tank or water heater shall be installed
in a galvanized steel pan having a material thickness of not less than 0.0236
inch (0.6010 mm) (No 24 gage), or other pans approved for such use. Listed pans
shall comply with CSA LC3.
(2) Section P2803.1 Relief Valves Required. This section has been modified to
specify the relief valve requirements and specifications in this section are
for tank type appliances and equipment only. The first paragraph of this
section has been modified to read: Tank type appliances and equipment used for
heating water or storing hot water shall be protected utilizing the options
listed in IRC 2009, section P2803.1. The remainder of this section is adopted
without modification.
O.   Chapter 29 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section P2902.5.3 Lawn Irrigation Systems. This section has been modified
to add a spill resistant backflow preventer as an option for protection. This
section has been modified to read: The potable water supply to lawn irrigation
systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum
breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker or a spill resistant backflow
preventer. A valve shall not be installed down-stream from an atmospheric
vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable
water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer.
(2) Section P2903.8.6 Hose Bibb Bleed. This section has been modified to
specify it is only pertinent when the authority having jurisdiction requires
it. This section has been modified to read: Where authority having jurisdiction
requires a readily accessible air bleed shall be installed in hose bibb
supplies at the manifold or at the hose bibb exit point.
(3) Section P2903.9.1 Service Valve. This section has been modified to strike
the provision for drainage such as a bleed orifice or installation of a
separate drain valve. This section shall now read: Each dwelling unit shall be
provided with an accessible main shutoff valve near the entrance of the water
service. The valve shall be of a full- open type having nominal restriction to
flow. Additionally, the water service shall be valved at the curb or property
line in accordance with local requirements.
(4) Section P2903.10 Hose Bibb. This section has been modified to strike the
requirement of a stop and waste type valve and the exception. This section has
been modified to read: Hose bibbs subject to freezing, including the "frost-
proof" type, shall be equipped with an accessible valve inside the building so
that they can be controlled and/or drained during cold periods.
(5) Section P2904.1 General. This section has been modified to read: Where
installed, residential fire sprinkler systems, or portions thereof, shall be in
accordance with NFPA 13D.
(6) Sections P2904.1.1 - Section P2904.8.2 Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler System
Provisions And Certain Tables Stricken. Sections P2904.1.1 through section
P2904.8.2 and tables P2904.6.2(1) through P2904.6.2(9) have been stricken from
the code.
(7) Section P2905.4 Water Service Pipe. This section has been modified to
require piping materials not third-party certified for water distribution to
terminate at least 30 inches outside of the exterior wall. It has also been
modified to strike the requirement of the termination to be before the full
open valve located at the entrance to the structure. This section has been
modified to read: Water service pipe shall conform to NSF 61 and shall conform
to one of the standards listed in table P2905.4. Water service pipe or tubing,
installed underground and outside of the structure shall have a minimum working
pressure rating of 160 pounds per square inch at 73 degrees Fahrenheit (1103
kPa at 23 degrees Celsius). Where the water pressure exceeds 160 pounds per
square inch, (1103 kPa), piping material shall have a rated working pressure
equal to or greater than the highest available pressure. Water service piping
materials not third-party certified for water distribution shall terminate at
least 30 inches outside the exterior wall. Ductile iron water service piping
shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104.
(8) Table P2905.4 Water Service Pipe. This table has been modified. Asbestos-
cement pipe has been stricken from the code.
P.   Chapter 30 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section P3003.2 Prohibited Joints. This section has been modified to
include the following exception: Saddle-type fittings may be used to connect
the building sewer to a public sewer.
(2) Section P3008.1 Sewage Backflow. This section has been modified by striking
the requirements of plumbing fixtures having flood level rims above the
elevation of the next upstream manhole cover in the public sewer system. It has
been modified to read: Where the flood level rims of plumbing fixtures are
below the elevation of the manhole cover of the next upstream manhole in the
public sewer, the fixtures shall be protected by a backwater valve installed in
the building drain, branch of the building drain or horizontal branch servicing
such fixtures.
Q.   Chapter 31 is adopted with modifications as follows:
Section P3103.4 Prohibited Use. This section has been modified and the
exception has been deleted. It has been modified to read: Vent terminals shall
not be used as a flag pole or to support flag poles, TV aerials, or similar
items.
R.   Chapter 34 is adopted with modifications as follows:
(1) Section E3402.2 Penetrations Of Fire-Resistance-Rated Assemblies. This
section has been modified to correct the reference section cited from R317.3 to
R302.4.1. It has been modified to read: Electrical installations in hollow
spaces, vertical shafts and ventilation or air-handling ducts shall be made so
that the possible spread of fire products of combustion will not be
substantially increased. Electrical penetrations through fire-resistance rated
walls, partitions, floors or ceilings shall be protected by approved methods to
maintain the fire-resistance-rating of the element penetrated. Penetrations of
fire-resistance- rated walls shall be limited as specified in section R302.4.1.
(2) Section E3403.3 Listing And Labeling. This section has been modified to
comply with NFPA 70. It has been modified to read: Electrical materials,
components, devices, fixtures and equipment shall be listed for the
application, in accordance with NFPA 70, shall bear the label of an approved
agency and shall be installed, and used, or both, in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions.
S.   Chapter 40 is adopted with modifications as follows:
Section E4002.14 Tamper-Resistant Receptacles. This section has been modified
to include the following exceptions: Receptacles in the following locations
shall not be required to be tamper-resistant:
(1) Receptacles located more than 51/2 feet (1.7 m) above the floor.
(2) Receptacles that are part of a luminaire or appliance.
(3) A single receptacle or a duplex receptacle for two appliances located
within dedicated space for each appliance that, in normal use, is not easily
moved from one place to another and that is cord-and-plug connected.
(4) Non-grounding receptacles used for replacement.
(Ord. 1110, 2011)
16.04.120: PERMIT FEES:
A.   No permit as required by the building code, nor certificate of occupancy,
shall be issued until the fee prescribed in this section has been paid to the
city clerk-treasurer's office.
B.   The fees to be charged for permits for the erection, change, alteration of
or addition to any building or structure shall be as follows:
 
Minimum fee                              $ 15.00
                                       
Alterations, additions, remodeling or      
repair:    
                                       
 Minimum fee                            15.00
                                       
 Rate per $1,000.00 of estimated cost:    
     
                                         
  No architect seal                    2.00
  With architect seal                  1.00
                                          
Demolition fee                           100.00
                                       
Rates per square foot for computing fee where the total charge exceeds the
minimum:
   
 Commercial building, office building,   $0.20 per square foot, not to exceed
  warehouse and/or storage buildings      $4,750.00
   
  Residences, single, duplex, fourplex,
 garage apartments, apartments,          $0.10
  including garage attached or detached
 
C.   The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy where no building
permit is required for the use of any land, building or structure shall be
twenty dollars ($20.00).
D.   Any person guilty of an offense under this section shall be punished by a
fine and cost not to exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
such offense. (Ord. 1052 §1, 2008: Ord. 1022 §5, 2006: Ord. 857 §1, 1998: Ord.
787 §1, 1996: Ord. 664 §1, 1988)
16.04.130: STATE PERMIT FEES:
A.   The city shall charge a state mandated fee for all building permits and
the renewal of such permits which authorize work governed by the codes within
the purview of the Oklahoma uniform building code commission (hereafter
referred to as "UBCC"). In accordance with the rules adopted by the UBCC, the
fee for the issuance or renewal of any permit within the purview of the UBCC
shall be four dollars ($4.00) per permit.
B.   The city shall deposit the fee referenced in subsection A of this section
into an account created by the city treasurer for that purpose. Such deposit
shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month for the fees
collected during the preceding calendar month.
C.   The city shall further levy and collect a fee of fifty cents ($0.50) for
the issuance of all building permits and the renewal of such permits which
authorize work governed by the codes within the purview of the UBCC. These
monies shall be deposited into an account for the sole use of the city.
D.   The city shall remit the monies in the account referenced in subsection B
of this section on a monthly basis directly to the state treasury for deposit
into the Oklahoma uniform building code commission revolving fund created
pursuant to 59 Oklahoma Statutes 1000.28. Along with the deposits required by
this section, the city shall also prepare and submit a report stating the total
amount of funds collected and the total number of fees imposed during the
preceding month. The report shall be made on computerized or manual disposition
forms as prescribed by the UBCC.
E.   The fees levied under this section shall be in addition to all current
fees levied by the city for permits which authorize work governed by the codes
within the purview of the UBCC. (Ord. 1080 §1, 2010)
CHAPTER 16.08
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
16.08.010: Adopted
16.08.020: Enforcement
16.08.030: Municipality Defined
16.08.040: Fire Limits
16.08.050: Amendments
16.08.060: Modifications
16.08.070: Appeals
16.08.080: Penalty
16.08.010: ADOPTED:
There is adopted by the city, for the purpose of providing practical
safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their contents from hazards
arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, power, radio, signaling
and for other purposes, that certain code known as the national electrical
code, being the current edition thereof and current amendments thereof, as
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code not
less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the
city clerk, and the same is adopted and incorporated as if fully set out at
length in this chapter, and from the date on which the electrical code takes
effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city and the
limits of the city. (Ord. 293 §1, 1969: prior code §4-57)
16.08.020: ENFORCEMENT:
The code adopted in section
16.08.010 of this chapter shall be enforced by the city building inspector.
(Prior code §4-58)
16.08.030: MUNICIPALITY DEFINED:
Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the electrical code adopted in
section
16.08.010 of this chapter it shall be held to mean the city. (Prior code §4-59)
16.08.040: FIRE LIMITS:
The fire limits, as referred to in the electrical code shall be as prescribed
in ordinance 190 of the city. (Prior code §4-60)
16.08.050: AMENDMENTS:
Provisions of the electrical code adopted in section
16.08.010 of this chapter are amended as follows:
A.   All wiring shall be no. 12 or larger, nonmetallic 3-wire.
B.   All single-family dwellings must have circuit breakers.
C.   All wiring in the designated fire zone area must be in conduit. (Prior
code §4-61)
16.08.060: MODIFICATIONS:
The building inspector shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the
electrical code adopted in section
16.08.010 of this chapter upon application in writing by the owner or lessee,
or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of such code; provided that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision
of the building inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the
office of building inspector, and a signed copy shall be furnished the
applicant. (Prior code §4-62)
16.08.070: APPEALS:
Whenever the building inspector disapproves an application or refuses to grant
a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
electrical code do not apply or that the true intent or meaning of such code
has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the building inspector to the city council within thirty (30) days
from the date of the decision appealed. (Prior code §4-63)
16.08.080: PENALTY:
A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the electrical code
adopted in section
16.08.010 of this chapter or who fails to comply therewith, or who violates or
fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or
modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the
time fixed in this chapter, is severally for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine and
costs of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than twenty dollars
($20.00). The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when
not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
B.   The application of the penalty set out in subsection A of this section
shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior code §4-64)
CHAPTER 16.12
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
16.12.010: Adoption
16.12.020: Amendments
16.12.030: Establishment Of Limits
16.12.010: ADOPTION:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk or the city of Warr Acres, being marked and designated as the 2012
international fire code, the latest edition thereof and all subsequent
amendments or additions thereto, as published by International Code Council
(ICC), is adopted as the fire prevention code of the city of Warr Acres in the
state of Oklahoma; for the control of buildings, structures and premises as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said fire prevention code, are referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with additions,
deletions, insertions and changes, if any, as prescribed in section
16.12.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 1132, 2013)
16.12.020: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections are revised as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert: "city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma"
(Ord. 1126, 2012)
16.12.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS:
The limits referred to in sections 3404.2.9.6.1, 3406.2.4.4, 3506.2 and 3804.2
of the 2012 international fire code are to be established and codified after
review and recommendation from the fire chief. (Ord. 1132, 2013)
CHAPTER 16.14
FIRE SAFETY AND PREVENTION MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
16.14.010: Smoke Detectors Required
16.14.010: SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED:
A.   Any person, partnership, corporation, or organizations owning or operating
any building or structure within the city which is used as a hospital, church,
theater, hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house, dormitory, rest home,
nursing home, day nursery, convalescent home, auditorium, or childcare
institution or facility, whether existing or newly constructed, shall install
in such building or structure a smoke detector or detectors in accordance with
the nationally recognized codes, standards and practices adopted by the state
fire marshal commission to safeguard life and property from the hazards of
smoke and fire.
B.   For the purpose of this section, the term "smoke detector" shall mean a
device which is:
   1.   Designed to detect visible or invisible products of combustion; and
   2.   Designed with an alarm audible to the room or building or structure
areas it serves; and
   3.   Powered by either battery, alternating current, or other power source;
and
   4.   Tested and listed for use as a smoke detector by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., Factory Mutual Research Corporation, or United States
Testing Company, Inc.
C.   The fire chief of the city fire department shall be charged with the
enforcement of this section pursuant to the rules and regulations for smoke
detectors promulgated by the state fire marshal commission adopted on April 25,
1986, effective on November 2, 1986, and amendments made thereto, including
timetables for compliance as prescribed therein.
D.   Any person, partnership, corporation or organization who violates this
section shall, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, be subject to a
fine not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00), plus court costs. The imposition of
a penalty for the violation shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to
continue, and such violation shall be required to be corrected or remedied
within the soonest time reasonably practicable, which in any event shall not
exceed five (5) working days after the date of conviction, after which said
time continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate offense and be
punishable as such. (Ord. 651 §1, 1987)
CHAPTER 16.15
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
16.15.010: Adoption
16.15.020: Amendments
16.15.010: ADOPTION:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk of the city of Warr Acres, being marked and designated as the BOCA
national mechanical code, the latest edition thereof and all subsequent
amendments or additions thereto, as published by Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., is adopted as the mechanical code of the
city of Warr Acres, state of Oklahoma; for the control of buildings and
structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the said BOCA national mechanical code are
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section
16.15.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 758 §1, 1995)
16.15.020: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections are revised as follows:
Section M-101.1 (page 1, line 2). Insert: "city of Warr Acres"
Section M-113.2 (page 4, line 3). Insert: "as set forth in title 5 of the Warr
Acres city code."
Section M-113.3 (page 4, line 3). Insert: "as set forth in title 5 of the Warr
Acres city code."
Section M-116.4 (page 5, line 7, 8 and 9). Insert: "misdemeanor and twenty (20)
dollars." Delete: "or by imprisonment not exceeding [number of days], or both
such fine and imprisonment."
Section M-117.2 (page 5, line 5 and 6). Insert: "ten (10) dollars and twenty
(20) dollars."
(Ord. 758 §3, 1995)
CHAPTER 16.16
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
16.16.010: Adopted
16.16.020: Amendments
16.16.010: ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, being marked and designated as the
international plumbing code of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, 2006 edition, as published
by the International Code Council, be and the same is hereby adopted as the
plumbing code of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, for regulating and governing
the design construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said plumbing code on file in the office of
the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
16.16.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 1047 §1, 2007)
16.16.020: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the plumbing code hereby adopted are revised and
amended to read as follows:
Chapter 1Administration
   Section 101General
   Section 101.1Title. These regulations shall be known as the international
plumbing code of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma and hereinafter referred to
as "this code".
   Section 103Department Of Plumbing Inspection
   Section 103.1General. The department of property maintenance inspection
shall mean the office of the code official as provided in the Warr Acres
ordinances.
   Section 103.2 Appointment. The code official shall be appointed and serve as
provided by Warr Acres ordinances.
   Section 106Permits
   Section 106.6.2. Fees. The fees for plumbing work and activities and
services performed by the code official in carrying out the responsibilities of
such office under this code shall be as adopted from time to time by the city
council in the form of an ordinance or resolution.
   Section 106.6.3Fee Refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding
of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or
collected.
2. Not more than eighty (80) percent of the permit fee paid when no work has
been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
3. Not more than eighty (80) percent of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn
or cancelled before any plan review effort has been expended.
   Section 108Violations
   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directives of the code official, or of a
permit issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor
more than $500.00, plus court costs and assessments. Each day that a violation
continues after an initial citation for violation has been served shall
constitute a separate offense and punishable as such.
   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on
any plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code
or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall
be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or the owner’s
agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions
under which work is authorized to resume. Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to remove a violation or unsafe
condition shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished as provided in Section 108.4.
   Section 109Means Of Appeal
   Section 109.1Application For Appeal. All reference to the board of appeals
in this code shall mean the Warr Acres board of adjustment as set out in title
19 of the municipal code. Any person directly affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right
to appeal to the board of adjustment, provided that a written applications for
appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was
served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim and the board of
adjustment must review only the grounds that i) the true intent of this code,
ii) the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, iii)
the provision of this code do not fully apply, or iv) the requirements of this
code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Chapter 2Definitions
   Section 202 General Definitions.
   A. The following definitions are added to the general definitions contained
in section 202 of the international plumbing code adopted hereby and shall be
codified in such alphabetical order as required.
1. Apprentice Or Plumber's Apprentice. As set forth in title 59 OS section
1003.
2. Journeyman Plumber. As set forth in title 59 OS section 1003.
3. Temporary Journeyman Plumber. As set forth in title 59 OS section 1003.
4. Master Plumber. As set forth in title 59 OS section 1003.
5. Plumbing Contractor. As set forth in title 59 section 1003.
   B. The definition of Plumbing System is hereby amended to read as follows:
      Plumbing System. Includes the water supply and distribution pipes,
plumbing fixtures and traps, soil, waste and vent pipes, and sanitary and storm
sewers and building drains; in addition to their respective connections,
devices, and appurtenances within a structure, including but not limited to:
      1. All piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for, and in
connection with a supply of water within or adjacent to any building, structure
or conveyance, on the premises and to the connection with a water main or other
source of water supply.
      2. All piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for, or in
connection with sanitary drainage, including venting systems for such
facilities, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance, on the
premises and to the connection with a public disposal system or other
acceptable terminal.
      3. The installation, repair, maintenance and renovation of all piping,
fixtures appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water, or for the
disposal of waste water, liquid waste or sewage within or adjacent to any
building, structure or conveyance on the premises and to the point of the
source of water or point of disposal of wastes.
Chapter 6Water Supply And Distribution
   Section 613.2 Rain Sensors And Freeze Gauges.
   (a) Installation of new automatic lawn irrigation systems within a
commercially zoned district and connected to the municipal water supply shall
be equipped with an effective rain sensor so that watering will be
automatically prevented during or after a rain storm. Any upgrade or repair of
an existing automatic lawn irrigation system shall include the installation of
an effective rain sensor if the same is not already installed and maintained in
good working condition.
   (b) Installation of new automatic lawn irrigation systems within a
commercially zoned district and connected to the municipal water supply shall
be equipped with an effective freeze gauge so that watering will be
automatically prevented during times when the temperature is at or below
freezing. Any upgrade or repair of an existing automatic lawn irrigation system
shall include the installation of an effective freeze gauge if the same is not
already installed and maintained in good working condition.
   Section 614 Lawn Sprinkling Systems On Public Property.
   Section 614.1 Installation Of Sprinkling Systems Authorized.
   The installation of lawn watering or sprinkling systems shall hereafter be
permitted within the city of Warr Acres on public rights-of-way, also known as
"parkways," or as "parking." Public rights-of-way, parkways and parking shall
be defined as the property lying between any curb or street line and adjacent
property lines.
   Section 614.2Permit Required.
   Any person desiring to construct or install a lawn watering or sprinkling
system on a public right-of-way shall obtain, prior to construction or
installation, a permit from the office of the building inspector of the city of
Warr Acres, the issuance of which shall be a condition precedent to such
construction or installation. Such permits shall be substantially the same, if
not identical to permits issued pursuant to the provisions of the plumbing code
of the city of Warr Acres; and the construction and installation of back-flow
preventers and water mains which are a part of or to be connected to any lawn
watering or sprinkling system on a public right-of-way shall be in full
compliance with the provisions, conditions and terms of the plumbing code of
the city of Warr Acres.
   Section 614.3Permit Fees.
   The fee for issuing and processing the permit shall be the same as that
required by the schedule of fees of the city of Warr Acres.
   Section 614.4 Agreement Required.
   Any person desiring to have a lawn watering or sprinkling system constructed
or installed adjacent to property owned by such person, which construction or
installation will be on the public right-of-way, shall execute an agreement
with the city of Warr Acres, containing such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed from time to time by the city of Warr Acres. The building inspector
is herein delegated to execute such agreement on behalf of the city of Warr
Acres. The agreement shall be in writing and shall restrict and condition the
use of the right-of-way, substantially in accordance with the restrictions and
conditions contained in this chapter.
   The execution of the agreement by the property owner and the payment of fees
shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a final clearance by the
building inspector of the city of Warr Acres for the use of water in the lawn
watering or sprinkling system by the property owner. In the absence of the
building inspector, his designee, so authorized by him, may execute the
agreement on behalf of the city of Warr Acres.
   Section 614.5Restrictions And Conditions.
   The following restrictions and conditions shall attach to and become a part
of this grant of permissive use of the public rights-of-way of the city of Warr
Acres for the construction or installation of lawn watering or sprinkling
systems:
      A. No lawn watering or sprinkling system shall be constructed or
installed or maintained so as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic
along the public rights-of-way, streets, alleys or sidewalks.
      B. Any lawn watering or sprinkling system shall be so constructed,
installed and maintained by the owner of the property adjacent to the right-of-
way, so that no maintenance costs shall inure to the disadvantage of the city
of Warr Acres on the public rights-of-way, streets, alleys or sidewalks
adjacent thereto. The city of Warr Acres shall bear no costs of future
maintenance of that portion of the right-of-way upon which or under which such
lawn watering or sprinkling system is installed and constructed, but such
maintenance shall be the exclusive responsibility of the property owner.
      C. No liability for property damage or personal injury shall attach to
the city of Warr Acres as a municipal corporation arising out of the
construction, installation or maintenance of a lawn watering or sprinkling
system.
      D. Permission for the construction or installation of lawn watering or
sprinkling systems shall be authorized as herein provided without waiving or
abandoning any privilege or rights in favor of the city of Warr Acres in, to or
under the public rights-of-way on or under which a lawn watering or sprinkling
system is constructed or installed; nor shall there be a waiver of any
privileges or rights previously acquired by any of the agents, servants or
employees of the city of Warr Acres, including utility companies.
      E. In the event it becomes necessary for any public purpose (including
construction, installation, maintenance, repair or discontinuance of utilities
on or under the public right-of-way occupied by a lawn watering or sprinkling
system) to remove such lawn watering or sprinkling system because it interferes
with the prior privileges or rights of the city of Warr Acres, its agents,
servants and employees, including utility companies, the lawn watering and
sprinkling system shall be removed by the owner of the property adjacent
thereto. In the event such removal is not accomplished as herein provided, such
lawn watering or sprinkling system may be removed by the city of Warr Acres,
its agents, servants or employees, including utility companies and independent
contractors, at the expense of the person who is the owner of the property
adjacent thereto.
      F. Any agreement entered into by the city of Warr Acres, as hereinabove
provided for the construction or installation of a lawn watering or sprinkling
system, shall attach to the use of the property adjacent thereto.
Chapter 9Vents
   Section 904 Vent Terminals
   Section 904.1 Roof Extension
   All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least
six (6) inches above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any
purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at
least 7 feet above the roof.
Chapter 13.Referenced Standards And Appendices
   Appendix A.-G.
   Appendices A and C are omitted. Appendices B, D, E, F, and G are retained.
(Ord. 1047 §1, 2007)
CHAPTER 16.18
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PERMANENT INSTALLATION CODE
SECTION:
16.18.010: Title
16.18.012: Purpose
16.18.014: Scope
16.18.020: Definitions; Generally
16.18.022: Terms Defined
16.18.030: Design And Construction
16.18.040: Permanent Installation Standards
16.18.050: Utility Connections
16.18.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the STANDARD FOR THE PERMANENT INSTALLATION OF
MANUFACTURED HOMES, may be cited as such, and will be referred to as "this
chapter". (Ord. 593 §1, 1984)
16.18.012: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life
or limb, health, property and public welfare in the city of Warr Acres,
Oklahoma, by regulating and controlling the design, construction and quality of
materials for permanent foundation systems, and building service equipment
connections which are necessary to provide for the permanent installation of
manufactured homes. (Ord. 593 §1, 1984)
16.18.014: SCOPE:
A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following:
   1.   Construction of any foundation and anchorage system provided for the
permanent installation of manufactured homes that are constructed in a factory
and which may be designed either to be towed on their own chassis or be site
delivered by a returnable carriage dolly, specifically designed for
transporting manufactured homes;
   2.   Connection of the building service equipment which is necessary for the
permanent use of manufactured homes.
B.   This chapter shall not be applicable to the design and construction of
manufactured homes nor shall it be deemed to authorize either modifications or
additions to manufactured homes where otherwise prohibited. This chapter shall
not be construed as relieving the installer of a manufactured home of
responsibility for compliance with any other municipal ordinances, codes and
appropriate regulations, or manufacturer's instructions for permanent
installation.
C.   The scope of this chapter is limited to the installation of permanently
sited manufactured homes intended to be used as permanent dwellings. (Ord. 593
§1, 1984)
16.18.020: DEFINITIONS; GENERALLY:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words
and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this chapter. Words
used in the singular include the plural and the plural singular. Where the
terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within
the context with which they are used. "Webster's Third New International
Dictionary" of the English language, unabridged, copyright 1981, shall be
considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. (Ord. 593 §1, 1984)
16.18.022: TERMS DEFINED:
ADD A ROOM: A unit of manufactured housing not designed as a part of the
original structure which is constructed to code requirements and is not a
manufactured home. It is not to be considered an accessory structure.
ANCHORING SYSTEMS: A combination of ties, anchoring equipment, and/or anchoring
devices that are designed to resist overturning, uplift and lateral movement of
the manufactured home from wind forces.
APPROVED: Acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction, by reason of code
compliance, investigation, industry standards, or testing by nationally
recognized organizations.
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION: The city council through their administrative
officers and designated representatives.
BUILDING CODE: The building code as adopted by the city.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The building inspector charged with the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, or his duly authorized representative.
BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT: The plumbing, mechanical or electrical equipment,
including piping, wiring fixtures and other accessories, which provide
sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation or cooling essential for the
habitable occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use and
occupancy.
CAP: An insert of concrete, metal or decay resistant wood placed between the
top of the pier and the bottom of a floor beam for leveling purposes, and may
include leveling spacers.
DIAGONAL TIE: A tie intended to primarily resist lateral or shear forces and
which may secondarily resist uplift and overturning forces. Diagonal ties shall
be placed along the main frame.
DWELLING: One or more habitable rooms which are designed to be primarily
occupied by one family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, eating
and sanitation.
ELECTRICAL CODE: The electrical code as adopted by the city.
FOOTING: That portion of the foundation of a structure which spreads and
transmits loads directly to the soil or to bearing piles at a depth below the
established frost line without exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the
supporting soil.
FOUNDATION SKIRTING: A type of wainscoting constructed of fire and weather
resistant material, enclosing the entire undercarriage of a manufactured home
in its sited configuration.
FOUNDATION SYSTEM: See definition of Manufactured Home Foundation.
JURISDICTION: The incorporated area of the city, together with any
extraterritorial jurisdiction as may be granted through an intergovernmental
corporation agreement.
LISTED AND LISTING: Equipment and materials published in a listing by an
approved testing agency, which is qualified and equipped for experimental
testing, which maintains an adequate periodic inspection of current
productions, and whose listing states that the equipment complies with
recognized safety standards.
MAIN FRAME: The primary structural component on which the body of the
manufactured home is mounted.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A dwelling which is fabricated in one or more modules at a
location other than the home site, by assembly line type production techniques
or by other construction methods unique to an off site manufacturing process.
Every module shall bear a label certifying that it is built in compliance with
the federal manufactured home construction and safety standards. For mobile
homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying compliance to the
standard for mobile homes, NFPA 501 ANSI 119.1, in effect at the time of
manufacture is required. A manufactured home is designed to be towed on its
chassis or be site delivered by a returnable carriage dolly, specifically
designed for transporting manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS: A standard for the
construction, design and performance of a manufactured home. This standard is
set forth in the code of federal regulations, title 24, parts 3280, 3282, 3283
and 42 USC 5401, as mandated in the United States of America and as
administered by the United States department of housing and urban development.
MANUFACTURED HOME FOUNDATION: A site built or assembled system of stabilizing
devices which:
A. Is capable of transferring design dead loads and live loads established by
the building code, and other required design loads, such as special site
conditions, wind and water site conditions, that are imposed by or upon the
structure, into the underlying soil and/or bedrock without failure and without
exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil; and
B. In frost susceptible areas, has its lower surface placed at or below the
frost line or which is otherwise adequately insulated/protected to prevent
frost movement; and
C. Is constructed of materials acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction;
and
D. Meets the requirements and standards of "MPS 4900.1", 1982 edition, and "MPS
4930.1", 1973 edition, as published by the U.S. department of housing and urban
development, as amended.
MANUFACTURED HOME PERMANENT INSTALLATION: That construction which is required
for the permanent installation of a manufactured home, including construction
of the foundation system and required structural connection of on site water,
gas, electrical and sewer systems, which are necessary for the normal operation
of the manufactured home.
MECHANICAL CODE: The adopted mechanical code of the city.
MOBILE HOME: A movable or portable dwelling, constructed to be towed on its own
chassis and which is capable of connection to utilities for year round
occupancy. It can consist of one or more components that can be retracted for
delivery purposes and subsequently expanded for additional capacity, or it can
consist of two (2) or more units separately deliverable, but designed to be
joined onto one integral unit. It shall have been built prior to the enactment
of the national mobile home construction and safety standards act of 1974,
which became effective for all mobile home construction on June 15, 1976.
OCCUPIED SPACE: The total area horizontally covered by the structure in its
occupied configuration, excluding accessory structures, such as, but not
limited to, garages, patios and porches.
PERIMETER ENCLOSURE: A perimeter enclosure system which completely encloses the
space between the floor of the home and the ground.
PIER: The portion of the support system between the footing and the
manufactured home structure exclusive of caps and leveling spacers, but not
including foundation walls.
PLUMBING CODE: The adopted plumbing code of the city.
SHALL: As used in this chapter, "shall" is mandatory.
SKIRTING, FOUNDATION: See definition of Foundation Skirting.
STABILIZING DEVICES: Any of the components of the anchoring and support systems
such as piers, footings, foundation walls, ties, anchoring equipment, anchoring
devices, and any other equipment which supports the manufactured home and
secures it in its sited position.
STABILIZING SYSTEM: The combination of the anchoring system and the support
system when properly installed.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
TIE: Straps, cables or securing devices used to connect the manufactured home
to anchoring devices. (Ord. 593 §1, 1984)
16.18.030: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
A.   General: Manufactured homes required to be installed onto a permanent
foundation shall be designed and construed to sustain all vertical and
horizontal loads as specified in this chapter. The permanent foundations shall
also be required to transfer any other imposed forces from the manufactured
home to undisturbed ground below the established frost line, without failure
and exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
B.   Dead And Live Loads: The foundation system shall be designed and
constructed to sustain all dead and live loads imposed thereon. The dead load
used in the design shall be the actual weight of the manufactured home unit to
be installed. The live load, including wind and uplift and snow loads used in
the design, shall be those set forth in the building code for single-family
dwellings. Uplift due to overturning forces shall be adequately resisted by the
anchoring system.
C.   Combined Loads: For the purpose of determining stresses, all vertical
design loads, including roof live loads, shall be considered as acting
simultaneously. In computing the effect of wind force in combination with
vertical loads, roof live loads need not be included; except that where snow
loading is required in the design of the roof, at least fifty percent (50%) of
such snow load shall be considered acting in combination with the wind load.
D.   Stress Increases: All allowable stress and soil bearing values may be
increased one-third (1/3) when considering wind forces. No increase will be
allowed for vertical loads acting alone.
E.   Rationality: Any system or method of construction that is used shall
conform to a rational analysis in accordance with well established engineering
principles.
F.   Footings And Foundations: When requested by building officials, soil
bearing capacities at each building site shall be determined. The building
official may require that the determination be made by a professional engineer
or architect. Footings and foundations, unless otherwise specifically provided,
shall be constructed of masonry, concrete or treated wood, in conformance with
the building code. The footings shall rest on undisturbed soil or engineered
fill at a depth at or below any established frost line, and be capable of
transferring all design loads imposed by or upon the structure into the soil or
bedrock without failure, or exceeding the safe bearing capacity of supporting
soil. (Ord. 593 §1, 1984)
16.18.040: PERMANENT INSTALLATION STANDARDS:
A.   Manufactured Home Foundations:
   1.   General: This section prescribes standards for the proper design and
installation of manufactured home foundations. It further clarifies the
definition of a "manufactured home foundation".
   2.   Manufactured Home Foundation System: The manufactured home permanent
foundation system constitutes a permanent, load bearing support system for the
manufactured home. The manufacturer or owner shall be permitted to design for
and specify the installation of any foundation system which meets the design
requirements of this standard. The foundation system shall be installed as
specified in this standard, or as specified in the building code for single-
family dwellings, or be designed by a professional engineer or architect. A
pier support system shall consist of footings, piers, caps, leveling spacers,
or approved prefabricated load bearing devices. Foundation walls which enclose
basements shall conform to the building code.
   3.   Manufactured Homes Provided With Manufacturer's Instructions For
Permanent Installations: If the manufacturer provides instructions for
permanent installation, which are designed by a professional engineer or
architect, then the instructions must meet all applicable requirements of the
building code and this standard. The building official may waive compliance
with this standard if a conflict exists between this standard and the
manufacturer's instructions. These instructions shall remain with the home.
   4.   Manufactured Homes Without Manufacturer's Installation Instructions:
Homes not provided with manufacturer's installation instructions shall be
installed onto a foundation system meeting the requirements of this standard or
be designed by a professional engineer or architect. Unless designed by a
professional engineer or architect, spacing of piers shall be as specified in
table 1 of this section with piers installed directly under the main frame of
the manufactured home, and with not more than two feet (2') of the main frame
cantilevered beyond the end piers.
B.   Clearance Under Homes: A minimum clearance of eighteen inches (18") shall
be maintained beneath the lowest member of the floor support framing system.
Clearance from the bottom of wood floor joists or perimeter shall be as
specified in the building code.
C.   Access To And Ventilation Of Under Floor Areas: Under floor spaces shall
be ventilated with openings as specified in the building code. If combustion
air for one or more heat producing appliances is taken from within the upper
floor spaces, ventilation shall be adequate to assure for proper appliance
operation.
Access openings shall be not less than eighteen inches (18") in any dimension
and not less than three (3) square feet in area and shall be located so that
any water supply and sewer drain connections located under the manufactured
home are accessible for inspection. Access panels or doors shall not be
fastened in a manner requiring the use of a special tool for removal or opening
of the panels or doors.
D.   Footings: The load bearing capacity of individual load bearing piers and
their footings shall be not less than the combined live and dead loads as
specified in this standard. Footings shall be adequate in size to withstand the
contributing live and dead loads of the manufactured home and any other imposed
loads. (See table 1 of this section for suggested typical footing sizes.)
Footings or pier foundations (unless otherwise approved by a registered
professional engineer or architect), shall be placed level on firm undisturbed
soil or on engineered fill, which is free of grass and organic materials,
compacted to a minimum load bearing capacity as specified in table 1 of this
section. Where unusual conditions exist, the spacing of piers and the load
bearing capacity of the soil shall be determined specifically for such
conditions. Concentrated roof loads may require special consideration.
Continuous footings shall conform to the requirements of the building code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3852.png]
 
E.   Piers: 1. Pier Construction: Piers shall be designed and constructed to
distribute loads evenly. Multiple section homes may have concentrated roof
loads which will require special consideration. Load bearing piers shall be
constructed utilizing one of the following methods:
      a.   A prefabricated load bearing device that is listed and labeled for
the intended use;
      b.   A pier designed by a registered professional engineer or architect;
      c.   A pier constructed with concrete blocks laid with mortar joints or
approved structural masonry adhesive. Blocks shall not be less than a nominal
eight inches (8") in width and sixteen inches (16") in length. Mortar mix shall
be type S or one part Portland cement, one-half (1/2) part hydrated lime and
four (4) parts sand by volume. Lime shall not be used with plastic or
waterproof cement;
      d.   A pier constructed with nonmortared concrete blocks and a separate
anchoring system, conforming to the following criteria:
         (1)   Concrete blocks are to be a nominal eight inches by eight inches
by sixteen inches (8" x 8" x 16") with open cells vertical, stacked true and
plumb with a maximum horizontal block offset of one-half inch (1/2") from the
top to the bottom of the pier. The maximum height of the pier shall be thirty
six inches (36") unless designed by a professional engineer or architect,
         (2)   Concrete block shall be stable and firm on the footing with all
bearing surfaces clean and smooth,
         (3)   The maximum vertical load shall not exceed six thousand four
hundred (6,400) pounds per pier,
         (4)   Nonmortared piers shall not carry any vertical uplift, moment or
horizontal load,
         (5)   Tie downs and anchors shall be designed to resist all uplift
loads not offset by two-thirds (2/3) of the manufactured home dead load and all
horizontal loads,
         (6)   The width of the man frame I-beam flange shall not be less than
two inches (2"),
         (7)   Concrete caps shall be the same size as the supporting concrete
block, a minimum of four inches (4") thick and may be used with leveling
spacers of steel or decay resistant wood which shall be level,
         (8)   Pier footings shall be solid concrete bearing on firm
undisturbed soil or engineered fill and conforming to subsection D of this
section,
         (9)   The top surface of the footing shall be smooth, clean and level,
providing a minimum of fifty percent (50%) direct bearing of concrete block on
the top surface of footing; if the top surface of the footing is not level or
smooth, a layer of mortar shall be applied to provide the proper bearing
surface for the concrete block pier.
Caps and leveling spacers may be used for leveling of the manufactured home.
Spacing of piers shall be as specified in the manufacturer's installation
instructions, if available, or table 1 of this section may be used for the
spacing of piers. Where unusual conditions or loads exist, the spacing of piers
and the load bearing capacity of the soil shall be determined specifically for
such conditions or loads.
   2.   Height Of Piers: Piers shall be constructed utilizing one of the
following methods:
      a.   Piers thirty six inches (36") or less in height can be constructed
of concrete block, placed with open cells in vertical position. Single-stacked
block piers shall be installed with the long dimensions at right angles to the
main frame member it supports. Piers shall be topped with a cap.
      b.   Subject to the limitations of this chapter, piers between thirty six
inches (36") and eighty inches (80") in height, and all corner piers over
twenty four inches (24") high, shall be at least sixteen inches (16") in width
with blocks interlocked and fully capped with a minimum four inch (4") solid
concrete block or equivalent.
      c.   Subject to other limitations of this standard, piers over eighty
inches (80") in height can be constructed in accordance with the provisions of
this subsection E2 provided the piers shall be filled solid with concrete and
reinforced with two (2) continuous one-half inch (1/2") diameter steel
reinforcing bars inserted vertically through the open cells of each sixteen
inch (16") block.
F.   Anchoring Instructions: Six (6) round anchors.
   1.   Ground Anchors: Ground anchors, including means for attaching ties,
shall be located to comply with anchoring system instructions provided by the
manufactured home manufacturer or, if there are no instructions, in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
Ground anchors shall be designed and installed to transfer the anchoring loads
to the ground. The load carrying portion of the ground anchors shall be
installed to the full depth called for by the manufacturer's installation
directions and shall extend below the established frost line into undisturbed
soil.
Manufactured ground anchors shall be listed and installed in accordance with
the terms of their listing and the anchor manufacturer's instructions, and
shall include means of attachment of ties meeting the requirements of
subsection G of this section. Ground anchor manufacturer's instructions shall
include the amount of preload required, the methods of adjustment after
installation, and the load capacity in various types of soil. These
instructions shall include tensioning adjustments which may be needed to
prevent damage to the manufactured home, particularly damage that can be caused
by frost heave. Each ground anchor shall be marked with the manufacturer's
identification and listed model identification number which shall be visible
after installation. Instructions shall accompany each listed ground anchor
specifying the types of soil for which the anchor is suitable under the
requirements of this section.
Each approved ground anchor, when installed, shall be capable of resisting an
allowable working load at least equal to three thousand one hundred fifty
(3,150) pounds in the direction of the tie, plus a fifty percent (50%) overload
(4,725 pounds) without failure. Failure shall be considered to have incurred
when the anchor moves more than two inches (2") at four thousand seven hundred
twenty five (4,725) pounds in the direction of the tie installation. Those
ground anchors which are designed to be installed so that loads on the anchor
are other than direct withdrawal, shall be designed and installed to resist an
applied design load of three thousand one hundred fifty (3,150) pounds at forty
(40) to fifty degrees (50°) from vertical without displacing the tie end of the
anchor more than four inches (4") horizontally. Anchors designed for connection
of multiple ties shall be capable of resisting the combined working load and
overload consistent with the intent expressed herein.
   2.   Anchoring Equipment: Anchoring equipment, when installed as a permanent
installation, shall be capable of resisting all loads as specified within this
chapter. When the stabilizing system is designed by a qualified, registered,
professional engineer or architect, alternative designs may be used, providing
the anchoring equipment to be used is capable of withstanding a fifty percent
(50%) overload. All anchoring equipment shall be listed or labeled as being
capable of meeting the requirements of this chapter. Anchors, as specified in
the building code, may be attached to the main frame of the manufactured home
by an approved three-sixteenths inch (3/16") thick slotted steel plate
anchoring device. Other anchoring devices or methods meeting the requirements
of this chapter shall be permitted when approved by the building official.
   3.   Resistance To Weather Deterioration: All anchoring equipment exposed to
weathering shall have a resistance to weather deterioration at least equivalent
to that provided by a coating of zinc on steel of not less than 0.626 ounces
per square foot on each side of the surface coated. Slit or cut edges of zinc
coated steel strapping do not need to be zinc coated.
   4.   Permanency Of Connections: Anchoring systems shall be so installed as
to be permanent. Anchoring equipment shall be designed to prevent self-
disconnection with no hook ends used.
   5.   Tensioning Device Design: Tensioning devices, such as turnbuckles or
yoke type fasteners, shall be ended with clevis, forged or welded eyes.
   6.   Footings: If footings are used to transfer the anchoring loads to the
ground, steel rods cast in concrete shall be capable of resisting design loads.
Deadman concrete anchors may be used in place of listed anchors if they meet
the requirements of this chapter.
G.   Ties:
   1.   Ties, Materials And Installation: Steel strappings, cable, chain or
other approved materials shall be used for ties. All ties shall be fastened to
ground anchors and drawn tight with turnbuckles or other adjustable tensioning
devices supplied with the ground anchor. The materials shall be capable of
resisting an allowable working load of three thousand one hundred fifty (3,150)
pounds with no more than two percent (2%) elongation and shall withstand a
fifty percent (50%) overload (4,750 pounds). Ties shall comply with the
weathering requirements of subsection F3 of this section. Ties shall connect
the ground anchor and the main structural frame. Ties shall not connect to
steel outrigger beams which fasten to and intersect the main structural frame
unless specifically stated in the manufacturer's installation instructions.
Connection of cable ties to main frame members shall be five-eighths inch (5/
8") drop forged closed eye bolts affixed to the frame member in an approved
manner. Cable ends shall be secured with at least three (3) U-bolt type cable
clamps with the U portion of the clamp installed on the short (dead) end of the
cable to assure strength equal to that required by this section.
   2.   Number Of Ties: Wood floor support systems shall be fixed to perimeter
foundation walls in accordance with provisions of the building code. The
minimum number of ties required per side shall be sufficient to resist the wind
load stated in the building code. Ties shall be as evenly spaced as practicable
along the length of the manufactured home with the distance from each end of
the home and the tie nearest that end not exceeding eight feet (8'). When
continuous straps are provided as vertical ties, such ties shall be positioned
at rafters and studs. Where a vertical tie and diagonal tie are located at the
same place, both ties may be connected to a single anchor; provided, that the
anchor used is capable of carrying both loadings. Multisection manufactured
homes require diagonal ties only. Diagonal ties shall be installed on the
exterior main frame and slope to the exterior at an angle of forty (40) to
fifty degrees (50°) from the vertical. Noncontinuous vertical ties shall be
placed at the main frame. If sufficient to meet the wind loads as provided in
the building code, the minimum number of ties per side of the manufactured home
shall be shown in table 2 of this section:
 
Table 2
Number Of Ties Required Per Side Of A Manufactured Home
Length Of Manufactured Home In Number Of Vertical Ties Number Of Diagonal Ties
Feet
Up to 40 2 3
40 to 46 2 3
46 to 49 2 3
49 to 54 2 3
54 to 58 2 4
58 to 64 2 4
64 to 70 2 4
70 to 73 2 4
73 to 84 2 5
 
Source: Proposed ANSI A225 "Standard On Manufactured Home Installations".
H.   Perimeter Enclosure:
   1.   Materials: Skirting shall be of brick or stone, and suitable for
exterior exposure and contact with the ground. All materials shall be installed
as a permanent perimeter enclosure and shall conform to those of a regular
foundation as defined by the building code.
   2.   Skirting Installation: Skirting shall be installed in accordance with
the manufacturer's installation instructions. It shall be adequately secured to
assure stability, to minimize vibrations and susceptibility to wind damage, and
to compensate for possible frost heave. The entire under floor area of the home
shall be completely enclosed by a perimeter enclosure, except for the required
openings.
   3.   Permanent Perimeter Enclosure Installation: Retaining walls, if used as
permanent perimeter enclosures, shall resist the lateral displacement of soil
or other materials and shall conform to the building code, as specified for
foundation walls. Unless a retaining wall is equivalent to a load bearing
foundation, it should not be attached to the manufactured home. Retaining walls
and foundation walls should be constructed of concrete, masonry, or other
approved materials or combinations of these materials, as for foundation walls
that are used as a load bearing foundation, the manufactured home shall be
anchored to the wall. The entire under floor of the home shall be completely
enclosed, except for required openings. Siding material shall extend below the
exterior of the retaining or foundation wall. (Ord. 593 §1, 1984)
16.18.050: UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
A.   General: Utility connections shall be made to assure that utility systems
permit satisfactory functioning and provide for health and safety under all
conditions of normal use. Manufactured home utility services shall only be
connected to the supply source by means of approved materials.
B.   Federal Manufactured Home Connections: A manufactured home which bears a
certification label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the
federal manufactured home construction and safety standards shall be connected
to the utilities as required by the federal manufactured home construction and
safety standards, section 503, and the following:
   1.   The gas piping supply system shall be designed for a pressure not
exceeding fourteen inch (14") water column (1/2 inch psi);
   2.   When a manufactured home is to be installed in an area where the water
pressure exceeds eighty (80) psi, a pressure reducing valve should be
installed;
   3.   The installation of a self-contained air conditioner comfort cooling
appliance shall meet the following requirements:
      a.   The installation of a duct common with an installed heating
appliance shall require the installation of an automatic damper or other means
to prevent the cold air from passing through the heating appliance unless the
heating appliance is certified or listed for such application and the supply
system is intended for such an application; and
      b.   The installation shall prevent the flow of heated air into the
external cooling appliance and its connecting ducts to the manufactured home
supply and return air system during the operation of the heating appliance
installed in the manufactured home, and the installation shall prevent
simultaneous operation of the heating and cooling appliances;
   4.   The power supply to the manufactured home shall be a permanently
installed circuit. Where a permanent feeder is used, the supply shall be by
means of:
      a.   One mast weather head installation installed in accordance with the
electrical code and containing four (4) continuous insulated, color coded,
feeder conductors, one of which shall be an equipment grounding conductor, or
      b.   An approved raceway from the disconnecting means in the manufactured
home with provisions for the attachment of a suitable junction box or fitting
to the raceway on the underside of the manufactured home. The manufacturer
shall provide in his written installation instructions, the proper feeder
conductor sizes for the raceway and the size of the junction box to be used.
Where there is a conflict of the above requirements, the federal manufactured
home construction and safety standards shall apply.
C.   Nonfederal Manufactured Home Connections: All manufactured homes bearing a
certification label certifying that they are built in compliance with the
building code shall be connected to the utilities as follows:
   1.   Water supply shall be as required by the plumbing code;
   2.   Drainage waste system shall be as required by the plumbing code;
   3.   Electrical connections shall be as required by electrical code;
   4.   Gas supply connections shall be as required by the national fuel gas
code NFPA 54 or the standard for the storage and handling of liquified
petroleum gasses NFPA 58;
   5.   Oil, supply connections shall be as required by installation of oil
burning equipment, NFPA 31;
   6.   Mechanical equipment and accessories shall be listed and labeled for
the use intended and shall be connected as required by the mechanical code.
(Ord. 593 §1, 1984)
CHAPTER 16.20
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
Article A. Statutory Authorization, Findings
Of Fact, Purpose And Methods
16.20.010: Statutory Authorization
16.20.020: Findings Of Fact
16.20.030: Statement Of Purpose
16.20.040: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
Article B. Definitions
16.20.050: Definitions
Article C. General Provisions
16.20.060: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
16.20.070: Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
16.20.080: Establishment Of Development Permit
16.20.090: Compliance
16.20.100: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
16.20.110: Interpretation
16.20.120: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
Article D. Administration
16.20.130: Designation Of Administrator
16.20.140: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Administrator
16.20.150: Permit Procedures
16.20.160: Variance Procedures
Article E. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
16.20.170: General Standards
16.20.180: Specific Standards
16.20.190: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
16.20.200: Floodways
16.20.210: Penalties For Noncompliance
ARTICLE A.  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
16.20.010: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Oklahoma has in 82 Oklahoma Statutes 1601-1618,
as amended, chapter 23 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units
to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city of
Warr Acres, Oklahoma, ordains the following. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.020: FINDINGS OF FACT:
A.   The flood hazard areas of the city of Warr Acres are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to
other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise
protected from flood damage. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.030: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A.   Protect human life and health;
B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.040: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property
in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
ARTICLE B.  DEFINITIONS
16.20.050: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: Structures which are on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure (such as garages and storage sheds).
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM for Tahlequah, zone A is refined into zones A and AE.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base
flood or one percent (1%) chance flood.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BOARD: The Oklahoma water resources board.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in
zones A, AE and X, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so
as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to
the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A, AE and X, "elevated
building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean
velocity.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: A person accredited by the board and designated by a
city council, to administer and implement laws and regulations relating to the
management of the floodplains.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing
maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of
interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
  1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
  2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North
American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub.L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary conditions, or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration would
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of these
regulations or ordinance when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a
manner otherwise prohibited by these regulations. (For full requirements see
section 60.6 of the national flood insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10)
or (d)(3) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American vertical
datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
ARTICLE C.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.20.060: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.070: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study For Oklahoma County, Oklahoma And Incorporated Areas" dated
December 18, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This chapter
shall go into effect on December 18, 2009, and not before. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.080: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.090: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.100: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any
other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1079 §1,
2009)
16.20.110: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.120: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these
regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1079
§1, 2009)
ARTICLE D.  ADMINISTRATION
16.20.130: DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR:
The city of Warr Acres city council appoints the public works director or his
designee as the floodplain administrator, who will administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national
flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ord.
1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.140: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
A.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of these regulations.
B.   Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
C.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required
by adoption of these regulations.
D.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
E.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain
administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
F.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, the Oklahoma water resources board, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal emergency management agency.
G.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
H.   Shall require the developer or permittee to provide the base flood
elevation data when it has not been provided in accordance with section
16.20.070 of this chapter, in order to administer the provisions of article E
of this chapter.
I.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zone AE on the
community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
J.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the national
flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zone AE on the community's FIRM which increases the water
surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided that
the community first complies with 44 CFR, chapter 1, section 65.12.
K.   Become accredited by the board in accordance with 82 Oklahoma Statutes
1601-1618, as amended.
L.   After a disaster or other type of damage occurrence to structures in the
city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, shall determine if the residential and
nonresidential structures and manufactured homes have been substantially
damaged and enforce the substantial improvement requirement. (Ord. 1079 §1,
2009)
16.20.150: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
A.   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain
administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and
elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the
following information is required:
   1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
   2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
   3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria
of subsection
16.20.180B of this chapter;
   4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
   5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection
16.20.140A of this chapter.
B.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator
shall be based on all of the provisions of these regulations and the following
relevant factors:
   1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
   6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
   7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
   8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
   10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.160: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
A.   Board Of Adjustment Established: The board of adjustment as established by
the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B.   Render Judgment: The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on
an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C.   Appeal Of Decision: Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the
board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent
jurisdiction.
D.   Records; Reports: The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of
all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal
emergency management agency upon request.
E.   Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of
historic places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
F.   Lot Size; Other Factors: Variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in
subsection
16.20.150B of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
G.   Conditions: Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent
of this chapter, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this chapter (section
16.20.030 of this chapter).
H.   Designated Floodways: Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
I.   Repair Or Rehabilitation Of Historic Structures: Variances may be issued
for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
J.   Prerequisites For Granting Variances:
   1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
      b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances.
   3.   A written notice will be provided to any person granted a variance to
build a structure below the base flood elevation. This notice will inform the
variance applicant that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with
the increased risk resulting from permitting the structure to be built lower
than the base flood elevation.
K.   Criteria To Be Met: Variances may be issued by a community for new
construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary
for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
   1.   The criteria outlined in subsections A through I of this section are
met, and
   2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
L.   Petition For Variance: Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition
with the city of Warr Acres per the requirements of section
19.68.040, "Appeals", of this code.
M.   Copy Of Variance: A copy of any variance issued shall be sent to the OWRB
within fifteen (15) days of issuance. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
 
ARTICLE E.  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
16.20.170: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage;
D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the
systems into floodwaters; and
G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.180: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required:
A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of
any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated at two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection 16.20.150A1 of this chapter is satisfied.
B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvements
of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated at two feet (2') above the base
flood level. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all
elevation certificates that includes the specific elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) to which each structure has been elevated.
C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
   1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
   2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above
grade.
   3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
D.   Manufactured Homes:
   1.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on the
city of Warr Acres's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I beam elevated at two feet
(2') above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces and a licensed installer shall install the home and place the
required placard on the dwelling.
   2.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zone AE on the community's FIRM on sites: a) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation so the bottom of the I beam of the
manufactured home is elevated at two feet (2') above the base flood elevation
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Also, a licensed installer shall
install the home.
   3.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zone AE on
the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection
D be elevated so that the bottom of the I beam of the manufactured home is at
two feet (2') above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement supporting the manufactured home chassis and also installed by
a licensed installer that complies with state law.
E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites
within zones A and AE on the community's FIRM either:
   1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
   2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
   3.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
16.20.150A of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions.
F.   Accessory Structure:
   1.   Structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment.
   2.   Structure shall be small and not exceed six hundred (600) square feet
in size.
   3.   Structure shall be unfinished on the interior.
   4.   Structure can be used only for parking and limited storage.
   5.   Structure shall not be used for human habitation (including work,
sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas).
   6.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be
elevated to or above the BFE or floodproofed.
   7.   Structure is constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer
the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
   8.   Structure is designed to have low flood damage potential, i.e.,
constructed with flood resistant materials.
   9.   Structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
   10.   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure.
   11.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE.
   12.   Structure is to be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and
nearby structures. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.190: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
A.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections
16.20.020,
16.20.030, and
16.20.040 of this chapter.
B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement
of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit
requirements of sections
16.20.080 and
16.20.150 of this chapter and the provisions of this article.
C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and
other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
16.20.070 or subsection
16.20.140H of this chapter.
D.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
E.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.200: FLOODWAYS:
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
16.20.070 of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that
carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
A.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article.
C.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the national
flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations, provided that the community complies with all of 44 CFR chapter 1,
section 65.12. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
16.20.210: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall be fined no more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense including any court costs. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city of Warr Acres city council or the city
attorney from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. (Ord. 1079 §1, 2009)
CHAPTER 16.30
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
16.30.010: Adopted
16.30.020: Amendments
16.30.010: ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
city clerk of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, being marked and designated as the
international property management code of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, 2006 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and the same is hereby
adopted as the property maintenance code of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma,
for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permit and collection of fees therefor, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property
maintenance code on file in the office of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section
16.30.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 1043 §1, 2007)
16.30.020: AMENDMENTS:
The following sections of the property maintenance code hereby adopted are
revised and amended to read as follows:
Chapter 1 Administration
Section 101General
   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the property
maintenance code of the city of Warr Acres, Oklahoma and hereinafter referred
to as "this code".
Section 102Applicability
   Section 102.3 Application Of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations
to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of codes existing on the date of the adoption of this
code until the international building code, international fuel gas code,
international mechanical code and the ICC electrical code are adopted by the
city. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside
any provision of the Warr Acres zoning code.
Section 103Department Of Property Maintenance Inspection
   Section 103.1 General. The department of property maintenance inspection
shall mean the office of the code official as provided in the Warr Acres
ordinances.
   Section 103.2 Appointment. The code official shall be appointed and serve as
provided by Warr Acres ordinances.
   Section 103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
code official in carrying out the responsibilities of such office under this
code shall be as adopted from time to time by the city council in the form of
an ordinance or resolution.
Section 107 Notices And Orders
   Section 107.1 Notice To Person Responsible. Unless otherwise provided,
whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this
code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice of such
violation shall be given in the manner prescribed in sections 107.2 and 107.3
to the owner of the property as shown in the records of the office of the
Oklahoma County clerk or other person responsible for the violation as
specified in this code. Notices for condemnations procedures shall also comply
with section 108.3.
Section 110 Demolition
   Section 110.1 General. Consistent with the provisions of state laws and
ordinances governing demolition of buildings, specifically as set out in
8.40.010 of the municipal code, the code official may order the owner of any
premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's
judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to
demolish and remove such structure, or such structure is incapable of being
made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and
remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal
construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish
and remove such structure.
   Section 110.2 Notices And Orders. All notices and orders shall comply with
section 107 or the provisions of 8.40.010 of the municipal code.
Section 111 Means Of Appeal
   Section 111.1 Application For Appeal. All reference to the board of appeals
in this code shall mean the Warr Acres board of adjustment as set out in title
19 of the municipal code. Any person directly affected by a decision of the
code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right
to appeal to the board of adjustment, provided that a written applications for
appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was
served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim and the board of
adjustment must review only the grounds that i) the true intent of this code,
ii) the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, iii)
the provision of this code do not fully apply, or iv) the requirements of this
code are adequately satisfied by other means.
Chapter 3 General Requirements
   Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from nuisances, including weeds or plant growth. All nuisances, including
noxious weeds shall be prohibited as provided in 8.04.020 of the municipal
code.
   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after notice of violations they shall be subject to prosecution
in accordance with section 106.3 hereof. In addition, the code official shall
be authorized to abate such nuisances, including excessive growth of weeds and
grass as provided in 8.04.030 of the municipal code.
   Section 303.2 Enclosures. The first sentence of section 303.2 is amended to
read as follows:
      Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24
inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier
at least 72 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on the
side of the barrier away from the pool.
   Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Except where other approved means are
employed, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, every door, window,
and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured,
packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of
not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Chapter 6 Mechanical And Electrical Requirements
   Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitories or
guestrooms on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October to May to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (18°C) in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and toilet rooms, except: i) when the outdoor temperature is below
outdoor design temperature for the locality, as indicated in appendix D of the
international plumbing code, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity; ii) in areas where the average monthly temperature is above
30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
   Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from October to may to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied, except: i) processing, storage and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions and, ii) areas in which persons are
primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
(Ord. 1043 §1, 2007)
CHAPTER 16.40
FENCES
SECTION:
16.40.010: General Provision
16.40.020: FE, R-1 And R-2 Zoning Districts
16.40.030: R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3 And C-4 Zoning Districts
16.40.040: Maintenance
16.40.050: Permit Application
16.40.060: Fees
16.40.070: Penalties
16.40.010: GENERAL PROVISION:
Fences constructed prior to January 1, 1997, are exempt from the requirements
of this chapter until either new construction is undertaken or the permit
requirements of this chapter become effective. (Ord. 838 §1, 1998)
16.40.020: FE, R-1 AND R-2 ZONING DISTRICTS:
Fencing shall meet the following requirements:
A.   Permit required.
B.   A perimeter fence is permitted subject to the following conditions:
   1.   No fence along side and rear lot lines shall exceed eight feet (8') in
height.
   2.   No fence shall be constructed within the front setback unless it meets
the following conditions:
      a.   A see through fence which does not exceed four feet (4') in height.
      b.   A side yard fence may be extended along the front setback to the
front property line where a side lot line adjoins the rear lot line of an
adjacent property.
   3.   No fence shall be placed inside a sight triangle of intersecting
streets.
   4.   No fence shall be placed on city rights of way. (Ord. 838 §1, 1998)
16.40.030: R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3 AND C-4 ZONING DISTRICTS:
Fencing shall meet the following requirements:
A.   Permit required.
B.   Whenever a parking lot or parking area adjoins the side or rear lot line
of a residential lot, a fence is required and shall meet the following
conditions:
   1.   An opaque ornamental fence or wall not less than six feet (6') in
height.
   2.   Shall be along the side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the
adjoining residential building setback line.
C.   No fence shall be placed inside a sight triangle of intersecting streets.
D.   No fence shall be placed on city rights of way. (Ord. 838 §1, 1998)
16.40.040: MAINTENANCE:
Fences shall meet the following requirements:
A.   Shall be structurally sound.
B.   Shall not have missing sections.
C.   Shall be kept in good repair.
D.   Shall be clean of trash, weeds and grass.
E.   A permit will not be required if less than twenty five percent (25%) of a
front, side, or rear fence is being replaced in a twelve (12) month period.
(Ord. 838 §1, 1998)
16.40.050: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Application for a permit shall be made at city hall on forms provided by the
city. Review of the application shall begin upon submittal of the application
with the required application fee. To be considered complete, the following
information is required:
A.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
B.   Legal description of the property upon which the fence is to be
constructed.
C.   Name of the person or company who will construct the fence.
D.   Plot plan with the type of material, location and height of fence.
If the application does not meet the requirements contained in this chapter,
the application shall be rejected, in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If
the city requirements have been met, the city shall issue the permit within
five (5) working days. (Ord. 838 §1, 1998)
16.40.060: FEES:
Fees for construction of fences shall be:
A.   FE and R-1 zoning districts: Ten dollars ($10.00).
B.   R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 zoning districts: Twenty five dollars
($25.00).
C.   Fences constructed in conjunction with a building permit: Ten dollars
($10.00).
D.   Inspection (upon completion): Ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 838 §1, 1998)
16.40.070: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any of
the provisions of the chapter shall, upon conviction be liable for a fine not
to exceed the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day, excluding court
costs. Each such day the violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 838 §1, 1998)
TITLE 17
RESERVED
TITLE 18
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 1
Uniform Drainage Regulations   18.04
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS ch. 13.
CHAPTER 18.04
UNIFORM DRAINAGE REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
18.04.010: Findings And Intent
18.04.020: Modification Of Provisions
18.04.030: Drainage Channel Classifications
18.04.040: Calculating Stream Flow And Runoff
18.04.050: Primary Drainage Channel
18.04.060: Surface Drainage And Secondary Drainage Channel
18.04.070: Bridge And Culvert
18.04.080: Closed Storm Sewer
18.04.090: Open Paved Storm Drainage Channel
18.04.100: Improvements And Drainage Easements
18.04.110: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 82 OS § 431 et seq.
18.04.010: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
A.   The rapid, efficient removal of storm water is a matter of great mutual
concern to the subdivision developer and the municipal government. The drainage
system, as established, becomes a permanent feature of the community so that
mistakes may cause considerable financial loss to the developer and continued
excessive maintenance expense to the city.
B.   It is the intent of this chapter to establish standards, based on sound
engineering principles, which will provide for an efficient storm drainage
system to the end that the development of land may proceed in an orderly manner
and excessive city maintenance expense may be avoided. (Prior code §7-1)
18.04.020: MODIFICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Modifications of any of the provisions of the regulations provided by this
chapter, when required by unusual circumstances, will not be made without
written permission of the city engineer. (Prior code §7-2)
18.04.030: DRAINAGE CHANNEL CLASSIFICATIONS:
For the purpose of the regulations provided in this chapter, drainage channels
shall be classified as follows:
A.   Primary drainage channels shall be those streams, creeks, and channels
which drain an area of five hundred (500) acres or more.
B.   Secondary drainage channels shall be all drainage channels which drain an
area less than five hundred (500) acres. (Prior code §7-3)
18.04.040: CALCULATING STREAM FLOW AND RUNOFF:
The maximum condition of rainfall for a 50-year frequency shall be used for the
purpose of determining all runoff for the sizing of drainage channels and
structures, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. The following formulas
and value shall be used for calculating all stream flow and runoff for the
policies and regulations established in this chapter:
A.   Runoff from drainage areas of nine hundred (900) acres or less shall be
determined by the rational formula:
   Q = AIR
Where:
Q =   Flow in cubic feet per second.
A =   Area to be drained in acres, determined by field surveys for areas less
than one hundred (100) acres, and by the latest government quadrangle maps for
larger areas.
I =   Percent of imperviousness of the area. Percent of imperviousness may vary
between seventy percent (70%) and ninety five percent (95%). Coefficients lower
than these indicated values may be used; however, in such instances, individual
block calculations will be submitted with plans.
R =   Rate of rainfall over entire drainage area in inches per hour, based on
the time for concentration and the latest government records for the area.
B.   Runoff from drainage areas greater than nine hundred (900) acres will be
determined by use of accepted engineering principles.
C.   The size of closed storm sewers, open channels, culverts and bridges shall
be determined using the Manning formula which may be modified for use with
runoff determined by the rational formula to:
   Q = (1.5r) (2/3 s) (1/2 A)
   n
Where:
Q =   Discharge in cubic feet per second.
A =   Cross sectional area of water in conduit square feet.
r =   Hydraulic radius of water in conduit.
s =   Mean slope of hydraulic gradient in feet of vertical rise per feet of
horizontal distance.
n =   Roughness coefficient, based on condition and type of material of conduit
lining, but not less than 0.013.
   (Prior code §7-4)
18.04.050: PRIMARY DRAINAGE CHANNEL:
All primary drainage channels lying within or immediately adjacent to the
subdivision shall meet the following conditions:
A.   All land having an elevation below the 50-year maximum flood elevation for
the final improved channel and not protected by levies or dikes shall be
dedicated for the purpose of providing drainage for public park and/or utility
easement use. All dedications for public park purposes will be reviewed and
approved by the city council or its designated representatives.
B.   The existing channel lying within or immediately adjacent to the
subdivision shall be cleaned to provide for the free flow of water, and the
channel shall be straightened, widened and improved to the extent required to
prevent overflow, resulting from a 50-year frequency rainfall, beyond the
limits of the dedicated drainage easement provided for in subsection A of this
section.
C.   Site improvement shall provide for the grading of all building sites and
streets to an elevation where all lots, building areas and streets will not be
subject to overflow from a 50-year frequency flood, and in a manner that will
provide for the rapid runoff of storm water.
D.   Whenever channel improvement is carried out, sodding, backsloping,
cribbing and other bank protection shall be designed and constructed to control
erosion for the anticipated conditions of flow resulting from a 50-year
frequency rainfall.
E.   A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless it is
placed in an enclosed storm sewer, except as provided below:
   1.   Unless a paved street surface at least two (2) lanes wide is provided
on both sides of a paved channel so as to provide access to abutting
properties;
   2.   Except where lots are platted to back up to the street right of way
where the drainage channel is located between the rear lot line and the paved
street, provided that there is no access to the rear of the lot from the
street, and further provided that at no time in the future shall access be
allowed or constructed over the open drainage channel to the rear of a lot so
platted. For the purpose of these regulations, a lot which sides is not
considered to back up to the street right of way;
   3.   When a condition outlined in either subsection E1 or E2 of this section
is present, adequate space shall be dedicated as right of way to provide for
maintenance of the paved drainage channel and its unpaved bank.
F.   Culverts, bridges, and other drainage structures shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications and design criteria of the city where the
city has present or future maintenance responsibility. (Prior code §7-5)
18.04.060: SURFACE DRAINAGE AND SECONDARY DRAINAGE CHANNEL:
Surface drainage and all secondary channels within or adjacent to the addition
shall meet the following conditions:
A.   Secondary drainage channels which have a primary function of collecting
surface water from adjacent properties or intercepting and diverting side hill
drainage shall be provided with an improved open channel.
B.   Secondary drainage channels which have a primary function of transporting
water through the block or collecting water from cross channels and which have
a drainage area of less than forty (40) acres shall be improved with closed
storm sewers; and where the secondary drainage channel has a drainage area of
greater than forty (40) acres, an improved open channel or closed storm sewer
may be provided. Within greenway developments, when the unit area to be drained
is less than four (4) acres, the city engineer may modify the requirements of
the first part of this subsection to permit a paved, open channel, designed for
use as a sidewalk, having a minimum width of four feet (4') and provided with
six inch (6") curbs.
C.   A drainage channel shall not be located in a street easement unless it is
placed in an enclosed storm sewer, except as provided below:
   1.   Unless a paved street surface at least two (2) lanes wide is provided
on both sides of a paved channel so as to provide access to abutting
properties;
   2.   Except where lots are platted to back up to the street right of way
where the drainage channel is located between the rear lot line and the paved
street, provided that there is no access to the rear of the lot from the
street, and further provided that at no time in the future shall access be
allowed or constructed over the open drainage channel to the rear of a lot so
platted. For the purpose of these regulations, a lot which sides is not
considered to back up to the street right of way;
   3.   When a condition in either subsection C1 or C2 of this section is
present, adequate space shall be dedicated as right of way to provide for
maintenance of the paved drainage channel and its unpaved bank.
D.   In a single-family residential high density development, site grading
shall be carried out in such a manner that surface water from each lot will
flow directly to a storm sewer, improved channel, sodded swale, or a paved
street without crossing more than four (4) adjacent lots.
E.   Surface water collected on streets shall be diverted to storm drains at
satisfactory intervals to prevent overflow of six inch (6") high curbs during a
25-year frequency rain for the area and grades involved. Drainage area allowed
for surface flow on streets at point of diversion shall not exceed twenty (20)
acres, regardless of flow.
F.   Drainage easement of satisfactory width to provide working room for
construction and maintenance shall be provided for all storm sewers.
G.   Open channels shall be improved by providing a paved section that will
carry the runoff from a rain of 25-year frequency within the lined section and
a sodden section to carry the additional runoff from a rain of 50-year
frequency. Whenever an open improved channel is required or authorized for a
secondary drainage channel under the provisions of these regulations and the
channel crosses residential lots which have been developed under the community
unit plan of development, or where the channel improvement is to be designed as
an area that will be maintained by a property owners' association, then, upon
recommendation of the city engineer, the city council may modify the
requirements of the first part of this subsection to permit a channel
improvement design in keeping with landscaping architectural plans, providing
all hydraulic requirements to support the overflow resulting from a 50-year
frequency rainfall are met. (Prior code §7-6)
18.04.070: BRIDGE AND CULVERT:
A.   All flow of water across continuous streets or alleys shall be through
culverts or bridges.
B.   Bridges and culverts shall be sized to accommodate a 50-year frequency
rain, without increasing the depth of flow in channel.
C.   Design of bridges and culverts shall conform to city construction
specifications. (Prior code §7-7(a))
18.04.080: CLOSED STORM SEWER:
Closed storm sewers shall be constructed of precast or prefabricated pipe or
built in place of closed box design to conform with city construction
specifications. Storm sewers carrying runoff from streets may be designed to
serve a 10-year frequency rain for the drainage area involved, provided that
overflow from a 25-year frequency rain can reach a suitable outlet without
inundating an elevation one foot (1') below any house pad elevation. In cases
where the above cannot be accomplished, the storm sewer shall be designed to
serve a 25-year frequency rain. Sizing shall be calculated by the Manning
formula. (Prior code §7-7(b))
18.04.090: OPEN PAVED STORM DRAINAGE CHANNEL:
Open paved storm drainage channels shall be constructed in accordance with city
specifications. Side slopes above the paved section shall be shaped and sodded
on a slope of three (3) horizontal to one vertical or flatter. Fences shall not
be erected closer than one foot (1') (measured horizontally) to the edge of the
paved section. (Prior code §7-7(c))
18.04.100: IMPROVEMENTS AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS:
The city reserves the right to require improvements and drainage easements
within the subdivision adequate to assure that there will be no backup of
water, from areas outside of the subdivision, beyond the limits of the
dedicated drainage easements in the subdivision as a result of a 50-year
frequency flood. (Prior code §7-8)
18.04.110: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this chapter is guilty
of an offense, and each violation shall be considered a separate offense, and
upon conviction of any offense shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
eighteen dollars ($18.00) and two dollars ($2.00) costs for each offense.
(Prior code §7-9)
TITLE 19
ZONING REGULATIONS 1
General Provisions   19.04
Definitions   19.08
Districts   19.12
FE (Single-Family Estate) District   19.16
R-1 (Single-Family Residential) District   19.20
R-2 (Two- To Four-Family Residential) District   19.24
R-3 (Multiple Dwelling Residential) District   19.28
C-1 (Suburban Office) District   19.30
C-2 (Restricted Commercial) District   19.32
C-3 (Neighborhood Shopping) District   19.36
C-4 (General Business) District   19.37
C-5 (South End/Industrial Business) District   19.38
PUD (Planned Unit Development) District   19.39
SPUD (Simplified Planned Unit Development) District   19.40
Additional District Regulations   19.41
CC (Community Conservation) District   19.42
TC-CC (Town Center Revitalization) District   19.43
Parking, Loading And Access   19.44
Special Building Lines   19.48
Building Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy   19.52
Special Use Permit   19.54
Telecommunications Towers And Antennas   19.55
Nonconforming Uses   19.56
Amendments   19.60
Planning Commission   19.64
Board Of Adjustment   19.68
Violations   19.72
 
Notes
1 1. 11 OS § 41-101 et seq.
CHAPTER 19.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
19.04.010: Interpretation And Application
19.04.020: Building Code (Rep. by Ord. 1017 §1, 2006)
19.04.030: Severability
19.04.010: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
In order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the city, the
zoning requirements:
A.   Shall be interpreted and applied as basic requirements;
B.   Shall not interfere with or repeal:
   1.   Any ordinance, rule, requirement, or permit previously adopted or
issued, which relates to the use of buildings and premises,
   2.   Any easement, covenant, restriction, or other agreement between two (2)
or more parties, unless the provision imposes a greater restriction. (Ord. 832
§1, 1997)
19.04.020: BUILDING CODE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1017 §1, 2006)
19.04.030: SEVERABILITY:
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section, or chapter of
this title is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such in validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the
remaining portions of this title. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 19.08
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
19.08.010: General Description
19.08.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
Certain terms and words contained in the chapters of this title are to be used
and interpreted as defined below:
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE: A building, structure or use which is
incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
buildings located on the same land.
ADULT AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT: Amusement or entertainment which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting,
describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual anatomical areas,
including, but not limited to, topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainment.
ADULT BOOKSTORE/RETAIL: A place of business having a significant portion of its
stock in trade in books, films, magazines, printed material, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing sexual conduct or sexual anatomical areas and/or
novelties, gifts, greeting cards, devices or other retail items which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual
conduct or sexual anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTEL: A place of business wherein material is presented, as part of the
motel service, via closed circuit TV or otherwise, which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or
sexual anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE: A place of business where slug operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained
to show images which when displayed are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or sexual anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A place of business, generally in an enclosed
building, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or sexual anatomical areas.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any
such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities. The operation of commercial feed pens, sales yards and auction
yards for cattle or hogs shall not be deemed an agricultural use.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, beer, and wine, including every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, beer or wine, which is
capable of being consumed as beverage by human beings.
ALLEY: A minor right of way, dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary
means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
a street, which may be used for public utility purposes.
AUTOMOBILE: A self-propelled vehicle designed for use on streets and highways
for the conveyance of goods and people, including, but not limited to,
passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters and motorcycles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used for the sale of gasoline, other refined products, and automobile
accessories. The service station may or may not include facilities for
lubricating, washing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, or
facilities for the sale of butane, propane, or compressed natural gas.
AUTOMOBILE WASH: A structure designed primarily for washing automobiles, which
may incorporate production line methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam
cleaner, high pressure spray or other mechanical device.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING OR SALVAGE YARD: An area outside a building where
automobiles which are not in an operable condition or which have been junked or
wrecked are disassembled or dismantled. Used parts may be stored at a wrecking
or salvage yard.
BASEMENT: A substructure or foundation of a building partly or wholly
underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as
a story when more than one-half (1/2) of its height is above ground.
BEER TAVERN: A place of business on whose premises the dispensing of beverages
occurs, which are composed, in whole or in part, of alcoholic beverages
containing 3.2 percent alcohol or less, where consumption on site is the
primary activity, and where the serving and selling of food items is the
secondary or limited activity accounting for less than fifty percent (50%) of
the annual combined total of food and beverage sales.
BLOCK: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is
entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, public walks, parks or green
strips, undeveloped land or drainage channels or a combination thereof.
BOARDING HOUSE/BED AND BREAKFAST: A dwelling containing less than six (6)
sleeping rooms where paying guests are provided with meals and lodging.
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT: A place of business on whose premises an
individual may, in exchange for consideration, engage in a procedure in which
an opening is created in a human body solely for the purpose of inserting
jewelry or other decoration (excluding ear piercing), whether or not for a fee
or other compensation.
BUILDER: Any person that engages in the construction of structures within the
subdivision.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that is
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or
property.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot covered by the building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average of the highest and
lowest points of the mean elevation of the available building site of the lot
to the highest point of the building, excluding steeples, antennas, and
chimneys.
BUILDING, MAIN: "Main building" means a building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is located. In any residential district, a
dwelling shall be deemed to be the main building.
BUILDING, PORTABLE: "Portable building" means a movable accessory building or
structure which is not connected to sewer service, does not exceed twelve feet
(12') in height and one hundred forty four (144) square feet in gross floor
area, is behind the front of the main building, is not subject to other setback
requirements, but is included in lot coverage requirements.
BUILDING, SECONDARY: "Secondary building" means any structure containing the
same uses and located on the same lot as the main building. All applicable
zoning and construction code requirements must be met.
BUILDING SETBACKS/LINES: The required open space between the property lines and
the exterior of the structure. Building setbacks/lines are established both by
plat restrictions and city ordinances.
BUILDING SITE: The buildable area of a single parcel of land, determined by
setback lines, occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure.
CARPORT: A permanent, roofed accessory structure, open on at least two (2)
sides, designed to shelter permitted vehicles.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Official certification which permits the use of a
building in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and which
certifies compliance with the provision of law for the use and occupancy of the
building in its several parts together with any special stipulations or
conditions of the building permit.
CHARITY GAME: A bingo game, U-PIK-EM bingo game, or break open ticket game
conducted by an organization pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma charity
games act.
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: "Dental or medical clinic" means a facility,
including dentists' and doctors' offices, used for the examination and
treatment of ill and afflicted human patients, who cannot be kept overnight
except under emergency conditions.
CLINIC, OUTPATIENT: "Outpatient clinic" means an office used for the care,
diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and injured persons and those
in need of medical or limited surgical attention; family and mental health
counseling; and aftercare counseling for persons recovering from drug, alcohol
or other addictions; all with no provision for room and board or overnight stay
on the premises. Typical uses include, but are not necessarily limited to,
offices for a doctor, dentist, oral surgeon, therapist, marriage and family
counselor, optometrist, drug and alcohol counselor.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The official statement of a municipal legislative body
which sets forth its major policies concerning desirable, future physical
development.
CONVALESCENT, REST OR NURSING HOME/EXTENDED CARE FACILITY: A health facility
where elderly or chronically ill persons, with medical problems such as
Alzheimer's disease, stroke, or the infirmities of age, are housed and
furnished with meals and continuing nursing care for compensation.
CORNER LOT: A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or
more streets.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings and which is bordered on two (2) or more sides
by such building or buildings.
COURT, INNER: "Inner court" means a court, other than an outer court, whose
length is the minimum horizontal dimension measured parallel to its longest
side and whose width is the minimum horizontal dimension measured at right
angles to its length.
COURT, OUTER: "Outer court" means a court whose full width opens onto a
required yard, street, or alley, whose width is the minimum horizontal
dimension measured in the same general direction as the yard, street, or alley,
and whose depth is the minimum horizontal dimension measured at right angles to
its width.
CUL-DE-SAC OR CUL-DE-SAC STREET: A minor street having one end open to
vehicular traffic and having one end terminated by a turnaround.
DAYCARE CENTER: A licensed childcare facility which receives and provides care
and protection for eight (8) or more children, apart from their natural
parents, legal guardians or custodians, and outside of the home where they
reside for any part of a twenty four (24) hour period.
DAYCARE HOME: A licensed childcare facility located in a single-family
residential dwelling, which receives and provides care and protection for seven
(7) or fewer children, including any preschool children under five (5) years of
age living in the home, apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or
custodians, and outside of the home where they reside, for any part of a twenty
four (24) hour period.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: A lot which runs through a block from street to street and
which abuts two (2) or more streets.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: Any establishment where food, frozen desserts, and/or
beverages are sold to the consumer, where motor vehicle parking space is
provided, and where such food, frozen desserts, and/or beverages are intended
to be consumed in the motor vehicle parked on the premises outside of the
building.
DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living
quarters for one or more families, excluding mobile homes or travel trailers.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: "Attached dwelling" means a dwelling having any portion in
common with an adjoining dwelling.
DWELLING, DETACHED: "Detached dwelling" means a dwelling having open space on
all sides.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY OR APARTMENT HOUSE: "Multiple-family or apartment
house dwelling" means a dwelling designed to be occupied by three (3) or more
families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer
courts or camps, hotels or motels.
DWELLING, ROW HOUSE OR TOWNHOUSE: "Row house or townhouse dwelling" means three
(3) or more dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit having a
separate outdoor entrance at ground level by one family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: "Single-family dwelling" means a dwelling designed to
be occupied by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: "Two-family dwelling" means a dwelling designed to be
occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used as
living quarters for one family.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or
persons, of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes.
FACILITY FOR INPATIENT TREATMENT FOR DRUG, ALCOHOL OR OTHER ABUSE/ADDICTION: A
place used for detoxification, diagnosis and/or treatment of persons addicted
to drugs, alcohol or other substances or behaviors, who are provided with room
and board and who voluntarily remain on the premises for the amount of time
necessary, in the judgment of professionals, to treat the disease. The facility
is not intended to be occupied by or used for persons incarcerated as a result
of a sentence by a criminal justice system of the state or federal government.
FAMILY: One or more persons related to each other by blood or marriage,
including adopted and/or foster children. The maximum number of persons
permitted to occupy the same dwelling unit, who are not family members, cannot
exceed five (5).
FINAL PLAT: A map of land subdivisions prepared in a form suitable for the
filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and
with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets, alleys, public areas, and other dimensions of land.
FITNESS CENTER/HEALTH CLUB: A business establishment with equipment and
facilities for exercising and improving physical fitness.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: "Gross floor area" means the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of all of the floors of a building or buildings, measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two
(2) buildings, and including, but not limited to, the following spaces:
A.   Basements;
B.   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
C.   Floor space for mechanical equipment, with structural headroom of seven
feet (7');
D.   Penthouses;
E.   Attic space providing headroom of seven feet (7') or more;
F.   Interior balconies, mezzanines, and enclosed covered porches, and enclosed
steps;
G.   Accessory uses in enclosed covered space, but not including space used for
off street parking.
FLOOR AREA, NET: "Net floor area" means the total floor area within a building
devoted or intended to be devoted to a particular use, with structural headroom
of seven feet (7') or more, whether above or below the finished lot grade,
excluding:
A.   Elevators, stairwells, hallways, walls and partitions;
B.   Floor space permanently devoted to a parking space or parking spaces,
mechanical equipment, closets, washrooms, or other items permanently preventing
the floor space from being occupied by persons while engaged in the use.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: A mathematical expression determined by dividing the floor
area of a building by the lot area in which it is located.
         Floor area = Floor area ratio
         Lot area
FOUNDATION CODE: The standards for the permanent installation of manufactured
homes.
FRONTAGE STREET OR SERVICE STREET: A minor street auxiliary to and located on
the side of a major street for service to abutting properties and adjacent
areas and for control of access.
GARAGE APARTMENT: A dwelling designed for occupancy by one family, erected
above a private garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: "Private garage" means part of a main building or an accessory
building or structure used primarily for the storage of automobiles.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: "Public garage" means any garage, other than a private garage,
which is available to the public for the parking or storage of vehicles for
pay.
GARAGE, REPAIR: "Repair garage" means a building in which facilities are
located for the care, servicing, repair, or outfitting of automobiles.
GRADING PLAN: A drawing to scale of the property depicting the same information
as the plat of survey, and also showing:
A.   All information shown on a plat of survey without the surveyor's
certification and signature;
B.   The size, location and orientation of the proposed improvements relative
to existing improvements and the boundaries of the property;
C.   Existing topographical and physical features;
D.   Existing and proposed ground contours at no greater than two foot (2')
intervals;
E.   Finished floor elevations of all existing and proposed structures;
F.   Detailed grading elevations depicting the proposed drainage pattern;
G.   Existing and proposed floodplain boundaries and flood zones, if any apply;
H.   Location of existing and proposed underground storm sewer improvements
with rim and flow line elevations;
I.   For larger drainage areas, runoff calculations and hydraulic design
calculations for proposed drainage improvements may be required to accompany
the grading plan;
J.   The grading plan does not require the certification or signature of the
land surveyor, but under some circumstances, may require the signature of a
professional civil engineer registered in the state of Oklahoma by the state
board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on in a residential
district which:
A.   Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises;
B.   Does not change the character thereof, provided that:
   1.   
   2.   
   3.   
   4.   
C.   Is not regulated or prohibited by any other ordinance;
D.   Certain occupations and professions are not considered to be home
occupations. By way of example, a beauty shop, barbershop, restaurant, rest
home, kennel, clinic, medical doctor's office, dentist's office, daycare
center, real estate office, or cabinet, metal or auto repair shop;
E.   People employed in a home occupation shall reside within a dwelling on the
property;
F.   There are two (2) types of home occupations:
   1.   
   2.   
HOSPITAL: An institution that provides care and treatment for the sick or the
injured, including related facilities such as a pharmacy, laboratories,
outpatient departments, and central service facilities.
HOTEL: Any building or building structures or other facility in which the
public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which six (6)
or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms
are in one or in several structures. This term shall include hotels, apartment
hotels, motels, tourist courts; lodging inns and all other facilities where
rooms or sleeping space are furnished for a consideration. This term shall not
include hospitals, sanatoriums, nursing homes nor facilities intended for
permanent residents for terms in excess of thirty (30) days.
KENNEL: An establishment located on a lot or premises where four (4) or more
legal domesticated animals are bred, trained, or boarded.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: A plan drawn to scale showing the improvement of land by adding
plants such as trees, shrubs, lawns, ground cover or flowers, frequently in
combination with ornamental construction elements (fences, screens, grills,
decorative paving or mulches, stones, etc.) and art forms (sculptures, mosaics,
water features, etc.). Lighting may be incorporated in the landscape plan.
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE: "Self-service laundry" means any attended or unattended
place, building, or portion thereof, available to the general public, for the
purpose of washing and drying wearing apparel, cloth, fabrics, and textiles of
any kind by means of a mechanical appliance operated primarily by the customer.
LOT: Any plat of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one or more
buildings, and accessory buildings, structures, or uses, including such open
spaces as required by this title and other laws or ordinances, and having its
principal frontage on a street.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: "Corner lot" means a lot where at least two (2) adjacent sides
adjoin intersecting streets; provided, that the interior angle at the
intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
LOT DEPTH: The average distance of the side lines of the lot measured from the
street line to the rear line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: "Double frontage lot" means a lot having a frontage on
two (2) nonintersecting streets.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of the legal boundary of the property that is
adjacent to and concurrent with a dedicated street right of way.
LOT, INTERIOR: "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bordering a lot.
MAJOR STREET: A street which is designated as a primary or minor arterial on
the major street plan.
Minor Arterial: The minor arterial street system which interconnects with and
augments the primary arterial system and provides service to trips of moderate
length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than the higher system.
This system also distributes travel to geographic areas smaller than those
identified with the higher system and it places more emphasis on land
accessibility.
Primary Arterial: This system of streets should serve the major centers of
activity, the highest traffic volume corridors, the longest trip desires and
the major portion of all travel. For this class of facilities, the concept of
service to abutting land should be subordinate to the provision of travel
service to major traffic movements and any such service should be purely
incidental to its primary functional responsibility.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A single-family dwelling, constructed to be towed on its own
chassis, capable of connection to utilities for year round occupancy, and
fabricated on or after June 15, 1976, in an off site manufacturing facility for
installation or assembly at the building site as a permanent structure with
transport features removed. The manufactured home must bear the seal of and be
certified as being built in compliance with the federal manufactured housing
construction and safety standards code.
MANUFACTURED HOME CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS: The standards for the
design, construction, and performance of a manufactured home.
MASSAGE PARLOR: Synonymous with the term "massage establishment" as used in
title 5 of this code (see section
5.04.510 of this code for definition of "massage establishment" which is
adopted herein by reference as applying to the term "massage parlor" as used in
the zoning code). This includes any place of business where for any form of
consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of
fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or
manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual
conduct or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service
related thereto exposes sexual anatomical areas.
MINOR STREET: Any street not classified as a major street on the major street
plan.
Collector Street: The collector street system provides both land access service
and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods and commercial areas.
It differs from the major system in that facilities on the collector system may
penetrate residential neighborhoods, distributing trips from the major streets
through the area to the ultimate destination. The collector street also
collects traffic from local streets in residential neighborhoods and channels
into the major street system.
Local Street: The local street system comprises all facilities not on one of
the higher systems. It serves primarily to provide direct access to abutting
land and access to the major and collector systems. It offers the lowest level
of mobility and service to through traffic movement is deliberately
discouraged.
MOBILE HOME: A single or double wide, portable or mobile living unit designed
for human occupancy on a permanent basis, which has, as a minimum, two (2)
exterior doors, complete toilet and bathing facilities, and hardware for
connection to required utilities.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Land or property which is used or rented for occupancy by one
or more mobile homes.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Any of the following:
A.   Any construction, alteration, structural expansion or change in land use
or residential density that requires a building permit, but not including
installation or replacement of a permitted accessory sign; or
B.   Any moving onto a site of a permanent structure, a trailer, or a mobile
home, which placement is intended for occupancy as a permitted use, including,
but not limited to, residence, institution, office or sales business, storage
of materials, or other primary or accessory building use; or
C.   Any physical or design alteration of the site, including, but not limited
to, change in drainage, change in location or size of required landscape area,
change in driveway access points, or redesign of parking area.
NIGHTCLUB OR BAR: A place of business on whose premises the dispensing of
beverages occurs, which are composed, in whole or in part, of alcoholic
beverages containing more than 3.2 percent alcohol, for consumption on site, is
the primary activity; where the serving and selling of food items is the
secondary or limited activity accounting for less than fifty percent (50%) of
the annual combined total of food and beverage sales; and where live and/or
prerecorded music and other entertainment media and facilities, such as
dancing, are provided for customers.
NONCONFORMANCE: A lawful condition of a structure or land which does not
conform to the requirements of the district in which it is situated, including,
but not limited to, the failure to conform to use, height, area, coverage, or
off street parking requirements.
OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICTS MAP: The official visual document setting forth the
zoning district classification of all property within the city.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient
in size to store one automobile, together with a permanently surfaced driveway
connecting the parking space with a street or alley to permit ingress or egress
of the automobile. A parking space for one vehicle shall be rectangular in
shape and shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') in width and eighteen feet (18')
in length, exclusive of driveway.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A zoning district that provides for flexibility in
applying conventional land use, area, and subdivision requirements in response
to creative and high quality design by the property owner.
PLAT, FINAL: "Final plat" means a map of a land subdivision prepared in a form
suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications, and
acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining
lots and blocks, streets and alleys, public areas, and other dimensions of
land.
PLAT OF SURVEY: A drawing, reproduced to scale, that represents in graphical
form the results of a survey performed by a professional land surveyor
registered in the state of Oklahoma with the state board of registration for
professional engineers and land surveyors. The plat of survey shall show:
A.   Property corners with descriptions;
B.   Boundary lines with bearings, distances or curve data;
C.   Easement and building setback lines;
D.   A legal description indicating lot, block and name of the addition or
section, township and range with quarter section breakdown or metes and bounds
calls;
E.   Mathematically computed lot area;
F.   A north arrow, and an indication of scale;
G.   The certification and signature of the surveyor and be dated.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: "Preliminary plat" means a map of a proposed subdivision
which indicates in general the area to be subdivided, the street layout, lots
and blocks, and the general nature of improvements.
PLOT PLAN: A drawing to scale of the boundaries of the property depicting
similar information as provided by a plat of survey or a filed subdivision
plat, and also showing:
A.   Boundary lines with distances;
B.   A legal description indicating lot, block and name of the addition or
section, township and range with quarter section breakdown or metes and bounds
calls;
C.   A north arrow and an indication of scale;
D.   Easement and building setback lines;
E.   The size, location and orientation of the proposed improvements relative
to existing improvements and the boundaries of the property;
F.   The dimensions locating the proposed improvements and indicating the size
of those improvements;
G.   The present zoning of the property;
H.   The plot plan does not require the certification or signature of a land
surveyor or engineer.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A map of proposed land subdivisions showing the character and
proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability
of the proposed subdivision of land.
PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION: An incorporated, nonprofit organization operating
under recorded land agreements through which:
A.   Each lot owner and/or homeowner is automatically a member;
B.   Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of
the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common
property;
C.   The charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
QUEUE: A line or file of vehicles waiting to be served.
QUEUING SPACE: A space for the temporary holding of vehicles waiting in a
queue.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit which is primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. It either has its own
motive power or is designed to be mounted on or drawn by an automotive vehicle.
The terms "fifth wheeler", "motor home", "truck camper", and "travel or camping
trailer" shall be considered to be the same as a recreational vehicle.
RESIDENTIAL SALES: Any sale commonly known as a garage, porch, car room, back
yard, front yard, patio or any other type of general sale conducted from or on
any premises not located in a zoning district which permits such sales, where
goods or articles of any type are held out for sale to the public. Such sales
shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days nor be held more than once per
quarter; provided, however, that this definition shall not include a situation
where specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sales
specifically references the items to be sold.
RESTAURANT OR BANQUET HALL: A place of business where there are outside service
facilities and/or the dispensing of beverages occurs, which may be composed, in
whole or in part, of alcoholic beverages containing more than 3.2 percent
alcohol, for consumption on site.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT: A condition upon the ownership of land which is
contracted between seller and buyer and may involve other parties when enacted
as a part of a plat. A restrictive covenant is not enforced by the city.
ROOMING HOUSE: A dwelling containing less than six (6) sleeping rooms where
paying guests are provided with lodging only.
SANATORIUM: An institution for the treatment of chronic diseases or for
medically supervised recuperation. This definition specifically excludes
supervised facilities for drug and alcohol rehabilitation.
SEASONAL BUILDING: A building or structure which is constructed or moved into
the city, for a period of time not to exceed six (6) calendar months within any
consecutive nine (9) calendar month period of time, such as a tent, a portable
building or a trailer for uses such as fruit stands, snow cone or concession
stands, or miscellaneous retail sales.
SEXUAL ANATOMICAL AREAS: Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; human genitals
in an apparent swollen state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breasts; ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, masturbation, and
excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities
set forth above.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A place of business, generally in a building or
structure, which contains or is used for commercial entertainment where the
customer directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact
with, or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with, or to
allow personal contact by, employees, devices, or equipment, or by personnel
provided by the establishment which appeals to the lustful interest of the
customer to include, but not be limited to, bathhouses, massage parlors, and
related or similar activities.
SIGHTPROOF SCREENING: Sightproof fencing or sightproof landscaping, including
decorative fencing, evergreen vegetation or landscaped earth berms, or any
combination thereof, maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the
property or structure behind such fence, evergreen vegetation or berm.
Corrugated or unpainted galvanized fencing material shall not be permitted.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A drawing to scale of the boundaries of the property
depicting all the information provided by a plat of survey and also showing:
A.   All information shown on a plat of survey without the surveyor's
certification and signature;
B.   The size, location and orientation of the proposed improvements relative
to existing improvements and the boundaries of the property, including
buildings, yards, courts, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking,
fences, screening, trash collection, service areas and other features;
C.   Dimensions locating the proposed improvements and indicating the size of
those improvements;
D.   Existing topographical and physical features, including adjacent streets,
sidewalks and alleys, buildings and other physical features;
E.   The relationship of the property to adjacent property;
F.   The present zoning of the property;
G.   Existing flood zone designation of the property;
H.   A data table for depicting conformance with zoning requirements, including
building height and parking requirements;
I.   The location and size of existing and proposed public utility lines and
fire hydrants;
J.   The site development plan does not require the certification or signature
of a land surveyor, but under some circumstances may require the signature of a
professional civil engineer registered in the state of Oklahoma by the state
board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors.
SPLIT LOT: A subordinate and integral part of any lot and which plot or parcel
of land is not capable of supporting or having a building constructed upon it.
STABLE, PRIVATE: "Private stable" means a stable with a capacity for not more
than two (2) horses or mules.
STABLE, PUBLIC: "Public stable" means a stable with a capacity for more than
two (2) horses or mules.
STREET: Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to adjoining property.
STREET, INTERSECTING: "Intersecting street" means any street which joins
another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location
on the ground, not including sidewalks, driveways and similar improvement
areas, but excluding, for the purposes of this title, all signs.
SUBDIVIDER OR DEVELOPER: Any person subdividing or proposing to subdivide land
as herein defined.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: "Major subdivision" means the splitting of land into four
(4) or more lots, or a significant alteration of an approved subdivision by
creating or deleting lots, or property transactions requiring the dedication of
a street to serve the lots which have been created.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: "Minor subdivision" means the splitting of land into three
(3) lots or less with no major easement or right of way requirements and no
major utility construction other than connections to the lots created.
SURVEY: A physical, on the ground, land survey of the property corners and
boundaries performed by a professional land surveyor registered in the state of
Oklahoma with the state board of registration for professional engineers and
land surveyors. Said survey shall have been performed within one year of the
date of the application.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT: A place of business on whose premises an individual may
engage in the practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the human
body by scarring or inserting under the skin using needles, scalpels, or other
related equipment, whether or not for a fee or other compensation; provided,
however, that medical micropigmentation, performed pursuant to the provisions
of the Oklahoma medical micropigmentation regulation act shall not be construed
as tattooing.
TEMPORARY BUILDINGS: Those permitted during the construction of buildings,
which, upon completion of construction, shall be removed.
TRAILER, HAULING: "Hauling trailer" means a conveyance transport with an axle
and tongue designed to be pulled behind an automobile or truck to haul animals,
produce goods, commodities, boats, trash, etc.
VEHICLE: A self-propelled conveyance, used in transporting persons or things,
that runs on tires; a motor vehicle.
VETERINARY CLINIC/HOSPITAL: A facility for the examination and treatment of
afflicted animals of the type that are permitted to be kept in residential
districts as household pets. Animals may be boarded for a fee, but no outside
runs are permitted.
YARD: An open space, at grade, other than a court or plaza, between a building
and the adjacent lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a
structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided
in this title.
YARD SETBACK: The required distance between the building or structure located
on a lot and the property line.
ZONING: Rules set by ordinance for the specific use of a building and/or the
premises.
ZONING DISTRICT: The section or sections of the city for which requirements
governing the use of buildings and premises are grouped. (Ord. 1142, 2014)
CHAPTER 19.12
DISTRICTS
SECTION:
19.12.010: Classifications
19.12.020: Map
19.12.030: Boundary Interpretation
19.12.040: General Description
19.12.050: Vacated Property
19.12.060: Annexed And Unplatted Lands
19.12.010: CLASSIFICATIONS:
All property within the City is divided into zoning districts as follows:
   FE (Single-Family Estate) District
   R-1 (Single-Family Residential) District
   R-2 (Two- To Four-Family Residential) District
   R-3 (Multiple Dwelling Residential) District
   C-1 (Suburban Office) District
   C-2 (Restricted Commercial) District
   C-3 (Neighborhood Shopping) District
   C-4 (General Business) District
C-5 (South End/Industrial Business) District
   PUD (Planned Unit Development) District
   SPUD (Simplified Planned Unit Development) District
   CC (Community Conservation) District
   TC-CC (Town Center Revitalization) District
(Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 1144, 2014: Ord. 1139, 2014: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.12.020: MAP:
The boundaries of these zoning districts shall be set forth on the City zoning
map and shall be made a part of this title, including all notations,
references, and other matters. The map shall be used solely for the purpose of
this chapter and shall be kept in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.12.030: BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION:
Where uncertainty exists, with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the City zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines,
such lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
B.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the lot
lines, such lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
C.   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately parallel to the
centerlines of streets or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way
lines, such boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto at such
scaled distances.
D.   Where district boundaries follow a railroad line, such boundaries shall be
deemed to be located on the closest easement line, which shall completely
include or exclude the railroad easement unless otherwise designated. (Ord. 832
§1, 1997)
19.12.040: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The City Council shall instruct the Planning Commission to study and make
recommendations concerning the use of undeveloped land in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan. Upon receipt of such recommendations, the City Council
shall, after public hearings, place the land in a zoning district. (Ord. 832
§1, 1997)
19.12.050: VACATED PROPERTY:
Whenever any street, alley, or other public easement is vacated, such vacated
property shall assume the zoning district designation of the land to which it
becomes a part. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.12.060: ANNEXED AND UNPLATTED LANDS:
All annexations of land and unplatted areas of land in the City shall initially
be placed in an R-1 District. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 19.16
FE (SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.16.005: General Description
19.16.010: Permitted Uses
19.16.020: Uses Subject To Review
19.16.025: Prohibited Uses
19.16.030: Building Height
19.16.040: Yards; Setback
19.16.050: Lot Area
19.16.055: Landscaping
19.16.060: Lot Coverage
19.16.070: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.16.005: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This large lot residential district is intended to contain single-family homes
on lots that are large enough to permit limited agricultural activity including
private stables for raising a limited number of horses for personal use. The
use and development regulations of this district are intended to permit these
activities without creating conflict with higher residential densities and
incompatible land uses that may exist on abutting and surrounding properties.
In order to preserve the compatibility of the uses in this district with more
conventional adjacent developments, it is important for properties with this
zoning district classification to mitigate the effects of the permitted uses
through provision of significant open space in the form of side and rear yard
building setbacks and required rear yard area. (Ord. 1007 §2, 2005)
19.16.010: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. Property, buildings and structures shall be
used only for the following purposes:
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Carports. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   Application for a building permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of
the subject property, or agent or either, or by a licensed contractor employed
in connection with the proposed work in accordance with the requirements set
forth in
chapter 19.52 of this title.
B.   The supporting structure of the carport shall not violate the required
side yard setback.
C.   Carports shall be located only over existing driveways.
D.   Carports shall be kept in an attractive state, in good repair, and in a
safe and sanitary condition.
E.   Carports shall be constructed, erected or installed to conform with the
requirements of the city building code and shall be of an acceptable design and
appearance compatible with the primary building on the property.
F.   Carports shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') in width for a single garage
and/or driveway, or twenty six feet (26') in width for a double garage and/or
driveway, or the width of such driveways plus an additional two feet (2'). All
roof width measurements shall be from the eave line.
G.   Carports shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height as measured from the
ground to the eave line. Further, such carport shall not exceed twenty four
feet (24') in total length.
H.   Carports shall be permanently open on two (2) sides from grade surface to
the eave line, except that all portions of carports which extend into the
required front yard setback shall be permanently open on three (3) sides from
grade surface to the eave line.
I.   Carports shall comply with front yard setback requirements, except that
carports used in conjunction with single-family dwellings shall be permitted to
extend into the required front yard setback area; however, carports shall be
permitted no closer than five feet (5') from the right of way line of a public
or private street.
Home occupation, type A. Applicants must meet the following conditions:
A.   Activity must be conducted entirely in the main residence.
B.   No client visitors.
C.   No change in appearance of residence, including parking.
D.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
New and/or replacement accessory buildings and structures, including all
buildings and structures in the rear yard (includes house, detached garage,
patio covers and all other buildings and structures not otherwise listed in
this section), are subject to the following conditions:
A.   Maximum Number: No limitation on number.
B.   Maximum Size: The total square footage of all accessory buildings,
including a private detached garage, cannot exceed two thousand four hundred
(2,400) square feet or twenty percent (20%) of the available rear yard,
whichever is the lesser, as measured from the rear walls of the house to the
rear property line.
C.   Maximum Height: The top plate height shall not exceed ten feet (10') with
the standard six foot (6') side setback, or thirteen feet (13') with an
additional side setback of two feet (2') per each one foot (1') of height above
ten feet (10'). The roof shall not exceed the maximum height of the house and
shall have a minimum pitch of four (4) in twelve (12).
D.   Location; Rear Yard: Accessory buildings and structures shall be located
in the rear yard.
E.   Property Line Setbacks: Setbacks are as set forth in section
19.16.040 of this chapter.
F.   Materials Of Construction: An accessory building or structure cannot be
constructed using corrugated, galvanized or exposed exterior metal material.
G.   Construction Of Main Building Required: No accessory building or structure
shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually commenced.
H.   Occupancy: Occupancy of all accessory buildings and structures shall be
limited to the owner and/or occupants of the main residence.
I.   Location; Across Lot Lines: No accessory building or structure shall be
located across lot lines separating two (2) or more dwellings or buildings
regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the lots.
J.   Access: Access to the accessory building or structure shall be limited to
the lot it occupies.
If the building or structure is to be used in a home occupation, type B, the
applicant must meet all of the requirements set forth for home occupation, type
B conditions in section
19.16.020 of this chapter. Accessory buildings and structures cannot be used
for commercial activities.
Perimeter fence. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 16 of this
code.
Portable buildings. May be placed within a utility easement along the side and
rear lot lines, but the property owner shall be responsible for any expense
incurred by the city in moving the building in order to gain access to the
easement.
Site built, single-family dwelling.
Temporary buildings.
Truck gardening, including the keeping of poultry, not more than two (2)
horses, but not the raising of livestock. (Ord. 1007 §2, 2005: Ord. 968 §1,
2002: Ord. 872 §1, 1998: Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.16.020: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning commission review and recommendation is required. The public hearing
requirements for uses subject to review are set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple. Includes the main building and all other
structures comprising the complex, including, but not limited to, parish hall,
education building, parking, accessory structures, recreation area and open
space, and minister's residence when a part of the complex, subject to the
following condition:
A.   A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
Home occupation, type B conditions. Applications are subject to the following
review standards and considerations in addition to the general definition of
home occupation, including one or more of the following activities or
modifications to the property:
A.   Client visitors allowed, subject to restrictions established in the review
process.
B.   Activity in other than the main house, e.g., garage, yard or accessory
building or structure.
C.   Any use of electrical or mechanical equipment in the home occupation
activity.
D.   Any structural alteration, including a separate entrance.
E.   Any expansion of the existing driveway.
F.   "Daycare home" as defined by the zoning ordinance.
G.   Hours of activity.
H.   Number of clients present at the same time.
I.   Vehicle parking requirements, including a company car, trailer or truck.
J.   Potential for noise and neighborhood disruption with numbers of client
vehicles.
K.   Effect on area by any proposed structural or property alteration.
L.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Public or private school. Includes classrooms, administration, maintenance,
storage and school vehicle parking facilities, but excludes dormitory
facilities. (Ord. 1007 §2, 2005: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.16.025: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses are prohibited in this district:
Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation.
Single or double wide trailers and mobile homes. (Ord. 986 §2, 2003: Ord. 972
§1, 2002)
19.16.030: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.16.040: YARDS; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights of way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front Setback: The front yard setback shall not be less than twenty five
feet (25').
B.   Side Setback: Each side yard setback shall not be less than:
   1.   Six feet (6') where the height of the building or structure is twenty
five feet (25') or less.
   2.   Nine feet (9') where the height of the building or structure is between
twenty six feet (26') and thirty five feet (35').
   3.   Ten feet (10') where the building or structure is parallel to a side
street.
C.   Rear Setback: The rear yard setback shall not be less than twenty five
feet (25'). (Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.16.050: LOT AREA:
The lot area shall not be less than forty three thousand five hundred sixty
(43,560) square feet (1 acre). (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.16.060: LOT COVERAGE:
Main and accessory buildings or structures shall not cover more than fifty
percent (50%) of the lot area. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.16.070: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector’s office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the FE
(single-family estate) zoning district. The table indicates which members of
the city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of permit
application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application does not
require that item to be submitted.
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted Uses
   Accessory sign                                       CI       CI            
   Carports                                             CI       CI  CI         
                                                           Not
                                                           required
                                                           unless   CI,
   Home occupation, type A                              premises FC            
                                                           are
                                                           being
                                                           altered
   New or replacement accessory buildings and structuresCI       CI  CI,        
                                                                        CE
   Perimeter fence                                      CI       CI            
   Portable buildings                                   CI       CI  CI         
   Site built, single-family dwelling                   CI       CI,    CI     CI,
                                                                    CE              CE
   Temporary buildings                                          CI  CI         
   Truck gardening; poultry, not more than 2 horses, no                      
livestock
Uses Subject To Review
                                                                    FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple                 CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                                    CE  CP  CE
                                                           Not
                                                           required
                                                           unless   FC, CI,
   Home occupation, type B                              premises CI  PC         
                                                           are
                                                           being
                                                           altered
                                                                    FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Public or private school                             CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                                    CE  CP  CE
Legend:
CI = City inspector
FC = Fire chief
CE = City engineer
CP = City planner
PC = Planning commission
 
(Ord. 1007 §2, 2005)
19.16.055: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area of all nonresidential uses,
permitted either by right or under an enabling permit, shall be devoted to
landscaping with the requirements of
chapter 19.40 of this title. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002)
CHAPTER 19.20
R-1 (SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.20.010: General Description
19.20.020: Permitted Uses
19.20.030: Uses Subject To Review
19.20.035: Prohibited Uses
19.20.040: Yards; Setback
19.20.050: Double Frontage
19.20.060: Lot Width
19.20.070: Lot Area
19.20.075: Landscaping
19.20.080: Lot Coverage
19.20.090: Building Height
19.20.100: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.20.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The R-1 (single-family residential) district is the most restrictive
residential district. The principal use is for single-family dwellings and
related recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required
to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area.
These areas are protected from the encroachment of uses considered to be
detrimental to the residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness,
order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate lighting, air,
and open space for dwellings and related facilities, and through consideration
of the proper functional relationship of each element. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.20.020: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. Property, buildings and structures shall be
used only for the following purposes:
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Carports. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   Application for a building permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of
the subject property, or agent of either, or by a licensed contractor employed
in connection with the proposed work in accordance with the requirements set
forth in
chapter 19.52 of this title.
B.   The supporting structure of the carport shall not violate the required
side yard setback.
C.   Carports shall be located only over existing driveways.
D.   Carports shall be kept in an attractive state, in good repair, and in a
safe and sanitary condition.
E.   Carports shall be constructed, erected or installed to conform with the
requirements of the city building code and shall be of an acceptable design and
appearance compatible with the primary building on the property.
F.   Carports shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') in width for a single garage
and/or driveway, or twenty six feet (26') in width for a double garage and/or
driveway, or the width of such driveways plus an additional two feet (2'). All
roof width measurements shall be from the eave line.
G.   Carports shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height as measured from the
ground to the eave line. Further, such carport shall not exceed twenty four
feet (24') in total length.
H.   Carports shall be permanently open on two (2) sides from grade surface to
the eave line, except that all portions of carports which extend into the
required front yard setback, shall be permanently open on three (3) sides from
grade surface to the eave line.
I.   Carports must comply with front yard setback requirements, except that
carports used in conjunction with single-family or two-family dwellings shall
be permitted to extend into the required front yard setback area; however,
carports shall be permitted no closer than five feet (5') from the right of way
line of a public or private street.
Garden or agricultural crops, but not for the raising of livestock.
Home occupation, type A. Applicants must meet the following conditions:
A.   Activity must be conducted entirely in the main residence.
B.   No client visitors.
C.   No change in appearance of residence, including parking.
D.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Manufactured home. Shall meet the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.40 of this title.
New and/or replacement accessory buildings and structures, including all
buildings and structures in the rear yard (includes house, detached garage,
patio covers and all other buildings and structures not otherwise listed in
this section), are subject to the following conditions:
A.   Maximum Number: No limitation on number.
B.   Maximum Size: The total square footage of all accessory buildings,
including a private detached garage, cannot exceed two thousand four hundred
(2,400) square feet or twenty percent (20%) of the available rear yard,
whichever is the lesser, as measured from the rear walls of the house to the
rear property line.
C.   Maximum Height: The top plate walls height shall not exceed ten feet (10')
with the standard six foot (6') side setback, or thirteen feet (13') with an
additional side setback of two feet (2') per each one foot (1') of height above
ten feet (10'). The roof shall not exceed the maximum height of the house and
shall have a minimum pitch of four (4) in twelve (12).
D.   Location; Rear Yard: Accessory buildings and structures shall be located
in the rear yard.
E.   Property Line Setbacks: Setbacks are as set forth in section
19.20.040 of this chapter.
F.   Materials Of Construction: An accessory building or structure cannot be
constructed using corrugated, galvanized or exposed exterior metal material.
G.   Construction Of Main Building Required: No accessory building or structure
shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has
actually commenced.
H.   Occupancy: Occupancy of all accessory buildings and structures shall be
limited to the owner and/or occupants of the main residence.
I.   Location; Across Lot Lines: No accessory building or structure shall be
located across lot lines separating two (2) or more dwellings or buildings
regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the lots.
J.   Access: Access to the accessory building or structure shall be limited to
the lot it occupies.
If the building or structure is to be used in a home occupation, type B, the
applicant must meet all of the requirements set forth for home occupation, type
B conditions in section
19.20.030 of this chapter. Accessory buildings and structures cannot be used
for commercial activities.
Perimeter fence. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 16 of this
code.
Portable buildings. May be placed within a utility easement along the side and
rear lot lines, but the property owner shall be responsible for any expense
incurred by the city in moving the building in order to gain access to the
easement.
Public park or playground.
Site built, single-family dwelling.
Temporary buildings. (Ord. 1007 §3, 2005: Ord. 997 §1, 2004: Ord. 968 §1, 2002:
Ord. 895 §1, 2000: Ord. 873-A §1, 1998: Ord. 872 §1, 1998: Ord. 846 §1, 1998:
Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.20.030: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning commission review and recommendation is required. The public hearing
requirements for uses subject to review are set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple. Includes the main building and all other
structures comprising the complex, including, but not limited to, parish hall,
education building, parking, accessory structures, recreation area and open
space, and minister's residence when a part of the complex, subject to the
following condition:
A.   A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
Daycare home. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   Shall be located in a single-family dwelling unit which is the permanent
residence of the operator.
B.   Shall be operated in a manner that will not change the character of the
residence or adversely affect other properties in the area.
C.   Shall meet city-county and state requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment.
D.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Home occupation, type B conditions. Applications are subject to the following
review standards and considerations in addition to the general definition of
home occupation, including one or more of the following activities or
modifications to the property:
A.   Client visitors allowed, subject to restrictions established in the review
process.
B.   Activity in other than the main house, e.g., garage, yard or accessory
building or structure.
C.   Any use of electrical or mechanical equipment in the home occupation
activity.
D.   Any structural alteration, including a separate entrance.
E.   Any expansion of the existing driveway.
F.   "Daycare home" as defined by the zoning ordinance.
G.   Hours of activity.
H.   Number of clients present at the same time.
I.   Vehicle parking requirements, including a company car, trailer or truck.
J.   Potential for noise and neighborhood disruption with numbers of client
vehicles.
K.   Effect on area by any proposed structural or property alteration.
L.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Municipal use, public building and public utility.
Nonprofit daycare center. A daycare center meeting the following minimum
conditions:
A.   Operates without profit to its members;
B.   The owner of the property has been in existence, registered and been
operating as a nonprofit organization for not less than five (5) years;
C.   The owner of the property has owned the property in question for not less
than two (2) years;
D.   The owner of the property is exempt from taxation pursuant to the
provisions of paragraphs (3), (4), (7), or (10) of subsection (c) of section
501 or paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 509 of the United States
internal revenue code of 1986 as amended, 26 USC section 501(c) et seq., or
section 509(a)(1);
E.   The daycare operations, if allowed, would not be the primary use of the
property;
F.   Shall meet city-county and state requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment; and
G.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Off street parking. Subject to the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Off street parking lot associated with a commercial use, as regulated under the
requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith.
Public or private school. Includes classrooms and administration, maintenance,
storage and school vehicle parking facilities, but excludes dormitory
facilities. (Ord. 1089, 8-17-2010)
19.20.035: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses are prohibited in this district:
Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation.
Singlewide or doublewide trailers and mobile homes. (Ord. 986 §3, 2003: Ord.
972 §1, 2002)
19.20.040: YARDS; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights of way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front Setback: The front yard setback shall not be less than twenty five
feet (25').
B.   Side Setback: Each side yard setback shall not be less than:
   1.   Six feet (6') where the height of the building or structure is twenty
five feet (25') or less.
   2.   Nine feet (9') where the height of the building or structure is between
twenty six feet (26') and thirty five feet (35').
   3.   Ten feet (10') where the building or structure is parallel to a side
street.
Churches, including main and accessory buildings or structures, other than
dwellings and buildings or structures accessory to dwellings, shall set back
from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35').
C.   Rear Setback: The rear yard setback for the main building shall not be
less than twenty five feet (25'). Unattached buildings of accessory use, except
portable buildings, may be located in the rear yard of the main building,
provided they are not located closer than ten feet (10') to the rear of the
property line and shall not be located within a utility easement. (Ord. 878 §1,
1999: Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.20.050: DOUBLE FRONTAGE:
Where a lot has double frontage, each frontage shall have a twenty five foot
(25') setback for the main building, and the following shall apply:
A.   The property owner shall designate the rear lot line except where the lot
adjoins an arterial street, in which case the lot line adjoining the arterial
street shall become the rear lot line, and the rear yard created shall be
subject to the rear yard setback requirements.
B.   A perimeter fence may be constructed on the designated rear lot line, and
the rear yard created shall be subject to the rear yard setback requirements.
C.   For permitted, nonresidential uses with double frontage, the front yard
setback requirements shall apply to both streets. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.20.060: LOT WIDTH:
For dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60') at the
front building line, and such lot shall adjoin on a street for a distance of
not less than thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.20.070: LOT AREA:
A.   For each dwelling, and accessory buildings or structures, there shall be a
lot area of not less than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet.
B.   If a lot, created by subdivision prior to January 1, 1980, has less area
than required in this section, and all the boundary lines of that lot touch
lands under other ownership, that lot may only be used for single-family
residential dwellings or open space purposes. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.20.075: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area of all nonresidential uses,
permitted either by right or under an enabling permit, shall be devoted to
landscaping in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 19.40 of this title. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002)
19.20.080: LOT COVERAGE:
Main and accessory buildings or structures shall not cover more than fifty
percent (50%) of the lot area. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.20.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.20.100: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector's office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the R-1
(single-family residential) zoning district. The table indicates which members
of the city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of permit
application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application does not
require that item to be submitted.
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted Uses
   Accessory sign                                 CI       CI            
   Carports                                       CI       CI  CI         
   Garden or agricultural crops                                        
                                                     Not
                                                     required
                                                     unless   CI,
   Home occupation, type A                        premises FC            
                                                     are
                                                     being
                                                     altered
   Manufactured home                              CI          CI  CI     CI,
                                                                              CE
   New and/or replacement accessory buildings and CI       CI  CI,        
structures                                                        CE
   Perimeter fence                                CI       CI            
   Portable buildings                             CI       CI  CI         
   Public park or playground                              CI     CI      
   Site built, single-family dwelling             CI       CI,    CI     CI,
                                                              CE              CE
   Temporary buildings                                    CI  CI         
Uses Subject To Review
                                                              FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple           CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                              CE  CP  CE
                                                     Not
                                                     required
                                                     unless   CI, CI,
   Daycare home                                   premises FC  PC         
                                                     are
                                                     being
                                                     altered
                                                     Not
                                                     required
                                                     unless   FC, CI,
   Home occupation, type B                        premises CI  PC         
                                                     are
                                                     being
                                                     altered
                                                              FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Municipal use, public building and public utiliCI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                              CE  CP  CE
                                                              CI, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Off street parking                             CI       CE  CE  CI, CE  CE
                                                                      CE
                                                              CI, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Off street parking lot, commercial use         CI       CE  CE  CI, CE  CE
                                                                      CE
                                                                      PC,
   Plant nursery                                                CI,     
                                                                      CE
                                                              FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Public or private school                       CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                              CE  CP  CE
Legend:
CI = City inspector
FC = Fire chief
CE = City engineer
CP = City planner
PC = Planning commission
 
(Ord. 1007 §3, 2005)
CHAPTER 19.24
R-2 (TWO- TO FOUR-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.24.010: General Description
19.24.020: Permitted Uses
19.24.030: Uses Subject To Review
19.24.035: Prohibited Uses
19.24.040: Yard; Setback
19.24.050: Double Frontage
19.24.060: Lot Width
19.24.070: Lot Area
19.24.075: Landscaping
19.24.080: Lot Coverage
19.24.090: Building Height
19.24.100: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.24.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The R-2 (two- to four-family residential) district is intended to provide for a
slightly higher population density with basic restrictions similar to the R-
1 district. The principal use is for single-family and two- to four-family
dwellings and related recreational, religious, and educational facilities,
normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive
residential area. These areas are protected from the encroachment of uses
considered to be detrimental to the residential environment. Internal
stability, attractiveness, order, and efficiency are encouraged by providing
for adequate lighting, air, and open space for dwellings and replaced
facilities, and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of
each element. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.24.020: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. Property and buildings shall be used only for
the following purposes:
Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses
listed in this section when located on the same lot are subject to the
following conditions:
A.   They must meet side setback requirements and shall not be located closer
than ten feet (10') to the rear property line or over the easement, whichever
is greater.
B.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced.
C.   All accessory buildings shall be limited to occupancy and use by occupants
of the main building.
D.   No accessory building shall be located across lot lines separating two (2)
or more dwellings or buildings regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the
lots.
E.   Access to the accessory building shall be limited to the lot it occupies.
F.   Building material of accessory buildings shall conform to the current
building standards of the city, provided that corrugated or unpainted
galvanized building materials shall not be permitted.
If the building or structure is to be used in a home occupation, type B, the
applicant must meet all of the requirements set forth for home occupation, type
B conditions in section
19.24.030 of this chapter. Accessory buildings and structures cannot be used
for commercial activities.
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Carports. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   Single-family dwelling carports must comply with the requirements set
forth in
chapter 19.20 of this title.
B.   A maximum of one carport is permitted for each two-family dwelling or
single-family dwelling with a garage apartment.
C.   One additional carport shall be permitted for each additional two-family
increment which a dwelling might possess.
Home occupation, type A. Applicants must meet the following conditions:
A.   Activity must be conducted entirely in the main residence.
B.   No client visitors.
C.   No change in appearance of residence, including parking.
D.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Manufactured home. Shall meet the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.40 of this title.
Perimeter fence. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 16 of this
code.
Portable buildings. May be placed within a utility easement along the side and
rear lot lines, but the property owner shall be responsible for any expense
incurred by the city in moving the building in order to gain access to the
easement.
Public park or playground.
Site built, single-family dwelling.
Temporary buildings.
Two- to four-family dwelling. (Ord. 1007 §4, 2005: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 846
§1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.24.030: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning commission review and recommendation is required. The public hearing
requirements for uses subject to review are set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple. Includes the main building and all other
structures comprising the complex, including, but not limited to, parish hall,
education building, parking, accessory structures, recreation area and open
space, and minister's residence when a part of the complex, subject to the
following condition:
A.   A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
Daycare home. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   May be located in a single-family dwelling unit which is the permanent
residence of the operator.
B.   Shall be operated in a manner that will not change the character of the
residence or adversely affect other properties in the area.
C.   Shall meet city-county and state requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment.
D.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Home occupation, type B conditions. Applications are subject to the following
review standards and considerations in addition to the general definition of
home occupation, including one or more of the following activities or
modifications to the property:
A.   Client visitors allowed, subject to restrictions established in the review
process.
B.   Activity in other than the main house, e.g., garage, yard or accessory
building or structure.
C.   Any use of electrical or mechanical equipment in the home occupation
activity.
D.   Any structural alteration, including a separate entrance.
E.   Any expansion of the existing driveway.
F.   "Daycare home" as defined by the zoning ordinance.
G.   Hours of activity.
H.   Number of clients present at the same time.
I.   Vehicle parking requirements, including a company car, trailer or truck.
J.   Potential for noise and neighborhood disruption with numbers of client
vehicles.
K.   Effect on area by any proposed structural or property alteration.
L.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Municipal use, public building, and public utility.
Nonprofit daycare center. A daycare center meeting the following minimum
conditions:
A.   Operates without profit to its members;
B.   The owner of the property has been in existence, registered and been
operating as a nonprofit organization for not less than five (5) years;
C.   The owner of the property has owned the property in question for not less
than two (2) years;
D.   The owner of the property is exempt from taxation pursuant to the
provisions of paragraphs (3), (4), (7), or (10) of subsection (c) of section
501 or paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 509 of the United States
internal revenue code of 1986 as amended, 26 USC section 501(c) et seq., or
section 509(a)(1);
E.   The daycare operations, if allowed, would not be the primary use of the
property;
F.   Shall meet city-county and state requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment; and
G.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Off street parking lot associated with a commercial use, as regulated under the
requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith.
Public or private school. Includes classrooms and administration, maintenance,
storage and school vehicle parking facilities, but excludes dormitory
facilities. (Ord. 1090, 8-17-2010)
19.24.035: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses are prohibited in this district:
Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation.
Single or double wide trailers and mobile homes. (Ord. 986 §4, 2003: Ord. 972
§1, 2002)
19.24.040: YARD; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights of way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front Setback: The front yard setback shall not be less than twenty five
feet (25').
B.   Side Setback: Each side yard setback shall not be less than:
   1.   Six feet (6') where the height of the building or structure is twenty
five feet (25') or less.
   2.   Nine feet (9') where the height of the building or structure is between
twenty six feet (26') and thirty five feet (35').
   3.   Ten feet (10') where the building or structure is parallel to a side
street.
Churches, including main and accessory buildings or structures, other than
dwellings and buildings or structures accessory to dwellings, shall set back
from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35').
C.   Rear Setback: The rear yard setback shall not be less than twenty five
feet (25'). (Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.24.050: DOUBLE FRONTAGE:
Where a lot has double frontage, each frontage shall have a twenty five foot
(25') setback for the main building, and the following shall apply:
A.   The property owner shall designate the rear lot line except where the lot
adjoins an arterial street, in which case the lot line adjoining the arterial
street shall become the rear lot line, and the rear yard created shall be
subject to the rear yard setback requirements.
B.   A perimeter fence may be constructed on the designated rear lot line, and
the rear yard created shall be subject to the rear yard setback requirements.
C.   For permitted, nonresidential uses with double frontage, the front yard
setback requirements shall apply to both streets. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.24.060: LOT WIDTH:
For two-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of sixty feet
(60') at the front building line, and the lot shall adjoin on a street for a
distance of not less than thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.24.070: LOT AREA:
A.   For each single-family dwelling and accessory buildings there shall be a
lot area of not less than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet.
B.   For each two-family dwelling and accessory buildings there shall be a lot
area of not less than nine thousand two hundred (9,200) square feet, and an
additional area of two thousand (2,000) square feet for each additional family
more than two (2) occupying the dwelling.
C.   If a lot was created by subdivision prior to January 1, 1980, has less
area than required in this section, and all boundary lines of that lot touch
lands under other ownership, that lot may only be used for single-family
residential dwellings or open space purposes. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.24.075: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area of all nonresidential uses,
permitted either by right or under an enabling permit, shall be devoted to
landscaping in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 19.40 of this title. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002)
19.24.080: LOT COVERAGE:
Main and accessory buildings or structures shall not cover more than fifty
percent (50%) of the lot area. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.24.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.24.100: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector's office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the R-2 (two-
to four-family residential) zoning district. The table indicates which members
of the city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of permit
application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application does not
require that item to be submitted.
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted Uses
   Accessory buildings and structures        CI       CI  CI,        
                                                             CE
   Accessory signs                           CI       CI            
   Carports                                  CI       CI  CI         
                                                Not
                                                required
                                                unless   CI,
   Home occupation, type A                   premises FC            
                                                are
                                                being
                                                altered
   Manufactured home                         CI          CI  CI     CI, CE
   Perimeter fence                           CI       CI            
   Portable buildings                        CI       CI  CI         
   Public park or playground                         CI     CI      
   Site built, single-family dwelling        CI       CI,    CI     CI, CE
                                                         CE
   Temporary buildings                               CI  CI         
   Two- to four-family dwelling              CI       CI,    CI     CI, CE
                                                         CE
Uses Subject To Review
                                                         FC, CI, PC, CI,
   Church, synagogue, mosque or temple       CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CI, CE
                                                         CE  CP  CE
                                                Not
                                                required
                                                unless   CI, CI,
   Daycare home                              premises FC  PC         
                                                are
                                                being
                                                altered
                                                Not
                                                required
                                                unless   CI, CI,
   Home occupation, type B                   premises FC  PC         
                                                are
                                                being
                                                altered
   Municipal use, public building and public          FC, CI, PC, CI,
utility                                         CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CI, CE
                                                         CE  CP  CE
                                                         CI, CI, PC, CI,
   Off street parking lot, commercial        CI       CE  CE  CI, CE  CI, CE
                                                                 CE
                                                                 PC,
   Plant nursery                                           CI,     
                                                                 CE
                                                         FC, CI, PC, CI,
   Public or private school                  CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CI, CE
                                                         CE  CP  CE
Legend:
CI = City inspector                  
FC = Fire chief                  
CE = City engineer                  
CP = City planner                  
PC = Planning commission               
 
(Ord. 1007 §4, 2005)
CHAPTER 19.28
R-3 (MULTIPLE DWELLING RESIDENTIAL) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.28.010: General Description
19.28.020: Permitted Uses
19.28.030: Uses Subject To Review
19.28.035: Prohibited Uses
19.28.040: Yards; Setback
19.28.050: Double Frontage
19.28.060: Lot Width
19.28.070: Lot Area; Dwelling Units Per Acre
19.28.075: Landscaping
19.28.080: Lot Coverage
19.28.090: Building Height
19.28.100: Sightproof Screening And Lighting
19.28.110: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.28.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The R-3 (multiple dwelling residential) district is intended to provide for
medium density areas of owner occupied and rental housing. The principal use is
for single-family and two- to four-family dwellings, townhouses, low rise
multiple-family dwellings, and garden apartments. Recreational, religious, and
educational facilities normally located to service residential areas are also
permitted to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive
residential area. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.28.020: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. Property and buildings shall be used only for
the following purposes:
Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses
listed in this section when located on the same lot are subject to the
following conditions:
A.   They must meet side setback requirements and shall not be located closer
than ten feet (10') to the rear property line or over the easement, whichever
is greater.
B.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced.
C.   All accessory buildings shall be limited to occupancy and use by occupants
of the main building.
D.   No accessory building shall be located across lot lines separating two (2)
or more dwellings or buildings regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the
lots.
E.   Access to the accessory building shall be limited to the lot it occupies.
F.   Building material of accessory buildings shall conform to the current
building standards of the city, provided that corrugated or unpainted
galvanized building materials shall not be permitted.
If the building or structure is to be used in a home occupation, type B, the
applicant must meet all of the requirements set forth for home occupation, type
B conditions in section
19.28.030 of this chapter. Accessory buildings and structures cannot be used
for commercial activities.
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Carports. Subject to the following conditions and requirements:
A.   Single-family dwelling carports must comply with the requirements set
forth in
chapter 19.20 of this title.
B.   A maximum of one carport is permitted for each two-family dwelling or a
single-family dwelling with a garage apartment.
C.   One additional carport shall be permitted for each additional two-family
increment which a dwelling might possess.
Home occupation, type A. Applicants must meet the following conditions:
A.   Activity must be conducted entirely in the main residence.
B.   No client visitors.
C.   No change in appearance of residence, including parking.
D.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Manufactured home. Shall meet the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.40 of this title.
Multiple-family dwelling.
Perimeter fence. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 16 of this
code.
Portable buildings. May be placed within a utility easement along the side and
rear lot lines, but the property owner shall be responsible for any expense
incurred by the city in moving the building in order to gain access to the
easement.
Public park or playground.
Site built, single-family dwelling.
Temporary buildings.
Townhouse, not exceeding eight (8) dwelling units per building.
Two- to four-family dwelling. (Ord. 1007 §5, 2005: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 846
§1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.28.030: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning commission review and recommendation is required. The public hearing
requirements for uses subject to review are set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple. Includes the main building and all other
structures comprising the complex, including, but not limited to, parish hall,
education building, parking, accessory structures, recreation area and open
space, and minister's residence when a part of the complex, subject to the
following condition:
A.   A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
Convalescent, rest or nursing home/extended care facility.
Daycare home. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   May be located in a single-family dwelling unit which is the permanent
residence of the operator.
B.   Shall be operated in a manner that will not change the character of the
residence or adversely affect other properties in the area.
C.   Shall meet city-county and state requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment.
D.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Home occupation, type B conditions. Applications are subject to the following
review standards and considerations in addition to the general definition of
home occupation, including one or more of the following activities or
modifications to the property:
A.   Client visitors allowed, subject to restrictions established in the review
process.
B.   Activity in other than the main house, e.g., garage, yard or accessory
building or structure.
C.   Any use of electrical or mechanical equipment in the home occupation
activity.
D.   Any structural alteration, including a separate entrance.
E.   Any expansion of the existing driveway.
F.   "Daycare home" as defined by the zoning ordinance.
G.   Hours of activity.
H.   Number of clients present at the same time.
I.   Vehicle parking requirements, including a company car, trailer or truck.
J.   Potential for noise and neighborhood disruption with numbers of client
vehicles.
K.   Effect on area by any proposed structural or property alteration.
L.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Municipal use, public building and public utility.
Nonprofit daycare center. A daycare center meeting the following minimum
conditions:
A.   Operates without profit to its members;
B.   The owner of the property has been in existence, registered and been
operating as a nonprofit organization for not less than five (5) years;
C.   The owner of the property has owned the property in question for not less
than two (2) years;
D.   The owner of the property is exempt from taxation pursuant to the
provisions of paragraphs (3), (4), (7), or (10) of subsection (c) of section
501 or paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 509 of the United States
internal revenue code of 1986 as amended, 26 USC section 501(c) et seq., or
section 509(a)(1);
E.   The daycare operations, if allowed, would not be the primary use of the
property;
F.   Shall meet city-county and state requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment; and
G.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Off street parking lot associated with a commercial use, as regulated under the
requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Plant nursery in which no building or structure is maintained in connection
therewith.
Public or private school. Includes classrooms and administration, maintenance,
storage and school vehicle parking facilities.
Rooming house or bed and breakfast/boarding house.
Sanatorium. (Ord. 1091, 8-17-2010)
19.28.035: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses are prohibited in this district:
Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation.
Single or double wide trailers and mobile homes. (Ord. 986 §5, 2003: Ord. 972
§1, 2002)
19.28.040: YARDS; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights of way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front Setback: The front yard setback shall not be less than twenty five
feet (25').
B.   Side Setback: Each side yard setback shall not be less than:
   1.   Six feet (6') where the height of the building or structure is twenty
five feet (25') or less.
   2.   Nine feet (9') where the height of the building or structure is between
twenty six feet (26') and thirty five feet (35').
   3.   Ten feet (10') where the building or structure is parallel to a side
street.
Churches, including main and accessory buildings or structures, other than
dwellings and buildings or structures accessory to dwellings, shall set back
from all exterior and interior side lot lines a distance of not less than
thirty five feet (35').
C.   Rear Setback: The rear yard setback shall not be less than twenty five
feet (25'). (Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.28.050: DOUBLE FRONTAGE:
Where a lot has double frontage, the front yard setback requirements shall
apply to both streets. If the property is occupied by a single- or two-family
dwelling, the following shall apply:
A.   The property owner shall designate the rear lot line except where the lot
adjoins an arterial street, in which case the lot line adjoining the arterial
street shall become the rear lot line, and the rear yard created shall be
subject to the rear yard setback requirements.
B.   A perimeter fence may be constructed on the designated rear lot line, and
the rear yard created shall be subject to the rear yard setback requirements.
(Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.28.060: LOT WIDTH:
A.   For single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and for single-family
dwellings with garage apartments located on the same lot, there shall be a
minimum lot width of sixty feet (60') at the front building line, and the lot
shall adjoin a street for a distance of not less than thirty five feet (35').
B.   For townhouses, there shall be a minimum lot width of twenty feet (20')
per dwelling at the front building line, and the lot shall adjoin a street for
a distance of not less than twenty feet (20').
C.   For multiple-family dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot width of sixty
feet (60') at the front building line, and the width shall be increased by ten
feet (10') for each additional dwelling unit exceeding three (3), which is
located in the dwelling; provided, however:
   1.   The lot width at the front building line shall not be required to
exceed one hundred fifty feet (150').
   2.   The front lot line shall adjoin a street for a distance of not less
than fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.28.070: LOT AREA; DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE:
A.   For each single-family dwelling and accessory buildings, there shall be a
lot area of not less than seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet.
B.   For two- to four-family dwellings and accessory buildings, there shall be
a lot area of not less than nine thousand two hundred (9,200) square feet plus
two thousand (2,000) square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
C.   For each townhouse and accessory buildings, there shall be a lot area of
not less than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet; provided, however,
that the lot area for each townhouse shall not be required to exceed one
thousand nine hundred eighty (1,980) square feet if the rear lot line adjoins
an open space commonly owned by the owners of the adjoining property of not
less than fifty feet (50') in width and extending across the total length of
the rear yards of all dwelling units in the attached dwelling.
D.   Where a lot has less area than required in this section, and all boundary
lines of that lot touch lands under other ownership, that lot may be used for
any of the uses permitted in the R-1 district, except churches.
E.   There shall be a maximum density of twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.
(Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.28.075: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area of all nonresidential uses,
permitted either by right or under an enabling permit, shall be devoted to
landscaping in accordance with the requirements of
chapter 19.40 of this title. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002)
19.28.080: LOT COVERAGE:
Main and accessory buildings or structures shall not cover more than fifty
percent (50%) of the lot. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.28.090: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.28.100: SIGHTPROOF SCREENING AND LIGHTING:
Whenever any property in the R-3 district adjoins an FE, R-1 or R-2 district,
sightproof screening, not less than six feet (6') in height, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along the side or rear lot line up
to, but not beyond, the adjoining residential building setback line. In
addition, the lighting shall be arranged so that no annoying glare is directed
or reflected toward the FE, R-1 or R-2 property. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832
§1, 1997)
19.28.110: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector's office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the R-3
(multiple-dwelling residential) zoning district. The table indicates which
members of the city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of
permit application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application
does not require that item to be submitted.
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted Uses                  
   Accessory buildings and structures               CI       CI  CI,        
                                                                    CE
   Accessory signs                                  CI       CI            
   Carports                                         CI       CI  CI         
                                                       Not
                                                       required
                                                       unless   CI,
   Home occupation, type A                          premises FC            
                                                       are
                                                       being
                                                       altered
   Manufactured home                                CI          CI  CI      
                                                                FC, CI, CI, CI, CI,
   Multiple-family dwelling                         CI       CI, CE, CE  CE  CE
                                                                CE  CP
   Perimeter fence                                  CI       CI            
   Portable buildings                               CI       CI  CI         
   Public park or playground                                CI,    CI      
                                                                CE
   Site built, single-family dwelling               CI       CI,    CI     CI,
                                                                CE              CE
   Temporary buildings                                      CI  CI         
                                                                FC, CI, CI, CI, CI,
   Townhouse                                        CI       CI, CE, CE  CE  CE
                                                                CE  CP
   Two- to four-family dwelling                     CI       CI,    CI     CI,
                                                                CE              CE
Uses Subject To Review               
                                                                FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Church, synagogue, mosque or temple              CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                                CE  CP  CE
   Convalescent, rest or nursing home/extended care          FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
facility                                               CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                                CE  CP  CE
                                                       Not
                                                       required
                                                       unless   FC, CI,
   Daycare home                                     premises CI  PC         
                                                       are
                                                       being
                                                       altered
                                                       Not
                                                       required
                                                       unless   FC, CI,
   Home occupation, type B                          premises CI  PC         
                                                       are
                                                       being
                                                       altered
                                                                FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Municipal use, public building and public utilityCI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                                CE  CP  CE
                                                                CI, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Off street parking lot, commercial               CI       CE  CE  CI, CE  CE
                                                                        CE
                                                                        PC,
   Plant nursery                                                  CI,     
                                                                        CE
                                                                FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Public or private school                         CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                                CE  CP  CE
   Rooming house or bed and breakfast/                       FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
boarding house                                         CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                                CE  CP  CE
                                                                FC, CI, PC, CI, CI,
   Sanatorium                                       CI       CI, CE, CI, CE  CE
                                                                CE  CP  CE
Legend:
CI = City inspector                  
FC = Fire chief                  
CE = City engineer                  
CP = City planner                  
PC = Planning commission               
 
(Ord. 1007 §5, 2005)
CHAPTER 19.30
C-1 (SUBURBAN OFFICE) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.30.010: General Description
19.30.020: Permitted Uses
19.30.030: Uses Subject To Review
19.30.040: Yards; Setback
19.30.050: Lot Coverage
19.30.060: Sightproof Screening And Lighting
19.30.070: Landscaping
19.30.080: Building Height
19.30.090: Conversion Of Structures
19.30.100: Prohibited Use
19.30.110: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.30.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-1 (suburban office) district is intended to provide a location for those
administrative and professional offices which can occupy smaller structures in
a landscaped setting. This type of development serves as a buffer between more
intense retail and office commercial uses and established residential
neighborhoods. Emphasis is placed on smaller, individual freestanding
buildings, landscaping, setbacks, sign control, and restricted building height
in order to promote maximum aesthetic considerations in establishing protection
for nearby residences. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.30.020: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. Property and buildings shall be used only for
the following purposes:
Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses
listed in this section when located on the same lot are subject to the
following conditions:
A.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced.
B.   All accessory buildings shall be limited to occupancy and use by occupants
of the main building.
C.   No accessory building shall be located across lot lines separating two (2)
or more dwellings or buildings regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the
lots.
D.   Access to the accessory building shall be limited to the lot it occupies.
E.   Building material of accessory buildings shall conform to the current
building standards of the city, provided that corrugated or unpainted
galvanized building material shall not be permitted.
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Carports. Permitted in the rear yard subject to existing easements.
Clinic, outpatient.
Off street parking lot. Subject to the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Office building and related professional, administrative, corporate, financial
and service office uses, providing no activity is carried on which caters to
retail trade with the general public and no stock of goods is maintained for
sale, rent, lease or delivery to customers. Language in this subsection shall
in no way be construed as permitting funeral homes or beauty or barber shops.
Temporary buildings. (Ord. 1007 §6, 2005: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.30.030: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning commission review and recommendation is required. The public hearing
requirements for uses subject to review are set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
Daycare center. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   Shall meet city-county and state requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment.
B.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Fitness center or health club.
Municipal use, public building and public utility.
Nationally recognized lodge halls, fraternal organizations and veterans'
organizations; provided, however, any club organized primarily for the purpose
of dispensing or consuming alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted.
Public or private school. Includes classrooms and administration, maintenance,
storage and school vehicle parking facilities, but excludes dormitory
facilities. (Ord. 1007 §6, 2005: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.30.040: YARDS; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights of way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front Setback:
   1.   The minimum depth shall be twenty five feet (25').
   2.   When a yard has double frontage, the twenty five foot (25') minimum
depth requirement shall apply to both streets.
B.   Side Setback:
   1.   For buildings whose height is no more than twenty five feet (25'),
located on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than six feet (6') shall be
provided. A side yard of not less than nine feet (9') shall be provided for
buildings whose height is between twenty five (25) and thirty five feet (35').
For detached buildings or structures of accessory use, there shall be a side
yard of not less than six feet (6').
   2.   For buildings and accessory buildings or structures located on corner
lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not
less than fifteen feet (15'), in case such lot is back to back with another
corner lot, and twenty five feet (25') in every other case. The interior side
yard shall be not less than six feet (6').
C.   Rear Setback:
   1.   For main buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty
five feet (25').
   2.   Detached buildings or structures of accessory use may be located in the
rear yard of a main building, provided such buildings are not located closer
than:
      a.   Six feet (6') to utility easements;
      b.   Ten feet (10') to the rear lot line. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.30.050: LOT COVERAGE:
Main and accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty five percent
(35%) of the lot area. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.30.060: SIGHTPROOF SCREENING AND LIGHTING:
Whenever any commercial district, parking lot or parking area is established so
as to adjoin the side or rear line of a lot in a residential district,
sightproof screening, not less than six feet (6') in height, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along the side or rear lot line up
to, but not beyond, the adjoining residential building setback line; except
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 19.44 of this title shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be
arranged so that no annoying glare is directed or reflected toward residential
property. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.30.070: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area shall be devoted to landscaping in
accordance with the requirements of
chapter 19.40 of this title. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.30.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.30.090: CONVERSION OF STRUCTURES:
An existing residential building located within the C-1 district may be
converted for a permitted use provided the following conditions are met:
A.   Conformance with yard, coverage, landscaping, and setback requirements;
B.   Parking, loading, and access facilities shall be installed subject to the
requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title;
C.   The main building and all accessory buildings or structures shall be
brought into full compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the
city prior to occupancy;
D.   A building permit is required. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.30.100: PROHIBITED USE:
!!! Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation. (Ord. 986 §6, 2003)
19.30.110: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector's office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the C-1
(suburban office) zoning district. The table indicates which members of the
city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of permit
application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application does not
require that item to be submitted.
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted Uses                  
   Accessory buildings                                            CI       CI   CI,     
                                                                                    CE
   Accessory sign                                                 CI       CI          
   Carports                                                       CI       CI   CI,     
                                                                                    CE
                                                                              FC,   CI, CI, CI,
   Clinic, outpatient                                             CI       CI,  CE, CE  CE
                                                                              CE    CP
   Off street parking lot                                         CI       CI,  CI, CI, CI,
                                                                              CE    CE  CE  CE
                                                                              FC,   CI, CI, CI,
   Office building without retail trade                           CI       CI,  CE, CE  CE
                                                                              CE    CP
   Temporary buildings                                                    CI   CI,     
                                                                                    CE
Uses Subject To Review                  
                                                                     Not
                                                                     required       PC,
                                                                     unless   FC,   CI, CI, CI,
   Daycare center                                                 premises CI,  CP, CE  CE
                                                                     are      CE    CE
                                                                     being
                                                                     altered
                                                                              FC,   PC,
   Fitness center or health club                                  CI       CI,  CI, CI, CI,
                                                                              CE    CP, CE  CE
                                                                                    CE
                                                                              FC,   PC,
   Municipal use, public building and public utility              CI       CI,  CI, CI, CI,
                                                                              CE    CP, CE  CE
                                                                                    CE
                                                                              FC,   PC,
   Nationally recognized lodge halls, fraternal organizations and CI       CI,  CI, CI, CI,
veterans' organizations                                                       CE    CP, CE  CE
                                                                                    CE
                                                                              FC,   PC,
   Public or private school                                       CI       CI,  CI, CI, CI,
                                                                              CE    CP, CE  CE
                                                                                    CE
Legend:
CI = City inspector                  
FC = Fire chief                  
CE = City engineer                  
CP = City planner                  
PC = Planning commission                  
 
(Ord. 1007 §6, 2005)
CHAPTER 19.32
C-2 (RESTRICTED COMMERCIAL) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.32.010: General Description
19.32.020: Permitted Uses
19.32.030: Uses Subject To Review
19.32.040: Yards; Setback
19.32.050: Lot Coverage
19.32.060: Sightproof Screening And Lighting
19.32.070: Landscaping
19.32.080: Building Height
19.32.090: Conversion Of Structures
19.32.100: Prohibited Use
19.32.110: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.32.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-2 (restricted commercial) district is intended to provide a place for
those office and institutional activities requiring separate buildings or
building groups, and whose employees and clientele are of a larger number and
do not necessarily live within the community. Land, space and aesthetic
requirements of these uses make desirable a location adjacent to retail
commercial activities. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.32.020: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. Property and buildings shall be used only for
the following purposes:
Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses
listed in this section when located on the same lot are subject to the
following conditions:
A.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced.
B.   All accessory buildings shall be limited to occupancy and use by occupants
of the main building.
C.   No accessory building shall be located across lot lines separating two (2)
or more dwellings or buildings regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the
lots.
D.   Access to the accessory building shall be limited to the lot it occupies.
E.   Building material of accessory buildings shall conform to the current
building standards of the city, provided that corrugated or unpainted
galvanized building materials shall not be permitted.
If a new and/or replacement accessory building or structure is to be used in a
home occupation, type B, the applicant must meet all of the requirements set
forth for home occupation, type B conditions in section
19.32.030 of this chapter.
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Any of the following educational or cultural uses:
Art gallery.
Assembly hall for nonprofit corporation.
Business college or school for vocational training.
Library.
Museum.
Public or private school or college without dormitory facilities.
School for instruction in dance.
Carports. Permitted in the rear yard subject to existing easements.
Clinic, outpatient.
Convalescent, rest or nursing home/extended care facility or sanatorium.
Funeral home.
Off street parking lot. Subject to the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Office building and related professional, administrative, corporate, financial
and service office uses, providing no activity is carried on which caters to
retail or wholesale trade with the general public, and no stock of goods is
maintained for sale, rent, lease or delivery to customers, except as provided
for in this chapter.
Recreational uses conducted within an enclosed building, such as a tennis
court, gymnasium, or health club facility.
Shops and stores, incidental to the uses permitted in this chapter subject to
the following conditions:
A.   Products sold shall be incidental to the principal permitted activity.
B.   The retail area shall:
   1.   Be contained within the office building.
   2.   Be oriented to the interior of the building.
   3.   Not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the total
structure.
C.   There shall be no display windows visible from a public street or
adjoining property.
D.   Beauty and barber shops, employees' cafeterias or snack bars, pharmacies
or opticians' offices, and newsstands or tobacco shops shall be permitted even
though they may provide more than incidental services, provided the
requirements listed above are met. (Ord. 1007 §7, 2005: Ord. 986 §7, 2003: Ord.
968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.32.030: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning commission review and recommendation is required. The public hearing
requirements for uses subject to review are set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
Church, synagogue, mosque or temple. Includes the main building and all other
structures comprising the complex including, but not limited to, parish hall,
education building, parking, accessory structures, recreation area and open
space, and minister's residence when a part of the complex, subject to the
following condition:
A.   A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
Daycare center. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   Shall meet city-county and state requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment.
B.   Shall meet the requirements set forth in title 5 of this code.
Home occupation, type B conditions. Applications are subject to the following
review standard and considerations in addition to the general definition of
home occupation, including one or more of the following activities or
modifications to the property:
A.   Client visitors allowed, subject to restrictions established in the review
process.
B.   Activity in other than the main house, e.g., garage, yard or accessory
building or structure.
C.   Any use of electrical or mechanical equipment in the home occupation
activity.
D.   Any structural alteration, including a separate entrance.
E.   Any expansion of the existing driveway.
F.   "Daycare home" as defined by the zoning ordinance.
G.   Hours of activity.
H.   Number of clients present at the same time.
I.   Vehicle parking requirements, including a company car, trailer or truck.
J.   Potential for noise and neighborhood disruption with numbers of client
vehicles.
K.   Effect on area by any proposed structural or property alteration.
L.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this code.
Residential uses associated with and maintained primarily for the benefit and
use of occupants and families of the uses listed under single-family dwellings,
two- to four-family dwellings, etc., of this section.
Single-family dwellings, two- to four-family dwellings and townhouses or
apartments, when planned and developed as a part of a combined business-
residential complex and submitted as a unit. (Ord. 1007 §7, 2005: Ord. 986 §7,
2003: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.32.040: YARDS; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights of way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front Setback: The minimum depth shall be twenty five feet (25').
B.   Side Setback: Where a side yard is adjacent to a residential district, no
building shall be located closer than thirty feet (30') to the adjacent
dwelling and no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the side lot line.
C.   Rear Setback: No building shall be located closer than thirty five feet
(35') to the rear lot line. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.32.050: LOT COVERAGE:
Main and accessory buildings or structures shall not cover more than thirty
five percent (35%) of the lot area. The total gross floor area of all
structures shall not exceed the area of the lot. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.32.060: SIGHTPROOF SCREENING AND LIGHTING:
Whenever any commercial district, parking lot or parking area is established so
as to adjoin the side or rear line of a lot in a residential district,
sightproof screening, not less than six feet (6') in height, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along the side or rear lot line up
to, but not beyond, the adjoining residential building setback line; except,
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 19.44 of this title shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be
arranged so that no annoying glare is directed or reflected toward residential
property. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.32.070: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area shall be devoted to landscaping in
accordance with the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.40 of this title. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.32.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.32.090: CONVERSION OF STRUCTURES:
An existing residential building located within the C-2 district may be
converted for a permitted use provided the following conditions are met:
A.   Conformance with yard, coverage, landscaping, and setback requirements.
B.   Parking, loading and access facilities shall be installed subject to the
requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
C.   The main building and all accessory buildings and structures shall be
brought into full compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the
city prior to occupancy.
D.   A building permit is required. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.32.100: PROHIBITED USE:
!!! Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation. (Ord. 986 §8, 2003)
19.32.110: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector's office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the C-2
(restricted commercial) zoning district. The table indicates which members of
the city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of permit
application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application does not
require that item to be submitted.
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted Uses                
                                                                                       CI,
   Accessory buildings and structures                                    CI CI     CE,     
                                                                                       CP
   Accessory sign                                                        CI CI            
   Carports                                                              CI CI     CI,     
                                                                                       CE
                                                                               FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Clinic, outpatient                                                    CI CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                               CE      CP
                                                                               FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Convalescent, rest or nursing home/extended care facility or sanatoriuCI CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                               CE      CP
                                                                               FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Educational or cultural uses                                          CI CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                               CE      CP
                                                                               FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Funeral home                                                          CI CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                               CE      CP
                                                                               CI,     CI, CI, CI,
   Off street parking lot                                                CI CE     CE, CE  CE
                                                                                       CP
                                                                               FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Office building without retail trade                                  CI CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                               CE      CP
                                                                               FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Recreational uses in an enclosed building                             CI CI     CE, CE  CE
                                                                                       CP
                                                                               FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Shops and stores for retail trade                                     CI CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                               CE      CP
Uses Subject To Review             
                                                                               FC,     PC,
   Church, synagogue, mosque or temple                                   CI CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                               CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                       CP
                                                                               FC,     PC,
   Daycare center                                                        CI CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                               CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                       CP
   Home occupation, type B                                               CI FC, CI,        
                                                                               CI  PC
   Residential uses                                                      CI CI  CI,        
                                                                                   PC
                                                                               FC,     PC,
   Single-, two- and four-family dwellings, townhouses and apartments as CI CI,    CI, CI, CI,
part of a combined business-residential complex                                CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                       CP
Legend:
CI = City inspector                  
FC = Fire chief            
CE = City engineer                  
CP = City planner                  
PC = Planning commission
 
(Ord. 1007 §7, 2005)
CHAPTER 19.36
C-3 (NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.36.010: General Description
19.36.020: Permitted Uses
19.36.030: Uses Subject To Review
19.36.040: Yards; Setback
19.36.050: Lot Coverage
19.36.060: Sightproof Screening And Lighting
19.36.070: Landscaping
19.36.080: Building Height
19.36.090: Conversion Of Structures
19.36.100: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.36.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-3 (neighborhood shopping) district is intended for the conduct of retail
trade and personal services to meet the needs of the residents of the adjacent
neighborhoods. Because these shops and stores may be an integral part of the
neighborhood and in close proximity to housing, the requirements for light,
air, open space, and signs are more strict than the C-4 district. (Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.36.020: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. All activity shall take place within an
enclosed building, except as permitted in this chapter. Property and buildings
shall be used only for the following purposes:
Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses
listed in this section when located on the same lot are subject to the
following conditions:
A.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced.
B.   All accessory buildings shall be limited to occupancy and use by occupants
of the main building.
C.   No accessory building shall be located across lot lines separating two (2)
or more dwellings or buildings regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the
lots.
D.   Access to the accessory building shall be limited to the lot it occupies.
E.   Building material of accessory buildings shall conform to the current
building standards of the city, provided that corrugated or unpainted
galvanized building materials shall not be permitted.
If a new and/or replacement accessory building or structure is to be used in a
home occupation, type B, the applicant must meet the requirements set forth for
home occupation, type B conditions in section
19.36.030 of this chapter.
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Carports. Permitted in the rear yard subject to existing easements.
Clinic, outpatient.
Eating, drinking, and recreation establishments:
A.   Types permitted:
Billiard parlor, pool hall, or domino parlor.
Catering facilities.
Drive-in for food, drinks, or confection.
Restaurant, cafe, or banquet hall, including the dispensing of beverages
composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages containing 3.2 percent or
less of alcohol, for consumption on the premises.
Theater.
B.   Use restrictions: No uses listed above shall be located within three
hundred feet (300') of any school, church, youth center or playground,
hospital, or community or City property. The measurement of such distance shall
be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the protected use to:
   1.   The nearest property line of such conditional use (single use,
freestanding building or structure).
   2.   The closest exterior wall of the space occupied by the conditional use
(multiple occupancy building or structure).
Funeral home.
Off street parking lot. Subject to the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Outside display and sales activities, only in accordance with the following
guidelines:
A.   Gasoline sales at an automobile service station or a retail business such
as a convenience store.
B.   Special sales merchandise may be temporarily displayed outdoors provided:
   1.   The display shall be limited to the sidewalk in front of the store.
   2.   No required parking lot area shall be used as a display or sales area.
C.   No public sidewalk or street right-of-way shall be used for display except
for a special community merchant promotion approved by the City Council.
Recreational uses such as a tennis court, gymnasium, or health club facility.
Sales and service facilities including, but not limited to, the following:
Bakery (5 employees or less).
Bicycle shop.
Household appliance store.
Lock or security system shop.
Radio, television, and home electronics shop.
Shoe repair shop.
Schools for instruction in dance or music.
Self-service laundry.
Store or shop for retail sales.
Temporary buildings.
Veterinary clinic/hospital; provided there are no outside runs and the practice
is limited to nonfarm animals. (Ord. 1113, 2011)
19.36.030: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning Commission review and recommendation is required. The public hearing
requirements for uses subject to review are set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
Any of the following educational or cultural uses:
Art gallery.
Assembly hall for nonprofit corporation.
Business college or school for vocational training.
Library.
Museum.
Public or private school or college without dormitory facilities.
Any permanent outside display area or activity for a retail or discount store
which can be seen from a public street or adjacent property, except that a
sales or storage area for automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, boats, trailers or
any other mechanical equipment is prohibited.
Automotive related facilities including, but not limited to, the following:
Automobile service station, or fuel pumps located with a retail business.
Automobile wash and self-service automobile wash facility.
Minor repair, including brakes and tune up, muffler or shock absorber
installation, excluding a body repair or paint shop, truck or heavy equipment
service, vehicle or trailer sales or rental, or vehicle storage.
New parts store, sales only.
Repair or service facility when operated as an accessory to retail or discount
stores or service station, excluding a body repair or paint shop.
Body piercing and/or tattoo establishment. Subject to the following
restrictions:
A.   Use restriction: Shall comply with all the requirements enforced by the
State of Oklahoma.
B.   Additional restrictions:
   1.   
   2.   
Bowling alley or indoor amusement place.
Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple. Includes the main building and all other
structures comprising the complex, including, but not limited to, parish hall,
education building, parking, accessory structures, recreation area and open
space, and minister's residence when a part of the complex, subject to the
following condition:
A.   A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
Daycare center. Subject to the following conditions:
A.   Shall meet City-County and State requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, and equipment.
B.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this Code.
Eating or drinking establishments:
A.   Types of establishments: Restaurant, cafe, or banquet hall, including the
dispensing of beverages composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages
containing more than 3.2 percent of alcohol, for consumption on the premises.
B.   Use restrictions: No uses listed above shall be located within three
hundred feet (300') of any school, church, youth center or playground,
hospital, or community or City property. The measurement of such distance shall
be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the protected use to:
   1.   
   2.   
Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation.
A.   Use restrictions:
   1.   
   2.   
   3.   
   4.   
      B. Additional standards:
   1.   
   2.   
   3.   
General warehouse or distribution center. There shall be no outside storage of
materials; no noise, smoke, dust or odor shall be emitted from the structure;
and all activity shall take place within the confines of a building.
Home occupation, type B conditions. Applications are subject to the following
review standards and considerations in addition to the general definition of
home occupation, including one or more of the following activities or
modifications to the property:
A.   Client visitors allowed, subject to restrictions established in the review
process.
B.   Activity in other than the main house, e.g., garage, yard or accessory
building or structure.
C.   Any use of electrical or mechanical equipment in the home occupation
activity.
D.   Any structural alteration, including a separate entrance.
E.   Any expansion of the existing driveway.
F.   "Daycare home" as defined by the zoning ordinance.
G.   Hours of activity.
H.   Number of clients present at the same time.
I.   Vehicle parking requirements, including a company car, trailer or truck.
J.   Potential for noise and neighborhood disruption with number of client
vehicles.
K.   Effect on area by any proposed structural or property alteration.
L.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this Code.
Hospital.
Miniwarehouse.
   Office building and related professional, administrative, corporate,
financial and service office uses.
   Residential uses associated with and maintained primarily for the benefit
and use of occupants and families of the uses permitted in this district.
   Retail sales business requiring outside parking of more than two (2) sales,
rental, service, or delivery vehicles on site.
   Single-family dwellings, two- to four-family dwellings and townhouses or
apartments, when planned and developed as a part of a combined business-
residential complex and submitted as a unit. (Ord. 1190, 2018; amd. Ord. 1196,
2019)
19.36.040: YARDS; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights- of-way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front Setback: The minimum depth shall be twenty five feet (25').
B.   Side Setback:
   1.   On the side of a lot adjoining a C-3 or C-4 district, there are no
specific side yard requirements.
   2.   On the side of a lot adjoining a residential or C-1 district, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10').
   3.   Where the rear lot line of a corner lot adjoins the side yard of a
residential or C-1 district, or is adjacent to the street there shall be a side
yard of not less than fifteen feet (15').
C.   Rear Setback:
   1.   Where a commercial building is to be serviced from the rear, an
alleyway, service court, or combination thereof of not less than thirty feet
(30') in width shall be provided.
   2.   No commercial building shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15')
to a rear lot line which adjoins a residential or C-1 district.
   3.   In all other cases, no rear yard shall be required. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.36.050: LOT COVERAGE:
While there are no specific lot coverage requirements, landscaping and off
street parking and loading requirements of this title must be met. (Ord. 832
§1, 1997)
19.36.060: SIGHTPROOF SCREENING AND LIGHTING:
Whenever any commercial district, parking lot or parking area is established so
as to adjoin the side or rear line of a lot in a residential district,
sightproof screening, not less than six feet (6') in height, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along the side or rear lot line up
to, but not beyond, the adjoining residential building setback line; except
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 19.44 of this title shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be
arranged so that no annoying glare is directed or reflected toward residential
property. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.36.070: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area shall be devoted to landscaping in
accordance with the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.40 of this title. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.36.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.36.090: CONVERSION OF STRUCTURES:
An existing residential building located within the C-3 district may be
converted for a permitted use provided the following conditions are met:
A.   Conformance with yard, coverage, landscaping, and setback requirements;
B.   Parking, loading and access facilities shall be installed subject to the
requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title;
C.   The main building and all accessory buildings or structures shall be
brought into full compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the
city prior to occupancy;
D.   A building permit is required. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.36.100: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector's office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the C-3
(neighborhood shopping) zoning district. The table indicates which members of
the city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of permit
application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application does not
require that item to be submitted.
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted Uses                  
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Accessory buildings                                                 CI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
   Accessory sign                                                      CI       CI            
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Automotive related facilities                                       CI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
   Carports                                                            CI       CI     CI,     
                                                                                           CE
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Clinic, outpatient                                                  CI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Eating, drinking and recreation establishments, 3.2% alcohol or lessCI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Funeral home                                                        CI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
                                                                                   CI,     CI, CI, CI,
   Off street parking lot                                                      CE     CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                           CI, CI, CI,
   Outside display and sales activities                                CI       CI     CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Recreational uses                                                           CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Sales and service facilities                                        CI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Schools for dance or music                                          CI       CI     CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Self-service laundry                                                CI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Store or shop for retail sales                                      CI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
   Temporary buildings                                                         CI     CI,    CI,
                                                                                           CE      CE
                                                                                   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Veterinary clinic/hospital                                          CI       CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                                   CE      CP
Uses Subject To Review                  
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Automatic or self-service automobile wash facility                  CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Bowling alley or indoor amusement place                             CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Church, synagogue, mosque or temple                                 CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                          Not
                                                                          required         PC,
                                                                          unless   FC,     CI, CI, CI,
   Daycare center                                                      premises CI,    CE, CE  CE
                                                                          are      CE      CP
                                                                          being
                                                                          altered
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Eating or drinking establishments, 3.2% alcohol or more             CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Educational or cultural uses                                        CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation                         CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   General warehouse or distribution center                            CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                          Not
                                                                          required
                                                                          unless   FC, CI,
   Home occupation; type B                                             premises CI  PC         
                                                                          are
                                                                          being
                                                                          altered
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Hospital                                                            CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Miniwarehouse                                                       CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Office building                                                     CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
                                                                                           PC,
   Permanent outside display area for a retail or discount store       CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
   Residential uses                                                    CI       FC,    CI,     
                                                                                   CI      PC
                                                                                   FC,     PC,
   Retail sales business                                               CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
                                                                                   CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
   Single-, two- or four-family dwellings, townhouses or apartments as          FC,     PC,
part of a combined business-                                              CI       CI,    CI, CI, CI,
residential complex                                                                CE      CE, CE  CE
                                                                                           CP
Legend:                 
CI = City inspector                  
FC = Fire chief                  
CE = City engineer                  
CP = City planner                  
PC = Planning commission                  
 
(Ord. 1007 §8, 2005)
CHAPTER 19.37
C-4 (GENERAL BUSINESS) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.37.010: General Description
19.37.020: Permitted Uses
19.37.030: Uses Subject To Review
19.37.040: Yards; Setback
19.37.050: Lot Coverage
19.37.060: Sightproof Screening And Lighting
19.37.070: Landscaping
19.37.080: Building Height
19.37.090: Conversion Of Structures
19.37.100: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.37.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-4 (general business) district is intended for the conduct of general
business activity which serves not only the needs of the residents of the city
or the immediate surrounding area, but also the population of the larger
metropolitan area. Because the permitted uses may serve and employ persons from
a larger trade area, the activities and traffic generated make the activities
least compatible with residential development. Therefore, this district covers
only the Northwest 39th Expressway and Northwest Highway traffic corridor
areas. The district makes provision for those areas which require display
outside the confines of an enclosed building and for light manufacturing and
warehousing activities. All the uses require direct access to persons from the
surrounding trade areas. In order to maintain sound development and good
community appearance, landscaping and off street parking are required. (Ord.
1143, 2014: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.37.020: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. Property and buildings shall be used only for
the following purposes:
Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses
listed in this section when located on the same lot are subject to the
following conditions:
A.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced.
B.   All accessory buildings shall be limited to occupancy and use by occupants
of the main building.
C.   No accessory building shall be located across lot lines separating two (2)
or more dwellings or buildings regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the
lots.
D.   Access to the accessory building shall be limited to the lot it occupies.
E.   Building material of accessory buildings shall conform to the current
building standards of the city, provided that corrugated or unpainted
galvanized building materials shall not be permitted.
If the new and/or replacement accessory building or structure is to be used in
a home occupation, type B, the applicant must meet all of the requirements set
forth for home occupation, type B conditions in section
19.37.030 of this chapter.
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Boats and other unlicensed recreational vehicles.
Carports. Permitted in the rear yard subject to existing easements.
Clinic, outpatient.
Eating, drinking, and recreation establishments as follows:
A.   Types Permitted:
Billiard parlor, pool hall, or domino parlor.
Catering facility.
Drive-in for food, drink, or confection.
Restaurant, cafe, or banquet hall, including the dispensing of beverages
composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages containing 3.2 percent or
less of alcohol, for consumption on the premises.
B.   Use Restrictions: No uses listed above shall be located within three
hundred feet (300') of any school, church, youth center or playground,
hospital, or community or city property. The measurement of such distance shall
be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the protected use to:
   1.   The nearest property line of such prohibited use (single use,
freestanding building or structure).
   2.   The closest exterior wall of the space occupied by the prohibited use
(multiple occupancy building or structure).
Funeral home.
Manufactured or prefabricated buildings or trailers with a use incidental,
appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of the land or buildings
located on the same land, which shall:
A.   Meet city and federal manufactured home construction and safety standards.
B.   Meet all requirements applicable to other buildings, structures and new
construction including all necessary improvements, location, building, and
occupancy permits and other certifications required by the city building codes.
C.   Be attached and enclosed to the ground or pavement in conformance with the
manufacturer's installation specifications for both live and shear loads.
D.   Have the wheels, axles, springs, and towing tongue removed.
E.   Have skirting installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions. In the absence of such installation instructions skirting shall
be installed as follows:
   1.   Top of skirting shall be attached firmly to the trailer itself.
   2.   Bottom of skirting shall be firmly attached to a base plate of pressure
treated wood, naturally decay resistant wood or metal channel attached to the
ground surface by long spikes if on a natural surface, or anchor bolts if on a
hard surface.
   3.   Skirting shall be squared and plumb with the trailer.
Any structural alteration or modification of a manufactured or prefabricated
building or trailer, after it is placed on the site, must be approved by the
city. All structural additions shall comply with the city building codes
including application for a building permit.
Miniwarehouse.
Off street parking lot. Subject to the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Outside display and sales activities, provided:
A.   No merchandise shall be placed on public rights of way, required parking
spaces, required landscape areas, or within a sight triangle.
B.   Merchandise or material not being actively offered for sale shall not be
stored outside a building.
Recreational uses within an enclosed building including, but not limited to,
the following:
Bowling alley.
Gymnasium.
Health club facility.
Skating rink.
Tennis court.
Sales and service facilities including, but not limited to, the following:
Bakery (5 employees or less).
Bicycle shop.
Electrical repair shop or similar contractor excluding outside storage of
equipment and supplies.
Hotel accommodations.
Household appliance store.
Laundry or dry cleaner.
Lock or security system shop.
Plumbing shop.
Radio, television, and home electronics shop.
Shoe repair shop.
Schools for instruction for dance or music.
Store or shop for retail sales.
Temporary buildings.
Theater for motion pictures or stage performances.
Veterinary clinic/hospital, provided there are no outside runs and the practice
is limited to nonfarm animals. (Ord. 1143, 2014)
19.37.030: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning Commission review and recommendation is required. The public hearing
requirements for uses subject to review are set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
Any of the following educational or cultural uses:
Art gallery.
Assembly hall for nonprofit corporation.
Business college or school for vocational training.
Library.
Museum.
Private school or college with or without dormitory facilities.
Automotive related facilities including, but not limited to, the following:
Automobile, light truck and trailer service.
Automobile service station.
Car wash, self-service or automatic.
General automobile repair, excluding auto salvage.
Body piercing and/or tattoo establishment. Subject to the following
restrictions:
A.   Use restriction: Shall comply with all the requirements enforced by the
State of Oklahoma.
B.   Additional restrictions:
   1.   
   2.   
Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple. Includes the main building and all other
structures comprising the complex, including, but not limited to, parish hall,
education building, parking, accessory structures, recreation area and open
space, and minister's residence when a part of the complex, subject to the
following condition:
A.   A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
Daycare center. Subject to the following requirements:
A.   Shall meet City-County and State requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, equipment.
B.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this Code.
Eating or drinking establishments.
A.   Review uses:
Beer tavern.
Nightclub or bar.
Restaurant, cafe, or banquet hall, including the dispensing of beverages
composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages containing more than 3.2
percent of alcohol, for consumption on the premises.
B.   Use restrictions: No uses listed above shall be located within three
hundred feet (300') of any school, church, youth center or playground,
hospital, or community or City property. The measurement of such distance shall
be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the protected use to:
   1.   The nearest property line of such prohibited use (single use,
freestanding building or structures).
   2.   The closest exterior wall of the space occupied by the prohibited use
(multiple occupancy building or structure).
Home occupation, type B conditions. Applicants must meet the following
conditions in addition to the general definition of home occupation, including
one or more of the following activities or modifications to the property:
A.   Client visitors allowed, subject to restrictions established in the review
process.
B.   Activity in other than the main house, e.g., garage, yard or accessory
building or structure.
C.   Any use of electrical or mechanical equipment in the home occupation
activity.
D.   Any structural alteration, including a separate entrance.
E.   Any expansion of the existing driveway.
F.   "Daycare home" as defined by the zoning ordinance.
G.   Hours of activity.
H.   Number of clients present at the same time.
I.   Vehicle parking requirements, including a company car, trailer or truck.
J.   Potential for noise and neighborhood disruption with number of client
vehicles.
K.   Effect on area by any proposed structural or property alteration.
L.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this Code.
Hospital.
Medical marijuana retailer; holders of a medical marijuana dispensary/retail
license as provided for in 63 Oklahoma Statutes 2018 section 421A (as may be
amended hereafter) and which are in compliance with title 5,
chapter 5.57 of this Code.
Off street parking or storage of trucks, tractors, trailers, construction
equipment, or any other equipment used off site.
Office building and related professional, administrative, corporate, financial
and service office uses.
Open air market, swap meet or flea market, both temporary and permanent.
Outside amusement or commercial recreation facility.
Residential uses associated with and maintained primarily for the benefit and
use of occupants and families of the uses listed under single-family dwellings,
two- to four- family dwellings, etc., of this section.
Single-family dwellings, two- to four-family dwellings and townhouses or
apartments, when planned and developed as a part of a combined business-
residential complex and submitted as a unit.
Used automobile parts, excluding auto salvage.
Veterinary clinic, hospital, or kennel with outside runs. (Ord. 1190, 2018)
19.37.040: YARDS; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights- of-way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front setback: There are no specific front yard requirements for this
district, provided that landscaping and off street parking and loading
requirements are met.
B.   Side setback:
   1.   On the side of a lot adjoining a C-3 or C-4 District, there are no
specific side yard requirements.
   2.   On the side of a lot adjoining a Residential or C-1 District, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10').
   3.   Where the rear lot line of a corner lot adjoins the side yard of a
Residential or C-1 District, there shall be a side yard of not less than
fifteen feet (15').
C.   Rear setback:
   1.   Where a commercial building is to be served from the rear, an alleyway,
service court, or combination thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30') shall
be provided.
   2.   No commercial building shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15')
to the rear lot line which adjoins a Residential or C-1 District. (Ord. 1143,
2014: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.37.050: LOT COVERAGE:
There are no specific lot coverage requirements provided that landscaping and
off street parking and loading regulations are met. (Ord. 1143, 2014: Ord. 832
§1, 1997)
19.37.060: SIGHTPROOF SCREENING AND LIGHTING:
Whenever any Commercial District, parking lot or parking area is established so
as to adjoin the side or rear line of a lot in a Residential District,
sightproof screening, not less than six feet (6') in height, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along the side or rear lot line up
to, but not beyond, the adjoining residential building setback line; except,
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 19.44 of this title shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be
arranged so that no annoying glare is directed or reflected toward residential
property. (Ord. 1143, 2014: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.37.070: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area shall be devoted to landscaping in
accordance with the requirements of
chapter 19.41 of this title. (Ord. 1143, 2014: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.37.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, maximum permitted
building height shall be sixty feet (60') for occupiable space, plus a maximum
of twenty (20) additional feet for nonoccupiable space, including, but not
necessarily limited to, attic within a pitched roof, parapets, elevator
housing, antenna or steeple. Space not meeting the definition of occupiable
space as contained in the current City of Warr Acres Building Code shall be
deemed nonoccupiable.
B.   When abutting or located less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
property line of an R-1, R-2, or R-3 District, maximum permitted building
height shall be thirty five feet (35') for that part of the building
constructed within the one hundred fifty foot (150') area. Any part of a
building that is located one hundred fifty feet (150') or more from the
property line of an R-1, R-2, or R-3 District shall be subject to the height
regulations of subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1143, 2014: Ord. 1045 §1,
2007: Ord. 1039 §3, 2007: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.37.090: CONVERSION OF STRUCTURES:
An existing residential building located within the C-4 District may be
converted for a permitted use provided the following conditions are met:
A.   Conformance with yard, coverage, landscaping and setback requirements,
B.   Parking, loading and access facilities shall be installed subject to the
requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title,
C.   The main building and all accessory buildings and structures shall be
brought into full compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the
city prior to occupancy,
D.   A building permit is required. (Ord. 1143, 2014: Ord. 968 §1, 2002)
19.37.100: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector's office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the C-4
(general business) zoning district. The table indicates which members of the
city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of permit
application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application does not
require that item to be submitted.
 
Legend:
 CI = City inspector CP = City planner
 FC = Fire chief     PC = Planning commission
 CE = City engineer      
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted uses:                                                      
  Accessory
 building and   CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  structures
 Accessory sign CI              CI                                    
  Boats and
  other
 unlicensed                                                         
  recreational
  vehicles
 Carports       CI              CI               CI, CE                
 Clinic,        CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  outpatient
  Eating,
 drinking, and  CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  recreation
  establishments
 Funeral home   CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  Manufactured
  or
 prefabricated  CI              CI               CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  buildings or
  trailers
 Miniwarehouse  CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
 Off street                    CI, CE           CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  parking lot
  Outside
 display and    CI              CI               CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  sales
  activities
  Recreational
 uses in an     CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  enclosed
  building
  Sales and
 service        CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  facilities
 Schools for    CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  dance or music
  Store or shop
 for retail     CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  sales
 Temporary                     CI               CI, CE               CI, CE
  buildings
  Theater for
  motion
 pictures or    CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  stage
  performances
  Veterinary
 clinic/        CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  hospital
Uses subject to                                                      
review    :
  Automotive
  related
  facilities,
  service
 stations, car  CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  wash, general
  repair,
  excluding auto
  salvage
  Church,
 synagogue,     CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  mosque or
  temple
                 Not required
 Daycare center unless premises FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
                 are being
                 altered
  Eating or
 drinking       CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  establishments
 Educational or CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  cultural uses
  Home           Not required
 occupation,    unless premises FC, CI     CI, CP                      
  type B         are being
                 altered
 Hospital       CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  Off street
  parking or
  storage of
  trucks,
  tractors,
 trailers,      CI              CI, CE           PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  construction
  equipment, or
  any other
  equipment used
  off site
 Office         CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  building
  Open air
 market, swap   CI              FC, CI           PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  meet or flea
  market
  Outside
  amusement or
 commercial     CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  recreation
  facility
 Residential    CI              FC, CI           CI, PC                
  uses
  Single-, two-
  or four-
  family
  dwellings and
  townhouse or
 apartments as  CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  part of a
  combined
  business-
  residential
  complex
  Used
  automobile
  parts,
  excluding
 reconditioned  CI              CI               PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  or
  remanufactured
  parts and auto
  salvage
  Veterinary
  clinic,
 hospital or    CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  kennel with
  outside run
 
(Ord. 1143, 2014: Ord. 1007 §9, 2005)
CHAPTER 19.38
C-5 (SOUTH END/INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.38.010: General Description
19.38.020: Permitted Uses
19.38.030: Uses Subject To Review
19.38.040: Yards; Setback
19.38.050: Lot Coverage
19.38.060: Sightproof Screening And Lighting
19.38.070: Landscaping
19.38.080: Building Height
19.38.090: Conversion Of Structures
19.38.100: Permitting Responsibilities And Requirements
19.38.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C-5 (south end/industrial business) district is intended for the conduct of
business activity which serves primarily the needs of the population of the
larger metropolitan area. Because the uses serve and employ persons from a
larger trade area, the activities and traffic generated make the activities the
least compatible with residential development of the city. Therefore, this
district covers only the Northwest 39th Expressway traffic corridor areas. The
district makes provision for those areas which require display outside the
confines of an enclosed building and for light manufacturing and warehousing
activities. All the uses require direct access to persons from the surrounding
trade areas. In order to maintain sound development and good community
appearance, landscaping and off street parking are required. (Ord. 1144, 2014)
19.38.020: PERMITTED USES:
Planning commission approval is not required for permitted uses unless the city
inspector deems the circumstances of the application to be of a nature that
would cause concern or be of special interest to the community. The city
inspector may, at his discretion, add such application to the planning
commission agenda for discussion. Property and buildings shall be used only for
the following purposes:
Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses
listed in this section when located on the same lot are subject to the
following conditions:
A.   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has actually commenced.
B.   All accessory buildings shall be limited to occupancy and use by occupants
of the main building.
C.   No accessory building shall be located across lot lines separating two (2)
or more dwellings or buildings regardless of ownership or tenancy status of the
lots.
D.   Access to the accessory building shall be limited to the lot it occupies.
E.   Building material of accessory buildings shall conform to the current
building standards of the city, provided that corrugated or unpainted
galvanized building materials shall not be permitted.
If the new and/or replacement accessory building or structure is to be used in
a home occupation, type B, the applicant must meet all of the requirements set
forth for home occupation, type B conditions in section
19.38.030 of this chapter.
Accessory sign. Subject to the requirements set forth in title 15 of this code.
Boats and other unlicensed recreational vehicles.
Carports. Permitted in the rear yard subject to existing easements.
Clinic, outpatient.
Eating, drinking, and recreation establishments as follows:
A.   Types Permitted:
Billiard parlor, pool hall, or domino parlor.
Catering facility.
Drive-in for food, drink, or confection.
Restaurant, cafe, or banquet hall, including the dispensing of beverages
composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages containing 3.2 percent or
less of alcohol, for consumption on the premises.
B.   Use Restrictions: No uses listed above shall be located within three
hundred feet (300') of any school, church, youth center or playground,
hospital, or community or city property. The measurement of such distance shall
be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the protected use to:
   1.   
   2.   
Funeral home.
Manufactured or prefabricated buildings or trailers with a use incidental,
appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of the land or buildings
located on the same land, which shall:
A.   Meet city and federal manufactured home construction and safety standards.
B.   Meet all requirements applicable to other buildings, structures and new
construction including all necessary improvements, location, building, and
occupancy permits and other certifications required by the city building codes.
C.   Be attached and enclosed to the ground or pavement in conformance with the
manufacturer's installation specifications for both live and shear loads.
D.   Have the wheels, axles, springs, and towing tongue removed.
E.   Have skirting installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions. In the absence of such installation instructions skirting shall
be installed as follows:
   1.   
   2.   
   3.   
Any structural alteration or modification of a manufactured or prefabricated
building or trailer, after it is placed on the site, must be approved by the
city. All structural additions shall comply with the city building codes
including application for a building permit.
Miniwarehouse.
Off street parking lot. Subject to the requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title.
Outside display and sales activities, provided:
A.   No merchandise shall be placed on public rights of way, required parking
spaces, required landscape areas, or within a sight triangle.
B.   Merchandise or material not being actively offered for sale shall not be
stored outside a building.
Recreational uses within an enclosed building including, but not limited to,
the following:
Bowling alley.
Gymnasium.
Health club facility.
Skating rink.
Tennis court.
Sales and service facilities including, but not limited to, the following:
Bakery.
Bicycle shop.
Electrical repair shop or similar contractor excluding outside storage of
equipment and supplies.
Hotel accommodations.
Household appliance store.
Laundry or dry cleaner.
Lock or security system shop.
Pawnbroker (as defined at section
5.34.010 of this Code).
Plumbing shop.
Radio, television, and home electronics shop.
Shoe repair shop.
Schools for instruction for dance or music.
Store or shop for retail sales.
Temporary buildings.
Theater for motion pictures or stage performances.
Veterinary clinic/hospital, provided there are no outside runs and the practice
is limited to nonfarm animals. (Ord. 1151, 2015)
19.38.030: USES SUBJECT TO REVIEW:
Planning Commission review and recommendation is required. Sole ingress and
egress off 39th Expressway required as a condition of any grant of use on
review (grant of use revocable if this condition is violated after grant is
given by City). The public hearing requirements for uses subject to review are
set forth in
chapter 19.54 of this title. All area requirements of this district must be
met:
   Adult entertainment uses:
   A. Review Uses:
   Adult amusement or entertainment.
   Adult bookstore/retail.
   Adult motel.
   Adult motion picture arcade.
   Adult motion picture theater.
   Massage parlor.
   Sexual encounter center.
   B. Development Regulations:
   1.   
   2.   
   3.   
C.   Nonconforming Use: Any business which is in violation hereof shall be
deemed a nonconforming use. Such use shall not in any manner be enlarged,
extended, altered, or rebuilt except that such use may be changed so as to
comply with the requirements of this section. Such use is deemed nonconforming
until such use shall terminate or come into compliance.
D.   Complying Use: In the event that any two (2) or more adult entertainment
uses are located within one thousand feet (1,000') of each other, the adult
entertainment use which shall have first been licensed or continually operated
shall be deemed to be the complying use. The person, firm, corporation, or
other entity responsible for the operation or management of the adult
entertainment use shall have the responsibility of proving, by documented
evidence, the date on which such adult entertainment use was first licensed or
began continuous operation.
Any of the following educational or cultural uses:
Art gallery.
Assembly hall for nonprofit corporation.
Business college or school for vocational training.
Library.
Museum.
Private school or college with or without dormitory facilities.
Automotive related facilities including, but not limited to, the following:
Automobile, light truck and trailer sales, rental and service, and new and used
vehicles.
Automobile service station.
Car wash, self-service or automatic.
General automobile repair, excluding auto salvage.
Body piercing and/or tattoo establishment. Subject to the following
restrictions:
A.   Use restriction: Shall comply with all the requirements enforced by the
State of Oklahoma.
B.   Additional restrictions:
   1.   
   2.   
Church, synagogue, mosque, or temple. Includes the main building and all other
structures comprising the complex, including, but not limited to, parish hall,
education building, parking, accessory structures, recreation area and open
space, and minister's residence when a part of the complex, subject to the
following condition:
A.   A minimum lot area of three (3) acres.
Construction machinery or heavy truck sales and service with outside display of
vehicles offered for sale.
Daycare center. Subject to the following requirements:
A.   Shall meet City-County and State requirements including, but not limited
to, safety, design, facilities, equipment.
B.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this Code.
Eating or drinking establishments.
A.   Review uses:
Beer tavern.
Nightclub or bar.
Restaurant, cafe, or banquet hall, including the dispensing of beverages
composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages containing more than 3.2
percent of alcohol, for consumption on the premises.
B.   Use restrictions: No uses listed above shall be located within three
hundred feet (300') of any school, church, youth center or playground,
hospital, or community or City property. The measurement of such distance shall
be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the protected use to:
   1.   
   2.   
Facility for drug or alcohol rehabilitation:
A.   Use restrictions:
   1.   
   2.   
   3.   
   4.   
   5.   
B.   Additional standards:
   1.   
   2.   
   3.   
General warehouse, distribution center, bakery or other food preparation, or
light manufacturing plant; provided, there shall be no outside storage of
materials unless completely screened from the view of any adjacent street
property; no noise, smoke, dust or odor shall be emitted from the structure;
and all manufacturing or assembling activity shall take place within the
confines of a building.
Home occupation, type B conditions. Applicants must meet the following
conditions in addition to the general definition of home occupation, including
one or more of the following activities or modifications to the property:
A.   Client visitors allowed, subject to restrictions established in the review
process.
B.   Activity in other than the main house, e.g., garage, yard or accessory
building or structure.
C.   Any use of electrical or mechanical equipment in the home occupation
activity.
D.   Any structural alteration, including a separate entrance.
E.   Any expansion of the existing driveway.
F.   "Daycare home" as defined by the zoning ordinance.
G.   Hours of activity.
H.   Number of clients present at the same time.
I.   Vehicle parking requirements, including a company car, trailer or truck.
J.   Potential for noise and neighborhood disruption with number of client
vehicles.
K.   Effect on area by any proposed structural or property alteration.
L.   The applicant shall meet the license requirements set forth in title 5 of
this Code.
Hospital.
Lumberyard.
Medical marijuana retailer; holders of a medical marijuana dispensary/retail
license as provided for in 63 Oklahoma Statutes 2018 section 421A (as may be
amended hereafter) and which are in compliance with title 5,
chapter 5.57 of this Code.
Off street parking or storage of trucks, tractors, trailers, construction
equipment, or any other equipment used off site.
Office building and related professional, administrative, corporate, financial
and service office uses.
Open air market, swap meet or flea market, both temporary and permanent.
Outside amusement or commercial recreation facility.
Residential uses associated with and maintained primarily for the benefit and
use of occupants and families of the uses listed under single-family dwellings,
two- to four- family dwellings, etc., of this section.
Single-family dwellings, two- to four-family dwellings and townhouses or
apartments, when planned and developed as a part of a combined business-
residential complex and submitted as a unit.
Used automobile parts, excluding auto salvage.
Veterinary clinic, hospital, or kennel with outside runs. (Ord. 1190, 2018)
19.38.040: YARDS; SETBACK:
All buildings or structures shall be set back from street rights- of-way and
property lines as follows:
A.   Front setback: There are no specific front yard requirements for this
district, provided that landscaping and off street parking and loading
requirements are met.
B.   Side setback:
   1.   On the side of a lot adjoining a C-3, C-4 or C-5 District, there are no
specific side yard requirements.
   2.   On the side of a lot adjoining a Residential or C-1 District, there
shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10').
   3.   Where the rear lot line of a corner lot adjoins the side yard of a
Residential or C-1 District, there shall be a side yard of not less than
fifteen feet (15').
C.   Rear setback:
   1.   Where a commercial building is to be served from the rear, an alleyway,
service court, or combination thereof, of not less than thirty feet (30') shall
be provided.
   2.   No commercial building shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15')
to the rear lot line which adjoins a Residential or C-1 District. (Ord. 1144,
2014)
19.38.050: LOT COVERAGE:
There are no specific lot coverage requirements provided that landscaping and
off street parking and loading regulations are met. (Ord. 1144, 2014)
19.38.060: SIGHTPROOF SCREENING AND LIGHTING:
Whenever any Commercial District, parking lot or parking area is established so
as to adjoin the side or rear line of a lot in a Residential District,
sightproof screening, not less than six feet (6') in height, shall be
constructed and maintained in good condition along the side or rear lot line up
to, but not beyond, the adjoining residential building setback line; except,
where the front yard is used for off street parking, then the provisions of
chapter 19.44 of this title shall apply. In addition, the lighting shall be
arranged so that no annoying glare is directed or reflected toward residential
property. (Ord. 1144, 2014)
19.38.070: LANDSCAPING:
At least five percent (5%) of the land area shall be devoted to landscaping in
accordance with the requirements of
chapter 19.41 of this title. (Ord. 1144, 2014)
19.38.080: BUILDING HEIGHT:
A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, maximum permitted
building height shall be sixty feet (60') for occupiable space, plus a maximum
of twenty (20) additional feet for nonoccupiable space, including, but not
necessarily limited to, attic within a pitched roof, parapets, elevator
housing, antenna or steeple. Space not meeting the definition of occupiable
space as contained in the current city of Warr Acres building code shall be
deemed nonoccupiable.
B.   When abutting or located less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
property line of an R-1, R-2, or R-3 district, maximum permitted building
height shall be thirty five feet (35') for that part of the building
constructed within the one hundred fifty foot (150') area. Any part of a
building that is located one hundred fifty feet (150') or more from the
property line of an R-1, R-2, or R-3 district shall be subject to the height
regulations of subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1144, 2014)
19.38.090: CONVERSION OF STRUCTURES:
An existing residential building located within the C-5 district may be
converted for a permitted use provided the following conditions are met:
A.   Conformance with yard, coverage, landscaping and setback requirements,
B.   Parking, loading and access facilities shall be installed subject to the
requirements set forth in
chapter 19.44 of this title,
C.   The main building and all accessory buildings and structures shall be
brought into full compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the
city prior to occupancy,
D.   A building permit is required. (Ord. 1144, 2014)
19.38.100: PERMITTING RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   The applicant shall submit to the city inspector's office the required
number of copies of all documents and application forms and fees that meet the
permitting requirements before they can be reviewed by the city staff or the
planning commission. Absent the required copies, the application shall be
deemed to be incomplete. If an application for a permitted use is incomplete,
review by the city inspector will be delayed until the required documentation
has been submitted. If an application for a use subject to review is
incomplete, it will not be placed on the agenda of the planning commission
until the required documentation has been submitted. The city inspector shall
distribute the documents as applicable. The city is not responsible for making
said copies on behalf of the applicant.
B.   The following table sets forth the permitting responsibilities and
requirements for permitted uses and uses subject to review within the C-5
(south end/industrial business) zoning district. The table indicates which
members of the city staff or the planning commission are to review each type of
permit application. A blank space in the table indicates that the application
does not require that item to be submitted.
 
Legend:
 CI = City inspector CP = City planner
 FC = Fire chief     PC = Planning commission
 CE = City engineer      
 
 
     Building Construction           Site        Landscaping
Uses Permit   Plans        Plot Plan Development Plan        Grading Plan
                                     Plan
Permitted uses:                                                      
  Accessory
 building and   CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  structures
 Accessory sign CI              CI                                    
  Boats and
  other
 unlicensed                                                         
  recreational
  vehicles
 Carports       CI              CI               CI, CE                
 Clinic,        CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  outpatient
  Eating,
 drinking, and  CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  recreation
  establishments
 Funeral home   CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  Manufactured
  or
 prefabricated  CI              CI               CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  buildings or
  trailers
 Miniwarehouse  CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
 Off street                    CI, CE           CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  parking lot
  Outside
 display and    CI              CI               CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  sales
  activities
  Recreational
 uses in an     CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  enclosed
  building
  Sales and
 service        CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  facilities
 Schools for    CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  dance or music
  Store or shop
 for retail     CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  sales
 Temporary                     CI               CI, CE               CI, CE
  buildings
  Theater for
  motion
 pictures or    CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  stage
  performances
  Veterinary
 clinic/        CI              FC, CI, CE       CI, CE, CP     CI, CE CI, CE
  hospital
Uses subject to                                                      
review:
  Adult
 entertainment  CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  uses
  Automotive
  related
  facilities,
  service
 stations, car  CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  wash, general
  repair,
  excluding auto
  salvage
  Church,
 synagogue,     CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  mosque or
  temple
  Construction
  machinery or
 heavy truck    CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  sales and
  service
                 Not required
 Daycare center unless premises FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
                 are being
                 altered
  Eating or
 drinking       CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  establishments
 Educational or CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  cultural uses
  Facility for
 drug or        CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  alcohol
  rehabilitation
  General
  warehouse,
  distribution
  center, bakery
 or other food  CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  preparation,
  or light
  manufacturing
  plant
  Home           Not required
 occupation,    unless premises FC, CI     CI, CP                      
  type B         are being
                 altered
 Hospital       CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
 Lumberyard     CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  Off street
  parking or
  storage of
  trucks,
  tractors,
 trailers,      CI              CI, CE           PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  construction
  equipment, or
  any other
  equipment used
  off site
 Office         CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  building
  Open air
 market, swap   CI              FC, CI           PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  meet or flea
  market
  Outside
  amusement or
 commercial     CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  recreation
  facility
 Residential    CI              FC, CI           CI, PC                
  uses
  Single-, two-
  or four-
  family
  dwellings and
  townhouses or
 apartments as  CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  part of a
  combined
  business-
  residential
  complex
  Used
  automobile
  parts,
  excluding
 reconditioned  CI              CI               PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  or
  remanufactured
  parts and auto
  salvage
  Veterinary
  clinic,
 hospital or    CI              FC, CI, CE       PC, CI, CE, CP CI, CE CI, CE
  kennel with
  outside run
 
(Ord. 1144, 2014)
CHAPTER 19.39
PUD (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.39.010: General Description
19.39.020: Intent And Purpose
19.39.030: Planned Unit Development Authorized
19.39.040: Location And Uses
19.39.050: Planned Unit Development Master Plan Required
19.39.060: Review And Approval
19.39.070: Modification Or Amendment
19.39.080: Reversion
19.39.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The planned unit development (PUD) district is a special zoning district
category that provides an alternate approach to conventional land use controls.
The PUD process offers an opportunity for more creative solutions to
redevelopment issues while at the same time requiring a proposal that conforms
to the goals and policies of the city comprehensive plan. The PUD is subject to
special review procedures, and once approved by the city council it becomes a
special zoning classification for the property it represents. (Ord. 1125, 2012)
19.39.020: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A.   Encourage innovative land development while maintaining appropriate
limitations on the character and intensity of use of the project to assure
compatibility with adjoining and neighborhood properties.
B.   Permit flexibility within the development to maximize the unique physical
features of the particular site.
C.   Encourage efficient use and reuse of land, and facilitate economic
arrangement of buildings and circulation systems.
D.   Achieve a continuity of function and design within the development that
results in an economically feasible project which conforms to the comprehensive
plan and is compatible with development patterns in the surrounding
neighborhood.
E.   Provide a tool for negotiating modifications in standard zoning district
regulations in order to achieve innovative design solutions that will protect
the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens. (Ord. 1125, 2012)
19.39.030: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORIZED:
A PUD may be authorized by an amendment to the official zoning districts map
after public hearings by the planning commission and city council, provided it
complies with the requirements contained herein. (Ord. 1125, 2012)
19.39.040: LOCATION AND USES:
A PUD shall be considered a special zoning district, and it may be authorized
for any use or combination of uses permitted in this chapter. The PUD may
include mixed uses and uses not otherwise permitted in this chapter, such as
apartments or townhouses, provided the location and development of such uses
conform to the policies of the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1125, 2012)
19.39.050: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN REQUIRED:
The basis for review and approval of a PUD is the planned unit development
master plan, which shall be adopted as a part of the ordinance of rezoning. The
master plan shall contain a design statement and a master development plan map
which shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
A.   PUD Design Statement: The PUD design statement shall be a written document
containing the following elements:
   1.   Title of the PUD;
   2.   List of the subject property owners and proposed developers;
   3.   Specific location of the proposal, and a legal description of the
property;
   4.   Reference to the Warr Acres comprehensive plan policy for the subject
property, including a map showing zoning and land uses within a minimum of
three hundred feet (300') of the subject;
   5.   A description of the development proposal including:
      a.   Existing and proposed land uses;
      b.   Existing and proposed densities where a housing development is
involved;
      c.   Existing and proposed points of vehicle access;
      d.   Provision for safe and convenient pedestrian access from abutting
properties and circulation within the development;
      e.   Drainage analysis, including a topographic map of the property with
two foot (2') contours, 100-year stormwater data, and a plan for detention and/
or disposal of stormwater runoff based on the completed project and possible
need for on site and off site solutions;
      f.   A description of building use types and construction materials,
sample rendering of proposed building elevations, and typical site layouts;
      g.   A list of all special development regulations requested and/or the
conventional zoning district regulations which will be permitted to be modified
as a part of the project;
      h.   Schedule of building construction materials to conform to all city
requirements for planned unit developments or other special zoning district
regulations;
      i.   A specific timetable and sequence for the development.
B.   Planned Unit Development Master Development Plan Map: The master
development plan map shall be a graphic representation of the plan for the PUD
area prepared at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). It
shall show, at a minimum, the following:
   1.   The subject property and sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the
relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses, including structures, streets, and
other physical features;
   2.   Stormwater drainage plan, for detention and/or controlled disposal of
stormwater runoff based on impact of the completed project;
   3.   Specific location of planned buildings, parking, driveways, landscaping
and open space, recreation areas, utility easements, setbacks, and other
specific information about the project;
   4.   Detailed landscaping plans showing treatment of a minimum of five
percent (5%) of the lot area plus street right of way, and addressing sight and
sound protection needs for residential properties at the rear of the project;
   5.   Architectural standards including a schedule of building construction
materials to conform to all city requirements for planned unit developments or
special zoning district regulations, including, but not limited to, overlay
zoning district regulations;
   6.   Any other relevant information as determined by the planning commission
or city council to be necessary for review, approval, and administration of the
PUD. (Ord. 1125, 2012)
19.39.060: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
A.   The PUD application will be considered by the planning commission and city
council at public hearings in accordance with established review procedures for
consideration of applications for rezoning. As a part of the city review, the
planning commission or city council may require additional information,
including, but not limited to, the following: evidence of a market feasibility
study; traffic impact study; infrastructure improvements or dedication of
necessary easements and rights of way; developer meetings with surrounding
property owners; replatting; building elevations; specific plat restrictions,
covenants, height, use, setback, or coverage requirements; standards for
proposed signs, including number, size, height, method of illumination, and
location; creation of a property owners' association; posting of a performance
bond or other surety for required public improvements.
B.   The PUD master plan shall control the development of the property, and all
building permits shall be in accord with said plan until it is otherwise
amended by the city council. The developer shall furnish a reproducible copy of
the PUD master plan map at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100') for signature by the chair of the planning commission and the mayor, with
acknowledgment by the city clerk. The PUD master plan, including the signed map
and all supporting data, shall be made a part of the permanent file and
maintained by the city clerk.
C.   Upon final approval by the city council of the PUD master plan and the
appropriate ordinance of rezoning, the site shall be designated as an amendment
to the official zoning districts map. The ordinance of rezoning shall adopt the
PUD master plan, its commitments, and all supporting documentation by
reference, and they shall be enforced by the city in the administration of the
zoning ordinance.
D.   No building permit shall be issued by the city for the PUD area until
these requirements have been met. (Ord. 1125, 2012)
19.39.070: MODIFICATION OR AMENDMENT:
A.   An application for rezoning to change part of the area of an approved PUD
to a different zoning district classification shall be considered an amendment
of the original PUD requiring property owner application on the entire original
tract. Before approving a new rezoning the planning commission shall review the
commitments and provisions of the original PUD as approved to determine the
impact of the new application on the viability of the original PUD plan. (Ord.
1125, 2012)
19.39.080: REVERSION:
A.   Property Owner Request: If the property owner determines to abandon the
PUD zoning, he shall make application for rezoning either to the original
status or to a new classification. Said application shall be heard according to
regular procedures by the planning commission and city council.
B.   Continuing Review By The City: If development of the PUD has not been
started within two (2) years of the date of approval of the PUD rezoning, the
city administration shall request a report from the applicant/owner to
determine the status of the project. The city staff shall present a report of
findings to the planning commission which shall determine the appropriateness
of holding a public hearing to consider rezoning the property to its original
district status. Additional two (2) year reviews shall be held as required.
(Ord. 1125, 2012)
CHAPTER 19.40
SPUD (SIMPLIFIED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.40.010: General Description
19.40.020: Intent And Purpose
19.40.030: SPUD (Simplified Planned Unit Development) Authorized
19.40.040: Location And Uses
19.40.050: SPUD Master Development Plan Required
19.40.060: Review And Approval
19.40.070: Modification Or Amendment
19.40.080: Reversion
19.40.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
A.   Purpose: The SPUD (Simplified Planned Unit Development) District is a
special zoning district category required for all rezoning applications within
the boundaries of the TC-CC Town Center Community Conservation Overlay District
that are five (5) net acres or less in size. Properties over five (5) net acres
in size are required to use the Planned Unit Development District for rezoning.
The purpose of the SPUD is to provide an alternative approach to traditional
land use controls in order to promote creative design and development
solutions. In all cases the uses and structures proposed by the SPUD must be in
conformance with the Warr Acres Comprehensive Plan and the TC-CC Overlay Zoning
District regulations; and the record of Planning Commission and City Council
actions related to a SPUD application should so verify.
B.   SPUD Characteristics:
   1.   The SPUD site shall consist of one or more tracts or parcels of land
that have a combined total size of five (5) net acres or less, exclusive of any
street or alley right-of-way; are under common ownership or control at time of
application; and are to be developed as one unit according to a design
statement and Master Development Plan Map.
   2.   The SPUD is subject to special review procedures and, once approved by
the City Council, becomes a special zoning classification for the property it
represents.
   3.   A SPUD plan shall contain no more than two (2) development tracts that
can be regulated under different base zoning districts, and shall be limited in
the number and complexity of modifications to conventional zoning and land use
regulations.
   4.   Required SPUD documentation is a design statement and a Master
Development Plan Map which are included in the ordinance of rezoning and
regulate future land use and improvements. (Ord. 1169, 2016)
19.40.020: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A SPUD shall meet the goals and objectives of the Warr Acres Comprehensive Plan
and the Town Center Overlay Zoning District by providing for innovative
building designs, landscaping, site design solutions, and possible mixed uses
for smaller lot developments that could not be accomplished under conventional
zoning district regulations. (Ord. 1169, 2016)
19.40.030: SPUD (SIMPLIFIED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT) AUTHORIZED:
The SPUD Zoning District is authorized for use in the TC-CC Town Center Overlay
District. Except as provided herein for tracts in excess of five (5) acres, all
applications for zoning change in the district shall be filed as a SPUD and
subject to conformance with the standards and regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 1169, 2016)
19.40.040: LOCATION AND USES:
A.   The SPUD Zoning District designation is limited to properties located
within the boundaries of the TC-CC Community Conservation Overlay District.
   1.   A SPUD may permit mixed residential, office, and retail commercial
uses.
   2.   Permitted uses in the SPUD are limited to the regulations of the TC-CC
District and cannot be superseded by the SPUD design statement.
   3.   A SPUD shall not permit any uses specifically permitted only in the C-
4 and C-5 Zoning Districts except in those areas where the underlying zoning is
C-4 or C-5 as of December 1, 2015. (Ord. 1169, 2016)
19.40.050: SPUD MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN REQUIRED:
A.   Required: The SPUD Master Development Plan shall be submitted as a part of
the application for rezoning and included by reference in the ordinance of
rezoning. The Master Development Plan establishes the use and development
regulations for all properties developed in the SPUD District, subject to the
guidelines of this chapter. It consists of a design statement and a Master
Development Plan Map,
B.   Design Statement: The SPUD design statement is written documentation
describing the project and identifying the basic zoning district in this Code
whose regulations shall apply unless specifically modified here. The design
statement is incorporated by reference into the City ordinance of rezoning for
enforcement purposes. The design statement shall include, at a minimum:
   1.   Title of the SPUD;
   2.   Legal description of the property;
   3.   Name and address of owner plus applicant if representing owner;
   4.   Reference to the conventional zoning district or districts in this Code
that will regulate use and development of the property unless specifically
modified in the design statement, provided that uses permitted only in the C-
4 and C-5 Districts are not eligible unless the subject property was classified
in one of these districts on December 31, 2015;
   5.   Provision and guidelines for any mixed uses, including specific
description of any mixed residential and commercial uses;
   6.   Specific prohibition of any uses or use categories to be restricted;
   7.   Architectural and construction standards to show conformance with Town
Center guidelines including but not limited to:
      a.   Schedule of building materials, including structures, sight proof
screening, sidewalks, signs, and other architectural elements;
      b.   Description of landscaping elements and pedestrian ways;
      c.   Proposed lot coverage;
   8.   Development schedule, including phased development plans.
C.   SPUD Master Development Plan Map: The SPUD Master Development Plan Map
shall be drawn to a standard engineering scale and shall contain the following
information to ensure compliance and conformance with the standards of the Town
Center Overlay District and any other applicable ordinances:
   1.   North arrow.
   2.   All property lines.
   3.   All adjacent street and alley rights-of-way, showing the centerline of
each, and any street names.
   4.   Complete site design elements, which may be on individual drawings, as
follows:
      a.   The specific location of all proposed buildings, accessory
structures, and service facilities such as garages and delivery docks;
      b.   Location of trash receptacles with required sight proof screening
indicated;
      c.   Location of driveway approaches;
      d.   The off-street parking and maneuvering arrangement;
      e.   Public sidewalks (required) and on-site pedestrian circulation;
      f.   Location of required and voluntary sight-proof screening abutting
adjacent properties;
   5.   Landscaping plan, including a listing of all trees and plant material,
and an irrigation plan;
   6.   A site lighting plan;
   7.   Rendering of front, side, and rear elevations of all buildings,
including a schedule of building materials;
   8.   Number, description and location of attached and free-standing sign(s);
   9.   Any other pertinent information/exhibits necessary for review, approval
and administration of the SPUD. (Ord. 1169, 2016)
19.40.060: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
A.   The SPUD application will be considered by the Planning Commission and
City Council at public hearings in accordance with established review
procedures for consideration of applications for rezoning. As a part of the
City review, the Planning Commission or City Council may require additional
information, including, but not limited to, the following: evidence of a market
feasibility study; traffic impact study; infrastructure improvements or
dedication of necessary easements and rights-of- way; developer meetings with
surrounding property owners; replatting; building elevations; specific plat
restrictions, covenants, height, use, setback, or coverage requirements;
standards for proposed signs, including number, size, height, method of
illumination, and location; creation of a property owners' association; posting
of a performance bond or other surety for required public improvements.
B.   The SPUD shall not reduce the Town Center District standards, including
but not limited to, quality of building materials, landscaping requirements,
sight proof screening standards, sign standards, building access, and general
long term upgrading of the district.
C.   The SPUD Master Plan shall control the development of the property, and
all building permits shall be in accord with said plan until it is otherwise
amended by the City Council. The developer shall furnish a reproducible copy of
the SPUD Master Plan Map at a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20')
for signature by the Chair of the Planning Commission and the Mayor, with
acknowledgment by the City Clerk. The SPUD Master Plan, including the signed
map and all supporting data, shall be made a part of the permanent file and
maintained by the City Clerk.
D.   Upon final approval by the City Council of the SPUD Master Plan and the
appropriate ordinance of rezoning, the site shall be designated as an amendment
to the official zoning districts map. The ordinance of rezoning shall adopt the
SPUD Master Plan, its commitments, and all supporting documentation by
reference, and they shall be enforced by the City in the administration of the
zoning ordinance.
E.   No building permit shall be issued by the City for the SPUD area until
these requirements have been met. (Ord. 1169, 2016)
19.40.070: MODIFICATION OR AMENDMENT:
An application for rezoning to change part of the area of an approved SPUD to a
different zoning district classification shall be considered an amendment of
the original SPUD requiring property owner application on the entire original
tract. Before approving a new rezoning the Planning Commission shall review the
commitments and provisions of the original SPUD as approved to determine the
impact of the new application on the viability of the original SPUD plan. (Ord.
1169, 2016)
19.40.080: REVERSION:
A.   Property Owner Request: If the property owner determines to abandon the
SPUD zoning, he shall make application for rezoning either to the original
status or to a new classification. Said application shall be heard according to
regular procedures by the Planning Commission and City Council.
B.   Continuing Review By The City: If development of the SPUD has not been
started within two (2) years of the date of approval of the SPUD rezoning, the
City administration shall request a report from the applicant/owner to
determine the status of the project. The City staff shall present a report of
findings to the Planning Commission which shall determine the appropriateness
of holding a public hearing to consider rezoning the property to its original
district status. Additional two (2) year reviews shall be held as required.
(Ord. 1169, 2016)
CHAPTER 19.41
ADDITIONAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
19.41.010: Residential Uses In A More Restrictive District
19.41.020: Open Space Requirements
19.41.030: Height Regulations
19.41.031: Private Wind Energy Conversion System (PWECS) Towers
19.41.040: Courts For Multiple-Family Dwellings
19.41.050: Swimming Pools
19.41.060: Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases
19.41.070: Change In Use
19.41.080: Property Maintenance
19.41.090: Landscaping Requirements
19.41.100: Platted Building Lines
19.41.110: Manufactured Housing
19.41.120: Storm Shelters And Safe Rooms
19.41.130: Architectural Design
19.41.010: RESIDENTIAL USES IN A MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT:
Whenever the specific requirements pertaining to one district permit
residential uses of a more restricted district, such residential uses shall be
subject to the requirements of the more restricted district. (Ord. 1169, 2016:
Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.020: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements are intended to provide exceptions or qualify and
supplement, as the case may be, the specific district requirements set forth in
chapters
19.16 through
19.38 of this title:
A.   Open Space To Serve Only One Building: No open space or lot area required
for a building or structure shall, during its life, be occupied by, or counted
as open space for, any other building or structure.
B.   Projections Into Yards: Open eaves, cornices, windowsills and belt courses
may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet (2'). Open
porches may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five
feet (5').
C.   Front Yard Depth On Narrow Streets: Where the dedicated street right-of-
way is less than fifty feet (50') wide, the depth of the front yard shall be
measured at a starting point fifty feet (50') from the centerline of the street
easement.
D.   Street Access For Dwelling Units: No dwelling unit shall be erected on a
lot which does not adjoin at least one street for at least thirty five feet
(35') and have a width of at least sixty feet (60') at the building line. A
street shall be the primary means of ingress and egress for all dwelling units.
Alleys, where they exist, shall be the secondary means of ingress and egress
for all dwelling units. Alleys, where they exist, shall be the secondary means
of ingress and egress.
E.   Sight Lines At Intersections: On any corner lot no wall, fence, sign,
structure or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at elevations between
two feet (2') and six feet (6') above the crown of the roadway shall be placed
or maintained within a sight triangle formed as follows:
   1.   Where one of the intersecting streets is classified as a collector or
arterial street, the sight triangle shall be formed by measuring from the point
of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines to a distance of
twenty five feet (25') along the front and side lot lines and connecting the
points so established. See figure 1 of this section.
   2.   Where both of the intersecting streets are classified as local streets,
the sight triangle shall be formed by measuring from the point of intersection
of the edge of the street paving to a distance of twenty five feet (25') along
the paved edge of the street parallel to the front and exterior side lot lines
and connecting the points so established. See figure 2 of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3854.png]
 
F.   Site Planning Requirements: Whenever one or more residential,
institutional, commercial, or industrial buildings are proposed to be located
in a cluster or grouping which has a different arrangement, orientation, or
other site planning variation from that of other buildings, structures or uses
in the area or on adjacent properties, the architectural design, location,
orientation, service, and parking areas of such buildings shall be planned so
as not to adversely affect the use of adjacent or other properties in the area.
(Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 1007 §10, 2005: Ord. 872 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.030: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The requirements set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the case
may be, the specific district requirements appearing in chapters
19.16 through
19.38 of this title.
A.   Chimneys, elevators, poles, spires, tanks, towers, and other projections
not used for human occupancy may extend above the height limit.
B.   Churches, schools, hospitals, sanatoriums, and other public and semipublic
buildings may exceed the height limitation of a district if the minimum depth
of rear yards and the minimum width of side yards, required in a district, are
increased one foot (1') for each two feet (2') of excess height. (Ord. 1169,
2016: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.031: PRIVATE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (PWECS) TOWERS:
All PWECS towers shall be subject to the following conditions:
A.   All structural elements shall meet or exceed a designed wind load of at
least one hundred twenty (120) miles per hour.
B.   The PWECS tower and component parts shall have a maximum height of sixty
feet (60') to be so situated on the lot that the distance from all the property
lines shall be no less than the height of the tower. All guys and anchors shall
meet the yard requirements of the district in which the tower is located. The
height shall be measured from grade to the center of the hub.
C.   Access to the system by climbing shall be limited by a fenced yard with a
locking portal, or by a fence six feet (6') tall with a locking portal distance
of three feet (3') from the base of the PWECS tower, or by limiting climbing
apparatus to no more than twelve feet (12') from the ground, or by anticlimbing
device twelve feet (12') from the ground.
D.   PWECS towers may be stationed only upon the issuance of a special use
permit. Such permit shall be issued only to the owner of the property who shall
affirmatively declare that the installation of such tower will not violate any
plat or other restrictions existing on the property.
E.   No PWECS tower, located in a residential district or upon property
developed for residential purposes, shall be erected, constructed or maintained
upon a roof of a structure.
F.   All PWECS towers shall be located to the rear of the main building.
G.   Nothing in this section shall be determined to authorize an establishment
of a commercial power generator facility not in conformance with this Code.
H.   Any PWECS tower found to cause any interference with microwave
transmissions or residential television or radio reception shall either be
modified to alleviate the problem or removed within thirty (30) days. (Ord.
1169, 2016: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.040: COURTS FOR MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
Whenever a multiple-family dwelling or group of multiple-family dwellings is
designed with an inner or outer court, the following standards shall apply:
A.   The width of an outer court shall not be less than ten feet (10') between
walls, or equal to the height of the opposing wall, whichever is greater.
B.   The width of an inner court shall not be less than two (2) times the
height of the lowest wall forming the court, but in no case less than twenty
feet (20').
C.   An open, unobstructed passageway shall be provided at the grade of each
inner court. Such passageway shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width,
shall have a clearance of not less than twelve feet (12') in height, and shall
provide a straight and continuous passage from the inner court to a yard or
open space having a direct connection with a street.
D.   No accessory maintenance building or structure shall be located in an
outer or inner court. (Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.050: SWIMMING POOLS:
Private inground and aboveground swimming pools may be constructed as an
accessory use, but shall be completely enclosed by a permanent wall or fence of
not less than six feet (6') in height and shall meet the requirements of the
City. A swimming pool shall not be constructed in front of the front building
line, and no portion of the pool, excluding equipment, walkway or other
facilities related thereto, shall be located closer than:
A.   Six feet (6') to utility easement;
B.   Ten feet (10') to the side or rear lot line. Swimming pools shall not be
included in back yard coverage calculations. (Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.41.060: STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES:
The use of land or buildings for the commercial wholesale or retail storage of
liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the
City and the regulations of the laws of the State regulating liquefied
petroleum gas. (Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.070: CHANGE IN USE:
A.   All uses shall be located on a site or within a building which has
sufficient utilities and services and is of appropriate space and design to
satisfactorily accommodate each use of land or building, in terms of safety,
function, aesthetic quality, and harmony with other uses in the area. Whenever
a request to change the use of the land or a building does not meet these
conditions, but all other requirements are met, the City shall refer such case
to the Planning Commission for their review and recommendations. The
recommendations shall be submitted to the City Council, which shall stipulate
the requirements, to be followed in order to comply with the intent of this
title. The requirements shall be made a part of the conditions for issuance of
the permit authorizing construction and occupancy.
B.   Whatever buildings designed for dwelling purposes are located in
commercial districts, no commercial use shall be permitted on the lot on which
the dwelling is located until such dwelling has met the Zoning and Building
Code requirements of the City. (Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.080: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
All property shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and sightly manner at
all times. Weeds are to be cut and debris and building materials are not to be
stored or piled on the premises except during building construction. All lands,
including City rights-of-way not used by buildings, structures, or parking,
shall be landscaped and maintained in good condition. However, the City may
properly expend public funds to landscape and maintain City rights-of-way for
the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the City.
(Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.090: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
All new construction in the City shall include landscaping as an integral part
of the design to provide a quality of life which complements the natural and
physical surroundings and environment of the City. All multiple-family,
commercial, industrial, and public uses shall be landscaped with trees,
ornamental shrubs, and green areas according to the following standards:
A.   Required Area: The public right-of-way between the property line and the
curb and not less than five percent (5%) of the total land area of the lot
shall be landscaped. At least seventy five percent (75%) of the landscaped lot
area shall be in the front or side yards and visible from a public street
providing access to the property. Inner courts not visible from a public street
shall not be calculated for the purposes of meeting this requirement.
B.   Landscaped Materials And Plan:
   1.   An application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a detailed
landscaping plan which shall contain the following:
      a.   The location and types of all plants;
      b.   A live tree, having a minimum planted height five feet (5') for
every five hundred (500) square feet of area to be landscaped, but not
including the street right-of-way;
      c.   Artificial grass or any form of synthetic plant is prohibited;
      d.   Rock gardens or sculpture may be approved, but the use of gravel or
chat as ground cover shall not be considered as meeting the requirements of
this section;
      e.   The plan shall respect sight triangles at intersections and all
other elements relating to traffic control.
   2.   The plan shall be a part of the building permit review process.
   3.   A certificate of occupancy for a structure shall not be issued until
the landscaping has been installed in accordance with the plan; provided,
however, that if a structure and all its site improvements are complete except
for the landscaping requirements and the season of the year will not permit
planting, temporary occupancy may be permitted until a date certain in the
growing season. In this case, a future inspection date shall be set by the City
to determine if the landscaping has been installed.
   4.   All landscaping shall be maintained in a live and healthy condition.
Failure to install or maintain landscaping as required and approved shall
constitute a violation of this title. (Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.100: PLATTED BUILDING LINES:
Regardless of the area and yard requirements of any zoning district, the
location of any building on a site shall be subject to the platted setback
lines if the lines are greater than setbacks required by this title. All
building plans submitted or approval and the issuance of a building permit
shall show the setback lines which are a part of a recorded subdivision plat of
the property. The City shall enforce these setback lines in its review and
approval of the building plans. (Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.110: MANUFACTURED HOUSING:
The intent of this section is to provide for an alternative housing source in
the R-1 District by permitting the use of certain manufactured homes. These
homes are subject to the following requirements to assure acceptable similarity
in exterior appearance between such manufactured homes and dwelling units that
have been or may be constructed as site built homes under these and other
requirements on adjoining lots within the district.
A.   Standards And Permitted Placement Of Manufactured Housing: The
establishment, location, and use of manufactured homes shall be permitted in
the R-1 District subject to the requirements and limitations applying generally
to such residential use. Such homes shall:
   1.   Meet the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards;
   2.   Meet all requirements applicable to single-family dwellings, including
all necessary improvements, location, building, and occupancy permits and other
certifications required by the City building codes;
   3.   Have a living area of not less than ninety percent (90%) of the average
square footage of the conventional homes in the district or be located within
three hundred feet (300') from residences, whichever is less;
   4.   Be attached and anchored to a permanent foundation in conformance with
the regulations set forth in the Foundation Code and with manufacturer's
installation specifications for both life and shear loads;
   5.   Be covered with an exterior material compatible with existing homes in
the neighborhood;
   6.   Be constructed so that when finished, it shall conform to surrounding
homes and appear to have been site built;
   7.   Have a roof composed of a material customarily used on site built
dwelling units, such as fiberglass, asphalt, or tile;
   8.   Be of the type that has two (2) components placed side by side to form
one unit, commonly referred to as a "doublewide";
   9.   Have the wheels, axles, springs, and towing tongues removed;
   10.   Not violate existing plat restrictions and other restrictive
covenants.
B.   Structural Additions And/Or Alterations: Any structural alteration or
modification of a manufactured home, after it is placed on the site, must be
approved by the City. All structural additions shall comply with City building
codes.
C.   Application And Approval: All applications for placement of a manufactured
home in an R-1 District must be submitted in writing to the City for review and
approval. The application shall include documentation substantiating that the
standards set forth in subsection A of this section, have been met.
D.   Permits; Approval, Disapproval: After approval of the application, the
City shall issue all necessary permits. In the case of an addition being added
to a manufactured home, the City shall issue such permit if it determines that
said addition will be in compliance with this section and all other applicable
City building codes. If the City disapproves an application, the applicant may
either resubmit the application for review and approval or appeal the ruling of
the City as provided for below.
E.   Utilities: All manufactured homes shall have an approved water supply,
sewage disposal system, and other utility connections including, but not
limited to, gas and electric.
F.   Removal From Property: A home placed upon property in violation of this
section shall be subject to removal from such property. If action is required
to ensure compliance, the expenses incurred may be reduced to a lien against
the property.
G.   Removal Method: The City may institute a suit in an appropriate court for
injunctive relief to cause such violation to be prevented, abated, or removed.
Removal for violation is subject to the notice and hearing requirements as set
forth below.
H.   Notice, Hearing, And Appeal: Any action taken by the City may be appealed
within ten (10) days of the ruling by an applicant. The appeal shall be
presented in writing to the City Clerk and shall include the name and residence
address of all interested parties. The City Clerk shall place the appeal on the
agenda of the Board of Adjustment/Appeal at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. The City Clerk will certify and mail notices to all interested parties
to the appeal no later than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The appeals
procedure is not intended to preclude any aggrieved party of the rights or
remedies which may be available at law or equity.
I.   Building Permit Required: A building permit is required. (Ord. 1169, 2016:
Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.41.120: STORM SHELTERS AND SAFE ROOMS:
A.   Inground and aboveground storm shelters shall be permitted in side and
rear yards subject to setback requirements.
B.   Side yard storm shelters shall not be visible from the street.
C.   No portion of the storm shelter shall be located closer than ten feet
(10') to a utility easement or right-of-way nor closer than six feet (6') to
the side or rear lot line.
D.   Storm shelters shall not be included in back yard coverage calculations.
E.   Safe rooms shall be permitted anywhere within the building.
F.   A building permit is required for construction of any type storm shelter
or safe room and construction must comply with applicable national, State or
Municipal laws, regulations and ordinances.
G.   A plot plan is required. (Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 894 §1,
2000)
19.41.130: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
A.   Exposed Exterior Metal Finish: Buildings, including accessory buildings,
with walls constructed with exposed exterior metal finish, shall not be
permitted in the R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and C-5 Districts or on nonresidential
uses, i.e., including, but not limited to, schools and churches in residential
zoning districts. This section shall not prohibit the use of metal for roofing
material, mechanical enclosures, fascias, signs, awnings and similar
appurtenances; except, corrugated metal shall not be permitted.
B.   Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall have a facade of brick, rock,
decorative concrete block, wood (treated by paint or wood sealing product),
stucco, ferrous cement or exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), or a
material other than exposed metal walls or unfinished or untreated concrete
block or concrete panels.
C.   Exception: For properties fronting the Northwest Expressway or the 39th
Street Expressway, there shall be an exception to the limitations established
in subsections A and B of this section as follows. Metal (including corrugated
metal) may be used for exterior walls or roofing if approved by the building
inspector. Approval may only be granted where the use of metal is a part of an
architectural feature(s) which is prominent and which aids in the
identification of the business (e.g., where consistent with the business'
branding concept). Economic factors, such as reduced construction costs, shall
not be considered in making the decision. Use of metal for walls shall be
limited to no more than twenty percent (20%) of the total for the structure's
walls, and in no cases may a metal wall constitute the entire wall for one side
of the structure. In the event the building inspector denies a request made
under this subsection, the applicant may appeal that denial to the Planning
Commission. The commission may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the
building inspector. (Ord. 1169, 2016: Ord. 1156, 2015)
CHAPTER 19.42
CC (COMMUNITY CONSERVATION) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.42.010: Purpose
19.42.020: General Provisions
19.42.030: Designation Procedure
19.42.040: Designation Criteria
19.42.050: Designation Ordinance
19.42.010: PURPOSE:
The CC district is intended to encourage the conservation and enhancement of
the environment and character of the city as a unique community within the
greater Oklahoma City metropolitan area. The purposes of the district are:
A.   To identify physical, social, and economic resources within the city that
are worthy of conservation, enhancement, or redevelopment that will be
compatible with the character of the existing community;
B.   To maintain neighborhood character and integrity by focusing special
attention on the maintenance of the physical environment, the enhancement of
physical, social, and economic resources, and the accommodation of desirable
change;
C.   To prevent economic obsolescence and to promote reinvestment by fostering
stable property values, by promoting a high level of economic activity, and by
maintaining or improving essential urban services;
D.   To promote the use of urban lands, including the encouragement of
compatible development on vacant, passed over, or economically obsolete
parcels;
E.   To encourage and to support rehabilitation of the physical environment
including community infrastructure;
F.   To foster the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth, development, and
redevelopment of the city. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.42.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The district requirements shall be in addition to the provisions of the
underlying zoning district applicable to the subject parcel.
A.   This designation may be placed on any parcel of land in any zoning
district within the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B.   Areas, tracts, or sites within the district shall be identified on the
city zoning map and in other official writings by the suffix "CC".
C.   When more than one requirement is applicable to a district, the
requirements created under this chapter shall apply.
D.   An individual zoning district change within the CC district shall not
alter the CC zoning classification or requirements.
E.   Amendments to the district boundaries or requirements shall only be
permitted through amendment of the designation ordinance as described in this
chapter. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.42.030: DESIGNATION PROCEDURE:
A.   The city may designate areas, tracts or sites for inclusion within the
district in the same manner prescribed for the designation of other zoning
districts, subject to compliance with this chapter.
B.   The initiation of an application for an ordinance of designation may be
made by the planning commission, by council, or site to be designated.
C.   The application will first be reviewed by the planning commission, which
may solicit and present expert testimony or documentation concerning the
importance and effects of the ordinance provisions within the proposed
district.
D.   As part of every amendment of a designation ordinance, the planning
commission shall state, in writing, the attributes of the area designated as
they relate to and comply with the review criteria for district designation
provided for in this chapter. In addition, the planning commission shall state,
in writing, whether or not, in its review, a proposed designation ordinance is
in compliance with the city's comprehensive plan and any other prior actions or
programs of the city. The city shall report to the planning commission about
the existence of all plans, programs, or authorizations which might apply to
the property proposed for designation and shall offer a professional opinion
concerning the compliance of the proposed designation.
E.   Based on its findings, the planning commission may prepare an ordinance of
CC designation for an area, schedule public hearings, and give notice to all
owners of affected property in accordance with the notice requirements
contained in this chapter. The notice shall include a copy of the proposed
designation ordinance, a letter outlining the basis for the designation, and
any obligations and restrictions which may result from such designation.
F.   The planning commission shall forward the designation ordinance and its
recommendations to the city council for its consideration at public hearings.
(Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.42.040: DESIGNATION CRITERIA:
When determining a district's potential for CC designation, the planning
commission and city council shall ensure that the following minimum criteria
are satisfied:
A.   The need for coordinated action or treatment because of physical, social,
or economic relationships, the presence of unifying elements and cohesiveness
within the district, similar land uses, densities, and intensities, and any
other related problems, issues, or factors;
B.   Evidence of structural deterioration, encroachment of incompatible land
uses, existence of disruptive elements or other factors contributing to the
decline of the area;
C.   The district's revitalization potential;
D.   District property owners', residents', or tenants' desire and support of
community conservation efforts;
E.   District designation conforms to city plans and policies;
F.   Evidence that CC designation would be an appropriate and effective method
for the area and the land surrounding it. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.42.050: DESIGNATION ORDINANCE:
A designation ordinance prepared by the planning commission shall include the
following:
A.   Identification of the district boundaries;
B.   Specific standards and controls to regulate the district. These may
include the following:
   1.   The permitted uses of land,
   2.   Density and/or intensity of land use, such as minimum lot size, maximum
floor area, floor area ratios, number of dwelling units per acre, minimum lot
area per dwelling unit, and other related provisions,
   3.   Area and bulk restrictions, including setbacks, maximum lot coverage,
height controls, open space requirements and other related provisions,
   4.   Standards for accessory uses, right of way and yard utilization such as
landscaping types and amounts, fencing, carports, access requirements, sidewalk
and pedestrian facilities, home occupations, animal regulations, signs, and
other related provisions,
   5.   Parking regulations, such as number of required spaces per type of use,
the location and design of parking areas, restrictions concerning recreational
vehicles, trailers, boats, large trucks, and other related provisions;
C.   Drainage and utility requirements to best serve both the principal and
adjacent properties, to protect all such properties from any adjacent
properties, and to protect all such properties from any adverse impacts of a
development;
D.   Regulation of the conversion of existing structures, including denial of
any conversion, provisions governing the use of a converted structure, minimum
structural standards, minimum floor area standards, minimum volume, parking or
other related provisions including conformance with all other requirements of
this chapter;
E.   Special procedures and techniques for enforcement of the city's building,
housing and maintenance codes;
F.   Procedures, techniques, and devices for implementation and enforcement of
this chapter, including the delegation of certain responsibilities and
authorities to duly constituted commissions, boards, committees, associations,
or officials; and
G.   Notification methods, including the requirement that restrictive covenants
be prepared, approved by the city council, and filed of record. (Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
CHAPTER 19.43
TC-CC (TOWN CENTER REVITALIZATION) DISTRICT
SECTION:
19.43.010: General Description
19.43.020: Purposes
19.43.030: Procedures
19.43.040: Permitted Uses
19.43.050: Uses Permitted On Review
19.43.060: Conversion Of Residential Structures Prohibited
19.43.070: Simplified Planned Unit Development (SPUD) And Planned Unit
Development (PUD) Requirements
19.43.080: Development Regulations
19.43.090: Site Landscaping Requirements
19.43.100: Design And Construction Standards
19.43.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This is an overlay zoning district authorized under provisions in
chapter 19.42, "CC (Community Conservation) District", of this title. This
district is intended to provide for a wide variety of office, retail and
residential uses for the purpose of creating a central community focal point
for the City of Warr Acres. The regulations included in this chapter are
intended to provide for an orderly transition and upgrade of properties into a
core activity area that offers shopping, business and personal services, and
opportunities for innovative housing, all in freestanding or mixed use
configurations. As properties are developed into new uses, improvements
provided shall include use of quality building materials, sidewalks for
pedestrian circulation, and significant landscaping. In addition, all proposed
developments must address protection of abutting residential neighborhoods.
This chapter provides the land use, development, and property maintenance
standards necessary to encourage private investment and achieve quality
redevelopment of the area. To accomplish this, all new applications for
rezoning within the boundaries of the TC-CC District are required to be
submitted as SPUD, Simplified Planned Unit Development District; provided that
PUD, Planned Unit Development District may be considered only for tracts of
five (5) net acres or more and intended for development in phases. (Ord. 1173,
2017)
19.43.020: PURPOSES:
The purposes of the Town Center District are to:
A.   Permit and encourage innovative land development while maintaining
appropriate limitation on the character and intensity of development and
assuring compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties;
B.   Permit greater flexibility within the development to best utilize the
unique physical features of the particular site;
C.   Encourage creative land use and site designs;
D.   Provide and preserve meaningful open space;
E.   Achieve a continuity of function and design within the development. (Ord.
1173, 2017)
19.43.030: PROCEDURES:
This is an overlay zoning district. All properties located within the
boundaries of this zoning district, as identified on the official zoning
districts map of the City of Warr Acres, shall be labeled by their standard
zoning district classification, known as the "underlying zoning", plus a
suffix: TC-CC, to identify them as being within the "overlay district" and
subject to the additional standards and regulations of this chapter. Any
"rezoning request" for a change in the underlying zoning district
classification of a property shall not include any provision to remove it from
the overlay district or its requirements. Removal of a property from the TC-CC
Overlay District classification shall require a separate and specific
"rezoning" action, including public hearing and adoption of an ordinance of
redistricting by City Council after hearings and recommendation by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the procedures established in this Code. (Ord.
1173, 2017)
19.43.040: PERMITTED USES:
A.   Unless authorized, modified or prohibited in this chapter, the underlying
zoning classification of a property continues to define the use and development
regulations applicable to it. Therefore, the zoning district classification of
a property in place at the time of adoption hereof determines current permitted
uses until either the area is rezoned under the provisions of this chapter,
existing nonresidential improvements are proposed to be replaced or expanded,
or vacant land is sought to be developed.
B.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the continued occupancy,
remodeling, renovation, expansion, or replacement in kind of an existing
single-family or multiple-family residence, including addition of an accessory
building or garage; provided there is no increase in the number of dwelling
units, and all such improvements are subject to the regulations of the
underlying zoning district. (Ord. 1173, 2017)
19.43.050: USES PERMITTED ON REVIEW:
A.   Unless authorized, modified or prohibited in this chapter or this
subsection, the underlying zoning district classification of a property
continues to determine the uses permitted on review regulations applicable to
it.
B.   In addition to the "uses permitted on review" listed in each of the
underlying zoning district regulations, all proposals for any type of open
display; outdoor recreation and assembly; or outdoor sales activity, including,
but not limited to, outdoor eating, drinking or dancing, musical entertainment
associated with a business, open air markets or seasonal sales, are subject to
specific City regulations: provided that special events sponsored or authorized
by the City of Warr Acres may be permitted by City Council. (Ord. 1173, 2017)
19.43.060: CONVERSION OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES PROHIBITED:
No existing residential structure within the TC-CC District shall be converted
to a non-residential use. All such structures shall be removed and replaced by
a structure or structures that conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1173, 2017)
19.43.070: SIMPLIFIED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (SPUD) AND PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Except as provided in this chapter, a simplified planned unit development
(SPUD) or planned unit development (PUD) application shall be required for
rezoning of any property, or group of properties within this district that have
been assembled for a development proposal.
B.   Only properties with frontage on, or having direct access to, Northwest
50th Street or MacArthur Boulevard are eligible to submit a SPUD or PUD
application for any commercial, office, or service uses. PUD applications may
only be made for properties with five (5) net acres or more and intended for
development in phases.
C.   Eligibility to submit a SPUD or PUD application shall further be limited
to only those applications where the property or group of properties have a
combined minimum frontage of one hundred twenty feet (120') on either Northwest
50th Street or MacArthur Boulevard. Properties failing to meet this requirement
may request that the one hundred twenty foot (120') frontage requirement be
waived. A waiver may only be obtained where the Planning Commission and City
Council specifically find that the waiver is not only consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan but also that the development proposed would be consistent
with the zoning of the properties surrounding the subject property (underlying
zoning and/or SPUD/PUD status).
D.   SPUD and PUD applications shall only be granted if it is found by majority
vote of both the Planning Commission and the City Council that application, if
granted, would be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
E.   Regardless of property size, a SPUD or PUD shall also be required for
property already zoned C-3 or C-4 with a proposal for any type of open display,
recreation, or outdoor sales activity that is authorized as a "permitted use"
or a "use permitted on review" in the Town Center Overlay District. (Ord. 1173,
2017)
19.43.080: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
The following regulations are in addition to and override any conflicting
regulations or standards contained in an underlying zoning district for
properties whose use at the time of inclusion in the overlay zoning district is
commercial (either through conformance with underlying zoning or as legally
nonconforming) and for any property zoned commercial which will be used as
commercial as part of or at the conclusion of development:
A.   Building Setbacks: Subject to regulations of the underlying zoning
district, unless the property will be zoned for a SPUD or PUD; provided that
there shall be no reduction in permitted rear or side yard setbacks where the
site abuts property in a residential zoned district.
B.   Building Height: Subject to regulations of the underlying zoning district
unless the property has been zoned for a SPUD or PUD that contains approved
modifications.
C.   Lot Coverage: Subject to regulations of the underlying zoning district
unless the property has been zoned for a SPUD or PUD that contains approved
modifications. (Ord. 1173, 2017)
19.43.090: SITE LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Purpose:
   1.   It is the purpose of this subsection that landscaping shall be included
as an integral part of the built environment to provide a quality of life and
amenities in keeping with the natural physical surroundings of the City and the
Town Center District.
   2.   Utilization of plant materials, berms, fences and walls is encouraged
where feasible in order to:
      a.   Preserve the existing native trees and other physical site values
where possible;
      b.   Screen and buffer undesirable views;
      c.   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas;
      d.   Soften the edge between a parking area and the building or adjacent
public right-of-way;
      e.   Define walkways, traffic circulation, special use areas and building
entries;
      f.   Complement the architectural form of a building;
      g.   Mitigate impacts of lighting or other negative influences;
      h.   Provide a pleasant driving experience;
      i.   Provide shade for the landscape, building and parking area;
      j.   Provide for energy conservation;
      k.   Control wind and water erosion;
      l.   Mitigate the impacts of traffic noise, dust and pollutants;
      m.   Utilize small trees species for planting under utility lines,
avoiding future conflict with utility lines.
B.   Landscaping Standards:
   1.   Minimum Requirements: All development in this zoning district shall be
landscaped per the minimum requirements listed below. A detailed landscaping
plan for both the lot area and the area within the public right-of-way between
the property line and curb shall be submitted with the building permit
application or SPUD-PUD application, whichever occurs first. The landscaping
plan shall meet the following requirements:
      a.   Not less than five percent (5%) of the total lot area shall be
landscaped with seventy five percent (75%) visible from the street and one tree
of 2.5 inch caliper required per five hundred (500) square feet of required
landscaping.
      b.   Where the entire front yard area of an existing commercial use has
been hard surfaced as of the date of adoption of this chapter, permanent
planter boxes or urns shall be provided along each building frontage abutting a
street as follows: One (1) 9-square foot planter box or decorative container
for each twenty five feet (25') of frontage. These improvements shall be
required as a part of any remodeling, construction, or paving permit.
   2.   Right-Of-Way Improvements Required:
      a.   Right-of-way area between the property line and curb shall include a
sidewalk on all street frontages and be landscaped, in accordance with a plan
submitted and approved as a part of the building permit process.
      b.   A City-approved Town Center Medallion shall be installed in each
driveway approach at the time of construction.
      c.   An irrigation system for landscaping in the right-of-way area is
required and shall be installed and approved prior to issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy.
      d.   Trees, plants, shrubs and ground cover shall be installed to meet or
exceed the requirements of this Code including an approved irrigation system.
   3.   Materials:
      a.   All planting beds and tree planting locations shall include edging
and mulch.
      b.   Gravel, artificial grass or any form of synthetic material shall not
be used.
   4.   Sight Triangles: All sight triangles at driveways and intersections as
described in section
19.41.020, "Open Space Requirements", of this title and if landscaped, shall
use small species plant material with a mature height less than twenty four
inches (24").
   5.   Utility Easements: Plantings under utility lines shall be small tree
species avoiding future conflict with the utility lines. Any plant material
inside public utility easements cannot be counted towards the landscaping
requirements.
   6.   Landscaping Plans: Landscaping plans shall include treatment of all
unpaved right-of-way areas between the property line and the paved street.
   7.   Landscaping Maintenance: All required landscaping shall be maintained
in a live and healthy condition. It shall be the continuing duty of the
property owner, its successors, or anyone having beneficial use of the
property, to maintain landscaping in a live and healthy condition and, if
necessary, to replace any dead, diseased or damaged plants as soon as natural
conditions allow. (Ord. 1173, 2017)
19.43.100: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A.   Mixed Residential/Commercial Structures Permitted: Regardless of existing
zoning a SPUD or PUD rezoning is required to permit a mixed use development
that includes residential and nonresidential uses that may be located in the
same or separate structures on a property, provided details of said uses are
specifically identified in the approved SPUD or PUD design statement.
B.   Residential Unit Access: Primary access to all residential units in a
single use or mixed use project shall be from an entry that either faces a
street or is located on an interior court that is open to and visible from the
street. Rear yard access to residential units shall only be permitted as a
secondary access point.
C.   Construction Material Standards: In addition to the construction and
material standards contained in this Code the following standards shall apply
in the TC-CC District:
   1.   Facades And Roof Structures:
      a.   Principal facade materials shall be brick, concrete, stone,
cementicious material, or a combination thereof. Metal, wood, plastic, and
ceramic materials may be used for canopies, interior (not visible externally)
structural elements, or as decorative elements only.
      b.   Decorative fabric canopies on commercial properties may be used
seasonally.
      c.   Based on the overall design concept, standing seam metal roofs may
be permitted during the site plan review process at the time of rezoning.
   2.   Protection Of Abutting Neighborhoods:
      a.   Sight Proof Screening: Whether required by underlying district
regulations or installed voluntarily, all sight proof screening along property
lines in the TC-CC District shall be constructed of brick, stone, or precast
panels finished on both sides. Wood products shall not be permitted as a
screening material in these areas.
      b.   Light Intrusion Prohibited: Security lighting at the rear or side of
commercial sites that abut neighborhoods shall not exceed the height of the
building or twelve feet (12'), whichever is less, and light shall be projected
downward and away from the residential property with necessary shading added to
the fixture half abutting the residential area.
      c.   Noise Generating Activity: No outside dining, drinking,
entertainment, assembly, repair, or other noise generating activity shall be
permitted within fifty feet (50') of a residential zoned area, and retroactive
sound mitigation measures may be required for continued City approval of any
permitted use that creates a disturbance.
      d.   Access: All properties abutting either MacArthur or NW 50th Street
shall have principal access from those streets. Corner lots abutting streets
serving residential neighborhoods may be permitted a secondary access on said
street provided it is not located within one hundred feet (100') of a
residential property or an alternative has been approved as part of a PUD or
SPUD.
D.   Signs:
   1.   Signs shall be subject to the regulations of the underlying zoning
district, provided that sign standards for the C-3 Zoning District shall apply
to all properties zoned C-3, C-4, PUD and SPUD.
E.   Sidewalks Required:
   1.   Except as provided below all City permits for building construction or
remodeling, parking lot construction or resurfacing, and site improvements such
as installation or reservation of open space adjacent to a building project,
shall include the requirement for installation of sidewalks meeting City
standards along all major and side streets in the TC-CC District.
   2.   Exceptions include:
      a.   Remodeling of an existing single-family or two-family residence,
including permitted construction of a garage or accessory building, but not an
increase in the number of dwelling units;
      b.   Remodeling of existing interior space in a commercial or
nonresidential building that requires a building permit; but not a change in
use or an expansion of the square footage of the structure.
F.   Conversion Of Residential Structures Prohibited:
   1.   No residential structure in this district shall be converted to an
increased number of dwelling units or to a nonresidential activity regardless
of the underlying zoning district classification of the property.
   2.   Unless specifically exempted in a SPUD or PUD design statement that has
been approved by the City Council in its ordinance approving rezoning, all
existing residential structures in an approved SPUD or PUD or an approved
project area shall be removed before occupancy permits for the new use or uses
are issued.
G.   Mixed Residential/Nonresidential Uses Permitted: A SPUD or PUD rezoning
shall be required to permit a mixed use development that includes residential
and nonresidential uses, provided said uses are specifically identified in the
approved design statement. (Ord. 1173, 2017)
CHAPTER 19.44
PARKING, LOADING AND ACCESS
SECTION:
19.44.010: Intent
19.44.020: Administration And Enforcement
19.44.030: Construction Standards
19.44.040: Off Street Parking Requirements
19.44.041: Parking Lot Requirements In Or Adjacent To R-1 And R-2 Districts And
Exceptions
19.44.042: Handicapped Parking Requirements
19.44.043: Specific Parking Requirements And Exceptions
19.44.044: Additional Requirements
19.44.050: Off Street Loading/Unloading Spaces For Industrial, Commercial, And
Institutional Buildings
19.44.060: Access
19.44.070: Design Standards
19.44.010: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to require proper access and adequate off street
parking and loading facilities for each use of land within the city, based on
the demand created by each use.
A.   Off Street Parking And Loading Required: Permanent off street parking and
loading areas in the amount specified in this chapter for each use shall be
provided at any time a building is constructed, or at the time a main building
is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guestrooms,
seats, or floor area; or before conversion from one type of use to another.
B.   Use Of Public Right Of Way: No portion of any required off street parking
space shall occupy or use any street, right of way, alley, or other public
property. Parking spaces which use any street or public right of way as a
direct means of access without the intermediate use of service aisles and
entrances of at least the minimum standards specified in this chapter shall be
prohibited. A public alley shall be the only public right of way area permitted
for maneuvering space to reach a required parking stall.
C.   Minimum Standards And Property Owner Responsibility: The standards
contained in this chapter represent the minimum requirements. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to certify, at the time he applies for a
building permit, that his plan is adequate to provide sufficient spaces and
facilities necessary to assure that no activity will take place on public
streets or property. Any use developed after the date of adoption of these
requirements which fails to provide for off street parking, loading, and access
needs shall be in violation of this title. Upon determination by the city that
a property owner has not provided adequate parking or loading space to serve
his operation, the property owner shall be required to either develop
additional parking or loading space or reduce the size of the operation to fit
the space available.
D.   Ownership Or Control: The land on which the off street parking or loading
facility is located shall be owned or controlled by the same entity which owns
or controls the land on which the principal use is located. Such ownership or
control shall be evidenced by a legal instrument duly recorded. (Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.44.020: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A.   New Construction Or Remodeling In All Zoning Districts:
   1.   A building permit is required,
   2.   No building permit shall be approved until a plan has been reviewed and
approved by the city as a part of the building and site plan review process,
   3.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all off street
parking and/or loading facilities have been constructed in accordance with the
approved building permit.
B.   Plan And Information Required: The applicant for a building permit for new
construction, expansion or remodeling shall submit a plan showing the number,
location, and size of parking spaces. The applicant shall submit information
regarding the projected number of employees, seating capacities, gross floor
area, gross leasable area, number of dwelling units, and any other appropriate
data necessary to verify compliance with these requirements.
C.   Plans For Surfacing Of Parking Areas: Plans for surfacing of all off
street parking areas, aisles, and access driveways, including detailed drainage
plans, shall be reviewed and approved by the city for compliance with city
specifications.
D.   Permits: Permits for driveways, aprons or approaches in all zoning
districts are required, and improvements must meet the construction standards
set forth in title 12 of this code.
E.   Interpretation And Appeal: If questions of interpretation or application
of these requirements to particular uses or structures arise, the city shall,
based on findings of fact, make a determination of the off street parking,
loading or access requirements. Any aggrieved property owner may appeal such
determination to the board of adjustment as a part of the building permit
application review process.
F.   Enforcement: The city shall determine which department shall be
responsible for parking or vehicle violations and shall issue policy directives
for enforcement in accordance with the requirements set forth in
chapter 2.24 of this code. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.44.030: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
The construction standards for new and replacement parking areas, driveways,
aisles and approaches are set forth in title 12 of this code. (Ord. 968 §1,
2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.44.040: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Remote Parking: If the off street parking space required by this chapter
cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is
located, such space may be provided on a separate lot.
B.   Joint Parking Facilities: The required parking space for any number of
separate uses may be combined in a joint parking facility under the following
conditions:
   1.   Multiple Ownerships Or Structures: Where there are multiple ownerships
or structures, each owner shall provide evidence of a permanent legal
instrument which has been filed of record with the county clerk and which
guarantees permanent right to use of the parking facility.
   2.   Churches: One-half (1/2) of the required parking space for churches may
be included in the total of required parking spaces for other uses that do not
operate after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. or on Sundays, provided that the nearest
property line of the parking area is located within two hundred feet (200') of
the church property line.
   3.   Specific Uses: The required parking spaces, for the uses specifically
listed below, shall be permitted to be reduced by one-half (1/2), provided they
are part of a shopping or office complex of one or more buildings which have a
total of forty eight thousand (48,000) square feet or more of gross floor area
and which share joint access and parking facilities as described in subsection
B1 of this section and provided further that the gross floor area of all of
these uses listed below in the building or complex shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the total gross floor area of the building or complex. Any
gross floor area in excess of twenty percent (20%) shall require parking spaces
to be provided, according to the regular standards contained in this chapter.
The uses subject to this provision are:
      a.   Eating establishments: Sit down, alcohol permitted or not permitted;
      b.   Drinking establishments: Sit down, alcohol permitted;
      c.   Theaters or auditoriums.
   4.   Shared Parking; Cumulative Effect: Where more than one facility shows
evidence of joint use agreements for common access and a cross parking
arrangement resulting in reduced street access points, parking requirements
will be based on the cumulative gross floor area of all structures.
C.   Striping: Off street parking areas shall be designed to provide systematic
and orderly circulation, traffic separation devices, and parking spaces in
accordance with sound traffic engineering practices.
   1.   All off street parking spaces and the means of ingress and egress shall
be laid out on the parking surface with paint or plastic striping which
provides a permanent delineation between spaces, aisles and surrounding
structures and land.
   2.   No striping shall be required on lots having only single-family or
residential structures.
D.   Separation From Public Right Of Way: All off street parking areas, aisles,
and access driveways that adjoin public street rights of way shall be designed
so that vehicles do not overhang public rights of way or adjacent property.
E.   Lighting:
   1.   All outdoor parking lots which serve commercial and institutional uses
shall be illuminated during the evening hours of operation. Evening hours shall
be deemed to begin one-half (1/2) hour after sunset.
   2.   All lighting equipment used in illumination of off street parking areas
shall not create a nuisance or hazard for streets or adjoining properties.
F.   Clearance:
   1.   There shall be a minimum vertical clearance, free of all obstructions
to a height of ten feet (10'), for all portions of any off street parking
space, except when off street parking spaces are provided in a parking
structure, a residential garage, or carport. No obstruction shall project into
this minimum clearance.
   2.   There shall be no obstruction within or near the bounds of any required
off street parking space which would interfere with the normal availability and
use thereof.
G.   Landscaping: All property used solely for off street parking lots shall
comply with the landscaping requirements set forth in
chapter 19.40 of this title.
H.   Curb, Guttering And Aprons: All property fronting on city streets shall
have curb, guttering and aprons which comply with the construction standards
set forth in title 12 of this code; provided, that this regulation shall not be
applied to existing single- and two-family dwellings and to new single- and
two-family dwellings in subdivisions where:
   1.   No more than two (2) new lots are created;
   2.   Current access to the property is provided by an existing street which
does not meet the curb and gutter standards of the city.
I.   Parking Lot Maintenance: Parking lots in commercial districts shall be
maintained free of potholes and areas of crumbling, broken pavement, or exposed
base material. When more than ten percent (10%) of the total parking lot
pavement area is in such condition, the property owner shall, in accordance
with the construction standards set forth in title 12 of this code, repair the
affected area at his expense within sixty (60) days following notification by
the city. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.44.041: PARKING LOT REQUIREMENTS IN OR ADJACENT TO R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS AND
EXCEPTIONS:
A.   Uses: Parking lots may be permitted for uses allowed in such districts
with the approval of the planning commission.
B.   Setback: No setback from property lines shall be required; provided,
however, that on any corner lot, no parking shall be permitted, and no wall,
fence, sign, structure or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at
elevations between two (2) and six feet (6') above the crown of the roadway
shall be placed or maintained within a sight triangle formed by measuring from
the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines to a
distance of twenty five feet (25') along the front and side lot lines, then
connecting the two (2) points so established. See figure 1 of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3856.png]
 
 
C.   Signs: No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used
to guide traffic and to state the terms and conditions of the use of the lot.
Only lighting of signs shall be permitted.
D.   Exception: Signal devices and utility poles may be placed within the sight
triangle. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.44.042: HANDICAPPED PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
As a part of the minimum parking space requirements established in the
Americans with disabilities act and this chapter, special parking spaces shall
be designated for sole use by the handicapped, for all uses other than one-
through four-family residential, in accordance with the following standards:
A.   If less than twenty (20) regular spaces are required, then one such space
shall be designated as handicapped parking.
B.   If twenty (20) or more spaces are required, then not less than two percent
(2%) of all parking spaces, with a minimum of two (2), shall be designated as
handicapped parking.
C.   A handicapped parking space shall be not less than thirteen feet (13') in
width. That equates to a stall width of nine feet (9') and four foot (4') wide
pedestrian aisle on one side of the space.
D.   Where the pedestrian aisle of the space is provided at curbside, a ramp to
the sidewalk level shall be constructed at the end of the aisle. In any event,
a ramp from the parking area to each entrance sidewalk shall be required.
E.   All handicapped parking spaces shall be permanently marked or striped with
paint or other device. In addition, each space shall be identified by a pole
mounted sign, or by a wall sign, at the option of the developer, if the space
is adjacent to a building. The center of the sign shall be not lower than four
feet (4') or more than six feet (6') above the parking surface.
F.   Handicapped parking spaces shall be placed as near as possible to building
entrances or centrally located in parking lots between buildings.
G.   Parallel parking spaces shall not be used for handicapped parking. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.44.043: SPECIFIC PARKING REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A.   List Of Specific Standards: Uses which are included in this title are
detailed below. Each use has a specific parking standard which shall be met. In
certain cases, where a use has no specific standard determined in advance by
these requirements, the city shall make a determination of need after review of
the site plan.
B.   Use Classification With Applicable Minimum Parking Standards:
 
Use  Parking Standard
Residential Uses                                           
   Group residential                                   1 space/2 occupants
   Manufactured home residential                       2 spaces/dwelling
                                                           unit
   Multiple-family residential:                          
                                                           
Efficiency and 1 bedroom                                   1.5 spaces/dwelling
                                                          unit
2 or more bedrooms                                         2 spaces/dwelling
                                                           unit
   Single-family residential                           2 spaces/dwelling
                                                           unit
   Three- and four-family residential                  2 spaces/dwelling
                                                           unit
   Two-family residential                              2 spaces/dwelling
                                                           unit
Civic Uses
   City and other governmental uses not defined herein City approval
                                                           1 space/300 square
   Community centers                                   feet of gross floor
                                                           area
   Community recreation; general:
                                                           1 space/100 square
      Clubhouses                                    feet of gross floor
                                                           area
      Game courts:   
         Playgrounds, play fields, public park   City approval
         Tennis, squash, racquetball, handball   5 spaces/court
         Swim centers                            1 space/150 square
                                                           feet of pool area
   Community recreation; restricted:                    
      Game courts:                                   
         Playgrounds, play fields, public park   City approval
         Tennis, squash, racquetball, handball   5 spaces/court
         Swim centers                            1 space/150 square
                                                           feet of pool area
                                                           1 space/400 square
   Cultural exhibits                                   feet of gross floor
                                                           area
   High impact institutional:                           
      General college and university                1 space/4 classroom
                                                           seats
                                                           2 spaces/bed plus 1
                                                           space/500 square
      Hospitals and sanitariums                     feet of gross floor
                                                           area of an emergency
                                                           room and outpatient
                                                           care, if provided
                                                           1 space/400 square
   Libraries                                           feet of gross floor
                                                           area
   Low impact institutional:                            
      Kindergarten, elementary, junior high/middle  1 space/10 classroom
schools                                                    seats
      Churches, temples, synagogues                 1 space per 4 seats
                                                           in chapel
   Moderate impact institutional:                       
      High schools                                  1 space/4 classroom
                                                           seats
      Vocational schools                            1 space/2 classroom
                                                           seats
   Property owners' association uses:                   
                                                           1 space/300 square
   Clubhouses                                          feet of gross floor
                                                           area
      Game courts:                                   
         Tennis, squash, racquetball, handball   2 spaces/court
         Playgrounds                             City approval
      Swimming pool                                 1 space/300 square
                                                           feet of pool area
Commercial Uses
   Administrative and professional office              See Table II, Office
   Animal sales and services:                            
                                                          
Kennels, veterinarians, grooming                           See Table I, Retail
   Automotive and equipment:                             
                                                          
Storage                                                    City approval
   Automotive vehicles and equipment:                   
                                                           1 space/500 square
   Cleaning and repairs                                feet of gross floor
                                                           area (5 spaces
                                                           minimum)
      Sales and rentals:                             
      For outside lot                               City approval
                                                           See Table III,
      For service area and body shop                Manufacturing And
                                                           Industrial
         For showroom area                       See Table I, Retail
   Communications services                             See Table II, Office
   Construction sales and services:                     
                                                           See Table IV,
                                                           Warehousing
   For outside lot                                     (substitute lot area
                                                           for gross floor
                                                           area)
   For showroom area                                   See Table I, Retail
   Convenience sales and personal services             See Table I, Retail
                                                           1 space/10 children
                                                           enrolled plus 1
                                                           space per 20
   Daycare center                                      children enrolled
                                                           for loading and
                                                           unloading (2 spaces
                                                           minimum)
                                                            
   Drinking establishments:                              
                                                         1 space/50 square
Sitdown, alcohol permitted                                 feet of gross floor
                                                           area
   Eating establishments:                               
                                                           1 space/50 square
   Drive-in                                            feet of gross floor
                                                           area (12 spaces
                                                           minimum)
                                                           1 space/50 square
      Fast foods                                    feet of gross floor
                                                           area
                                                           1 space/100 square
   Sitdown, alcohol not permitted                      feet of gross floor
                                                           area
                                                           1 space/100 square
   Sitdown, alcohol permitted                          feet of gross floor
                                                           area
   Gasoline sales:                                      
                                                           See Table I, Retail
                                                           (spaces in addition
   For building area                                   to adequate loading
                                                           and unloading and
                                                           access)
                                                         City approval
Truck stop
   Medical services                                    See Table II, Office
   Personal storage:                                    See Table IV,
                                                         Warehouse
Miniwarehouse
   Recreation and entertainment:                        
   Indoor:                                              
      Arcades                                       See Table I, Retail
      Billiard parlors                              See Table I, Retail
      Bowling alleys                                5 spaces/lane
                                                           1 space/50 square
                                                           feet of club area
      Dance halls                                   and 1 space/100
                                                           square feet of
                                                           remaining gross
                                                           floor area
         Gymnasiums                              City approval
      Health clubs                                  See Table I, Retail
      Skating rinks                                 City approval
         Theaters                                1 space/4 seats
   Outdoor:                                             
      Amusement park                                City approval
                                                           6 spaces minimum
      Drive-in theater                              plus adequate spaces
                                                           for viewing
      Driving range                                 1 space/2 driving
                                                           stations
      Go-cart tracks                                City approval
      Miniature golf                                2 spaces/3 holes
   Repair services:
                                                         See Table I, Retail
Consumer
   Research laboratories                               See Table II, Office
   Retail sales and services:                           
      General                                       See Table I, Retail
      Outdoor swap meets                            City approval
   Transient accommodations:                            
   Campground                                          City approval
                                                           1 space/rental plus
                                                           1 space/200 square
                                                           feet of gross floor
                                                           area of restaurant
                                                           area (including
                                                           kitchen) plus 1
                                                           space/100 square
   Lodging                                             feet of gross floor
                                                           area of club area
                                                           (excluding office
                                                           and meeting rooms)
                                                           plus 1 space/200
                                                           square feet of gross
                                                           floor area for any
                                                           retail area
                                                          
Industrial Uses                                            
                                                           See Table III,
   Permitted light industry                            Manufacturing And
                                                           Industrial
   Wholesaling, storage and distribution; restricted   See Table IV,
                                                           Warehousing
 
C.   Minimum Parking Standard Tables:
 
TABLE I
Retail
For the first 10,000 square feet of    1 space/200 square feet of gross floor
gross floor area                       area
From 10,001 to 40,000 square feet of   Plus 1 space/225 square feet of gross
gross floor area                       floor area
Over 40,000 square feet of gross floor Plus 1 space/250 square feet of gross
area                                   floor area
 
 
TABLE II
Office
For the first 10,000 square feet of    1 space/200 square feet of gross floor
gross floor area                       area
From 10,001 to 40,000 square feet of   Plus 1 space/300 square feet of gross
gross floor area                       floor area
Over 40,000 square feet of gross floor Plus 1 space/350 square feet of gross
area                                   floor area
 
 
TABLE III
Manufacturing And Industrial
For the first 20,000 square feet of    1 space/500 square feet of gross floor
gross floor area                       area
Over 20,000 square feet of gross floor Plus 1 space/1,000 square feet of gross
area                                   floor area
 
 
TABLE IV
Warehousing
For the first 20,000 square feet of    1 space/1,000 square feet of gross floor
gross floor area                       area
Over 20,000 square feet of gross floor Plus 1 space/5,000 square feet of gross
area                                   floor area
 
D.   Parking Area Design Standards:
   1.   Basic: The basic parking stall shall be nine feet (9') in width and
eighteen feet (18') in length. Tables V and VI of this section and accompanying
diagrams establish minimum design standards for parking areas utilizing this
minimum requirement and dimensions to be followed. Nothing in these standards
shall prohibit an owner/applicant from providing larger aisle widths or stall
dimensions in order to better suit his development requirements.
   2.   Alternate: While tables V and VI of this section provide design
standards for angles of zero degrees (0°), forty five degrees (45°), sixty
degrees (60°), seventy five degrees (75°) and ninety degrees (90°), the city
shall be permitted to approve an alternate design using different angles,
provided the property owner submits such a design with calculations for stalls
and aisles based upon the standards contained herein.
   3.   Small Car: Where a parking lot is required to contain twenty (20) or
more spaces, the city shall be permitted to approve an alternate design for
spaces to specifically accommodate compact automobiles. The design shall
conform to the following minimum basic standards:
      a.   Up to fifteen percent (15%) of the required spaces may be allocated
for compact cars;
      b.   Dimensions for a compact car space shall be nine feet (9') in width
and fifteen feet (15') in length;
      c.   Compact car spaces should be designed and striped at ninety degree
(90°) angles or an equivalent which will eliminate access and use by large
cars.
E.   Loading/Unloading (Queuing) Spaces: Loading/unloading (queuing) spaces as
required for certain uses in this chapter shall conform to the following
standards:
   1.   No queuing space may occupy any portion of a public right of way.
   2.   Queuing spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') in width and
eighteen feet (18') in length.
   3.   Queuing spaces may not be used to satisfy the off street parking or
loading requirements of this section.
   4.   Queuing spaces may be provided in the primary access aisle leading to a
drive-in or drive-through facility.
F.   Aisle Requirements:
   1.   Aisles providing access to off street parking areas, but not
immediately adjacent to or providing direct access to an off street parking
space, shall be at least twenty two feet (22') in width if designed for two-way
traffic, and at least twelve feet (12') in width if designed for one-way
traffic.
   2.   Aisles located immediately adjacent to buildings or structures shall be
separated by a planted or landscaped strip or by a sidewalk of not less than
three feet (3') in width protected by a six inch (6") concrete curb or, in lieu
thereof, a bumper guard of a height not less than two feet (2') above the
finished grade.
   3.   Parking may be located immediately adjacent to buildings or structures
without a planted or landscaped strip or a sidewalk or without a bumper guard.
   4.   A drive-in window shall not project more than one foot (1') into an
aisle.
 
TABLE V
PARKING LAYOUT DIMENSIONS
For 9 Feet 0 Inches (Minimum Standard)
At Various Angles With One-Way Aisles
A          B               C    D    E    F    G
45 degrees 9 feet 0 inches 19.1 12.7 12.3 50.5 44.7
60 degrees 9 feet 0 inches 20.1 10.4 17.1 57.3 53.0
75 degrees 9 feet 0 inches 19.7 9.3  20.6 60.0 57.7
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3858.png]
 
 
PARKING LAYOUT DIMENSIONS
For 9 Feet 0 Inches (Minimum Standard)
At Various Angles With Two-Way Aisles
A          B               C    D    E    F    G
45 degrees 9 feet 0 inches 19.1 17.7 21.8 60.0 54.2
60 degrees 9 feet 0 inches 20.1 10.4 19.8 60.0 55.7
75 degrees 9 feet 0 inches 19.7 9.3  20.6 60.0 57.7
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3860.png]
 
A = Stall angle
B = Stall width
C = Vehicle projection for 18 foot stall length
D = Curb length per car
E = Aisle width
F = Wall to wall width for double aisle
G = Overlap center to overlap center width for double aisle
 
TABLE VI
PARKING LAYOUT DIMENSIONS
(Minimum Standards)
At 0 Degree And 90 Degree Angles
A         B               C   D    E      F
0 degrees 8 feet 0 inches 8.0 22.0 12.0   28.0 (one-way)
                               (24.0) (48.0) (two-way)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3862.png]
 
 
A          B               C    D   E    F
90 degrees 9 feet 0 inches 18.0 9.0 24.0 60.0
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3864.png]
 
   A = Stall angle
   B = Stall width
   C = Vehicle projection for 18 foot stall length
   D = Curb length per car
   E = Aisle width
   F = Wall to wall for double aisle
G.   Exception: Family estate, single-family and duplex residential structures
located on one lot may use a paved driveway to fulfill the minimum parking
requirements. The space for each automobile on the paved area shall be a
minimum of nine feet (9') in width and eighteen feet (18') in length and shall
not be located within five feet (5') of the street pavement. The residential
driveway shall comply with the driveway design standards set forth in
chapter 19.40 of this title and the construction standards set forth in title
12 of this code.
H.   Notes:
   1.   For mixed uses containing any combination of retail, institutional,
office, manufacturing and industrial, or warehousing activity, parking
requirements shall be tabulated separately for each use within the development
using the list of specific standards or the tables above. Mixed uses regulated
under separate parking requirements shall not be combined to achieve a larger
square footage total that would result in a reduced parking requirement. Where
any part of a mixed use is converted to another use category, then the parking
requirements shall be recalculated based on the new square footage figure.
   2.   Where a manufacturing and industrial use has more than one working
shift of employees, parking facilities shall be adequate to accommodate overlap
requirements during transition periods.
   3.   Where a multiple purpose retail, institutional, or industrial building
is proposed to be occupied by a use which can be demonstrated by the occupant
to require less parking than the standards contained herein, the city may
permit, subject to city council approval, paving of a smaller parking area to
meet the estimated need; provided, however, that the balance of the land
required by these requirements shall be held in reserve as an unpaved area to
meet future needs generated by an expansion of the business or a change in land
use. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.44.044: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Trash Dumpster And Receptacle Enclosure And Pads:
   1.   No dumpster or receptacle shall be placed in a required parking space.
   2.   Dumpsters and receptacles designed for transfer and unloading by trucks
shall not be located where they interfere with traffic circulation or access to
parking spaces and shall have a permanent location pad or enclosure and
accessway designed and constructed in accordance with the standards set forth
in title 12 of this code. (Ord. 922 §1, 2001: Ord. 920 §1, 2001: Ord. 868 §1,
1998: Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.44.050: OFF STREET LOADING/UNLOADING SPACES FOR INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS:
A.   Requirement: Every industrial, commercial, and civic building erected or
expanded shall provide space, as indicated herein, for loading and unloading of
vehicles and hauling trailers. The number of spaces required shall be
considered as the absolute minimum, and the owner/applicant shall evaluate his
own needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum specified.
B.   Size: All off street loading and unloading spaces shall have the minimum
dimensions of twelve feet by sixty feet (12' x 60') with a fifteen foot (15')
overhead clearance. In no case shall required off street loading and unloading
spaces encroach upon off street parking space required under this chapter, or
on a public right of way. No maneuvering shall be permitted on a public right
of way.
C.   Number: Table VII of this section sets forth the minimum number of
loading/unloading spaces required by use category according to gross floor
area:
 
TABLE VII
Minimum Loading/Unloading Standards
Land Use                  Gross Floor Area   Total Minimum Number
                          (Square Feet)      Of Spaces Required
Retail                    0 - 12,000         0
Commercial and industrial 12,001 - 48,000    1
                          48,001 and over    2
                          0 - 48,000         0
Office and civic          48,001 - 100,000   1
                          100,001  and over 2
 
D.   Design: Off street loading and unloading spaces shall be designed so that
vehicles shall maneuver entirely within the property lines of the premises and
not on a public right of way. Unenclosed off street loading and unloading areas
shall be permanently paved with hard surfaced pavement. A six inch (6") header
curb must also be constructed to separate a loading area from a public right of
way. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.44.060: ACCESS:
A.   Purpose: To provide access to private and public property in a safe,
efficient, and orderly manner that is compatible with the public transportation
system and to ensure orderly designs and proper location of driveways that have
a positive effect on traffic operations. In addition, this section provides
means for enhancing transportation movement and safety within the city,
including generally improved traffic capacity, maintaining uniform traffic
speeds, and reducing accidents.
B.   Access To Lots: Each lot of record that exists on the effective date
hereof shall be entitled to access to a public street.
C.   Curb Cut Permit: No person shall cut or remove curbing or construct a
driveway on an approved public street without securing a permit from the city.
All costs to construct or remove curbs and driveways shall be the
responsibility of the applicant. Any roadway improvement that is designed to
provide access to a lot shall also be the responsibility of the applicant. All
curb cuts, new construction and curb replacements shall be constructed in
accordance with the construction standards set forth in title 12 of this code.
D.   Access To Public Streets, Single- And Two-Family Residences: Single- and
two-family residences in all zoning districts shall be permitted curb cuts for
driveway access as follows:
   1.   Maximum Number Of Curb Cuts:
      a.   One curb cut per street frontage; or
      b.   Two (2) curb cuts on the same street frontage for a circular drive
on an interior lot; or
      c.   Three (3) curb cuts on a corner lot to accommodate a circular drive
and a driveway to provide access to a garage or rear yard;
      d.   Two-family residences shall be permitted one curb cut per residence
on the same street frontage, provided there is a minimum separation of three
feet (3') between curb cuts for connected dwelling units.
   2.   Curb Cut Dimensions: Regardless of the width of the driveway, the
maximum width of curb cuts for single- and two-family residential uses shall be
as set forth in title 12 of this code.
E.   Access To Arterial Streets, Single- To Four-Family Residences: In no case
shall a residential structure with four (4) or less dwelling units be allowed
access onto an expressway or major arterial street if access is available onto
a minor arterial, collector, or local street. Residential structures, or
complexes of five (5) or more dwelling units under the same ownership, shall be
required to follow the general access provisions set forth in this chapter.
F.   Variance To Access Provisions: An application for variance may be granted
by the board of adjustment for access requirements of this chapter where:
   1.   The literal application does not permit proper access to serve the
land;
   2.   The variance does not harm the public health, safety and welfare and
does not adversely affect the intent of the chapter;
   3.   The problem of access relates to existing conditions of the lot and not
to proposed plans;
   4.   The improvements would increase hazards associated with driveway/
roadway conflicts.
G.   Access Review: The planning commission shall review all applications for
rezoning property to commercial districts for potential impact of
nonresidential access driveways on surrounding residential areas.
   1.   The findings of the planning commission shall be reported to the city
council prior to a public hearing on the application for rezoning. Such review
shall be conducted in conformance with the following criteria:
      a.   The potential hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of
the inhabitants of the surrounding residential area caused by allowing access
into such areas;
      b.   The degree to which the carrying capacity of a collector or arterial
street would be reduced and traffic hazards thereon increased in the event
access onto adjacent residential streets is limited or denied;
      c.   Whether detrimental effects upon the surrounding residential areas
are substantially outweighed by the detrimental effect upon carrying capacity
and traffic safety or collector or arterial streets resulting from denial or
limitation of access onto adjacent residential streets.
   2.   If the city council finds that limiting access from a commercially
zoned tract onto a local residential street would protect the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents in an area, then they may direct that no
curb cuts be placed on that portion of the local residential street adjacent to
the commercially zoned tract.
H.   Corner Clearance And Separation Requirements For Driveways:
   1.   Driveways shall be separated from street intersections and other
driveways by the distances defined in table VIII of this section. These
distances shall be measured from the centerline of streets and the curb line of
driveways, excluding radii.
   2.   These requirements shall be applied to strip developments having
multiple ownership and to developments of all sizes under one ownership.
   3.   Where a property has less frontage than the minimum requirements
contained in table VIII of this section, a driveway shall still be permitted
for each street frontage, provided that it is located at a point of maximum
separation from the nearest street (first priority) and nearest driveway
(second priority).
 
TABLE VIII
Minimum Separation Between Driveways And Street Intersections
(See dimension "A" in figure 1 below)
Location Of Driveway
Intersecting Street                                      Arterial Collector
Arterial:
(N.W. Expressway, MacArthur, Meridian, N.W. 63rd Street, 200      150
N.W. 50th Street, N.W. 39th Street Expressway, N.W. 36th
Street, Ann Arbor)
Collector:
(Grove, Hammond, Mueller, N.W. 58th Street, N.W. 42nd    100      60
Street)
Local:                                                   100      60
(All not classified as arterial or collector)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1183c3010b136ae77ce768d4361cb922a5f053d5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3866.png]
 
I.   Sight Distance: A minimum sight distance of four hundred feet (400') for
vehicles egressing a driveway to an arterial street shall be required for each
intersection. The sight distance shall be measured from a point on the driveway
at least fifteen feet (15') from the edge of the major road pavement and
measured from a height of eye of 3.75 feet on the driveway to a height of an
object of 4.5 feet on the major road. One-way egress driveways shall conform to
the sight distance requirements that are stated for two-way driveways. (Ord.
993 §1, 2003: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.44.070: DESIGN STANDARDS:
This section sets forth the standards for the design of sidewalks, driveways
and approaches, curbs and gutters within residential and commercial zoning
districts.
A.   Sidewalks: New or replacement sidewalks over right of way shall meet or
exceed the following minimum standards:
   1.   Shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width;
   2.   Shall be sloped toward the street;
   3.   Shall be four feet (4') from the back of the curb.
B.   Driveways, Residential:
   1.   New or replacement driveways in all residential zoning districts,
excluding R-3 (multiple dwelling residential) district, shall, from the
property line (right of way) to the building line, be twelve feet (12') wide,
except circular driveways, which shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide,
providing the minimum parking requirement of two (2) nine foot by eighteen foot
(9' x 18') spaces per residential unit is met.
   2.   Residential driveways on local or collector streets shall have a
minimum radius of five feet (5'). One-way egress driveways of less than ninety
degrees (90°) may be required by the city where it is determined that it is in
the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare. All driveways
and access facilities shall be designed to meet the grade, alignment, pavement
and channelization standards and other specifications prescribed by the city.
C.   Driveways, Commercial:
   1.   New or replacement driveways in all commercial zoning districts,
including R-3 (multiple dwelling residential) district, shall, from the
property line throughout the complex, be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') in
width. These driveway standards do not apply to parking space standards set
forth in this chapter.
   2.   The intersection of a two-way driveway shall be designed to intersect
at a ninety degree (90°) angle. The corner radius of a driveway shall be no
less than fifteen feet (15') or that which is adequate for the anticipated use.
D.   Approaches, Curbs And Gutters, Residential:
   1.   New or replacement approaches, curbs and gutters in all residential
zoning districts, excluding R-3 (multiple dwelling residential) district, shall
meet or exceed the following minimum standards from the edge of the street to
the property line (right of way):
      a.   All approaches shall have a minimum radius of five feet (5'). An
inside radius of three feet (3') shall be allowed, if required, for circle
drives and small lots.
      b.   The curb cut for a circle drive shall be a minimum of eighteen feet
(18') wide; for a standard drive, a minimum of twenty two feet (22') wide.
      c.   All approaches shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') wide, except
for approaches on circular drives, which shall be a minimum of ten feet (10')
wide.
   2.   Single- and two-family residences in all zoning districts shall be
permitted curb cuts for driveway access as follows:
      a.   Maximum Number Of Curb Cuts:
         (1)   One curb cut per street frontage; or
         (2)   Two (2) curb cuts on the same street frontage for a circular
drive; or
         (3)   Three (3) curb cuts on a corner lot to accommodate a circular
drive and a driveway to provide access to a garage or rear yard.
         (4)   Two-family residences shall be permitted one curb cut per
residence on the same street frontage, provided there is a minimum separation
of three feet (3') between curb cuts for connected dwelling units.
      b.   Curb Cut Dimensions: Regardless of the width of the driveway, the
minimum width of curb cuts for single- and two-family residential uses shall be
ten feet (10') greater than the driveway width.
E.   Approaches, Curbs And Gutters, Commercial: New or replacement approaches,
curbs and gutters in all commercial zoning districts, including R-3 (multiple
dwelling residential) district, as well as any institutional use in any zoning
district, shall meet or exceed the following minimum standards from the edge of
the street to the property line (right of way):
   1.   All approaches shall have a minimum radius of fifteen feet (15') up to
a maximum radius of twenty five feet (25'), if available.
   2.   All approaches shall maintain or improve the existing drainage and
match existing curbing.
   3.   All approaches shall be no less than twenty four feet (24') or more
than thirty six feet (36') in width.
   4.   The curb cut will be a minimum of fifty four feet (54') up to a maximum
of eighty six feet (86'). (Ord. 993 §2, 2003: Ord. 968 §1, 2002)
CHAPTER 19.48
SPECIAL BUILDING LINES
SECTION:
19.48.010: General Description
19.48.020: Petition For Alteration
19.48.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
Special building lines are established along the streets listed in this chapter
and no building shall be erected closer to the centerline of the street than
the distance shown. The centerline shall be a line equidistant from the
established right of way; provided, however, that land dedicated for, or
easements granted for widening of streets in new subdivisions shall not be
counted in calculating the location of street centerline:
A.   Wilshire Boulevard and Northwest 63rd, Northwest 50th, and Northwest 36th
Streets, from the east city limits to the west city limits, seventy five feet
(75');
B.   Meridian Avenue and MacArthur Boulevard, from the south city limits to the
north city limits, seventy five feet (75'). (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.48.020: PETITION FOR ALTERATION:
The owner or owners of forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage along one
side of one of the streets designated in this chapter, between two (2)
intersecting streets or for a distance of five hundred feet (500') or more, may
petition the city council for establishment of a different special building
line. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 19.52
BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
SECTION:
19.52.010: Administration And Enforcement
19.52.020: Planning Commission Review
19.52.030: Building Permit Application
19.52.040: Building Permit Procedures
19.52.045: Seasonal Building Permits; Procedures
19.52.050: Building Permit Expirations And Limitations
19.52.060: Change Of Orders
19.52.070: Certificate Of Occupancy Requirements
19.52.080: Reports
19.52.010: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A.   It is a violation for any person to change or permit the change in the use
of land, buildings or structures, or to construct, alter, move or improve any
building or structure until a building permit or certificate of occupancy has
been obtained.
B.   These regulations shall be enforced by the city.
C.   While this chapter does not require submittal of any documentation prior
to formal application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy,
property owners are encouraged to consult with the city prior to making formal
application to become familiar with the policies and requirements set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.52.020: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
Planning commission review and recommendation is required if any building or
structure under the conditions set forth below is listed in "uses subject to
review" in each zoning district:
A.   Whenever any structure or building is to be constructed, moved, or
requires structural alterations;
B.   Whenever a structure or building is to be demolished and new construction
is to take place on the existing site. (Ord. 1007 §12, 2005: Ord. 968 §1, 2002:
Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.52.030: BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION:
The city shall examine all applications for building permits and amendments
thereto within ten (10) working days following receipt at city hall. If the
application meets the requirements of the city and does not have to be reviewed
by the planning commission, as provided for in this chapter, a building permit
shall be issued. If the application does not meet the requirements of the city,
it shall be rejected, in writing, stating the reasons for the rejection. (Ord.
968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.52.040: BUILDING PERMIT PROCEDURES:
Application for a residential or commercial building permit shall be made at
city hall on forms provided by the city. A review of the application by the
city's administrative staff shall begin upon submittal of the completed
application and the required application fee. If the application requires
planning commission review and recommendation, the city's administrative staff
shall first determine compliance or noncompliance with the city's requirements.
To be considered complete, the following supporting information must accompany
the application:
A.   For single-family and two-family dwellings:
   1.   A plat of survey;
   2.   Two (2) complete sets of construction plans;
   3.   A site development plan. Every dwelling shall have direct access to
either a dedicated public street or a private road that has been constructed to
the minimum standards established by the city;
   4.   A grading plan.
B.   For multi-family (3 or more), commercial, industrial, public buildings,
and all public and private institutional development:
   1.   A plat of survey;
   2.   Three (3) complete sets of construction plans, including structural,
civil, mechanical, electrical, and fire protection plans, prepared in
conformance with applicable city codes and ordinances;
   3.   Three (3) copies of a site development plan, showing the following
information on one or more sheets:
      a.   The exact size, shape, and dimensions of the lot proposed to be
built on with a notation of the total square feet of lot area;
      b.   The exact size and location on the lot of all existing buildings and
structures, and the exact size and location on the lot of any building or
structure proposed to be repaired, altered, or moved;
      c.   A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing or
proposed building or structure on the lot, and, if applicable, the number of
families or dwelling units which each existing and proposed building or
structure is designed to accommodate;
      d.   Adjacent street and alley rights of way, showing curb cuts or
proposed points of ingress and egress, and dimensions of driveways. Every
dwelling unit shall have direct access to either a dedicated public street or a
private road that has been constructed to the minimum standards established by
the city;
      e.   A landscaping plan showing conformance with the landscaping
requirements of this title;
      f.   Vehicle parking and loading areas, including the delineation of all
parking spaces and a total number indicated, dimensions of all aisle widths,
specifications for depth, and type of paving;
      g.   Location of walkways and steps, including all information necessary
to show conformance with access requirements for disabled persons;
      h.   A drainage plan showing the size and location of existing and
proposed storm water structures, floodplain area, if applicable, topographic
contours at two foot (2') intervals, and proposed grading plans to direct storm
water to the street, to a drainage structure in a recorded easement, or to
natural drainage means at the rear or side of the lot. The city may require
that storm water detention be provided;
      i.   Location, dimensions, and type of all easements situated on or
adjoining the property;
      j.   Front, side, and rear yard setbacks, illustrated in feet;
      k.   Location of exterior lighting, screening, open space, solid waste
collection methods, and accommodation;
      l.   Location and size of existing or proposed utility services;
      m.   Persons performing parking lot and driveway resurfacing and
restriping shall not be required to submit the full list included above, but
shall be required to submit satisfactory information to verify the proper
handling of drainage, that the number of parking spaces will not be reduced
below the minimum requirements, that the resurfacing materials conform to the
minimum standards established by the city, and that the landscaping
requirements of this title have been met or will be met prior to completion of
the improvements;
   4.   A landscape plan;
   5.   A grading plan. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.52.045: SEASONAL BUILDING PERMITS; PROCEDURES:
Application for a seasonal building permit shall be made at city hall on forms
provided by the city. Administration review of the application shall begin upon
submittal of the complete application and the required application fee.
Seasonal building permits shall be issued by the city following review by the
planning commission. To be considered complete, the following information must
accompany the application:
A.   A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the structure on the
lot;
B.   Written documentation of ownership, lease or permission to locate on
proposed site;
C.   The exact size, shape, and dimensions of all existing buildings and
structures, and the exact size and location on the lot of any proposed
buildings or structures;
D.   The exact size, shape, and dimensions of the lot proposed to be built or
located on with a notation of the total square feet of lot area;
E.   A declaration of the existing and intended use of each existing or
proposed building or structure on the lot, plus proposed duration of use for
seasonal buildings or structures;
F.   Location and size of existing or proposed utilities services, if
applicable; and
G.   Location, size and number of proposed signs or banners, which must comply
with requirements of title 15, "Signs", of this code.
Additionally, all proposed buildings or structures must comply with applicable
municipal and state fire, safety and health codes including, but not limited
to, requirements for business licenses and state and municipal taxes. (Ord. 968
§1, 2002: Ord. 887 §1, 1999)
19.52.050: BUILDING PERMIT EXPIRATIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
All building permits shall be issued subject to expiration and modification
under the following conditions:
A.   Any building permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire and
become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within six (6) months
from the date of issuance. The building permit may be extended for one 6-month
period by the city, prior to expiration, provided the applicant submits an
application for extension along with the required application fee. This six (6)
month extension does not have to be reviewed by the planning commission,
provided the request is extended prior to expiration of the permit. If the
request is submitted after the expiration date, or the request is for a
subsequent six (6) month extension, the extension is subject to review by the
planning commission. Applications for extension shall be the same in all
material aspects as the original application previously reviewed by the
planning commission.
B.   Any building permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire and
become invalid if such authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period
in excess of six (6) months. The applicant must resubmit a complete application
along with the required application fee.
C.   Any building permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire and
become invalid if the authorized work (4,000 square feet or less) is not
completed within twelve (12) months. The applicant must resubmit a complete
application along with the required application fee. (Ord. 995 §1, 2003: Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.52.060: CHANGE OF ORDERS:
Nonsubstantial changes to proposals or documents relating to building permits
already issued, may be authorized by the city, provided that all requirements
of the city building codes are met. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.52.070: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Except as provided for in subsection B of this section, no change shall be
made in the use of any existing commercial land, building, or structure until a
certificate of occupancy is obtained by the landlord, lessor, or property
owner, from the city certifying that all the requirements of this title have
been met.
B.   Changing occupancy to a tenant or owner whose use conforms to the same
district requirements, shall not be considered a change in use requiring a
certificate of occupancy, provided that any property that has remained vacant
for a period of six (6) months or longer shall require a certificate of
occupancy to ensure continued conformance with all city requirements.
C.   Whenever a building permit is issued for new construction, remodeling, or
add on work in connection with existing buildings or structures, and the city
building codes and requirements permit continued occupancy of the existing
buildings or structures, no occupancy of the new project area shall take place
until the city has issued a certificate of occupancy.
D.   Whenever a building permit is issued for the construction of a new
building or structure, an occupancy permit shall not be required, except where
the use of the building or structure is changed from that for which the permit
was issued or where the intended use is not clearly stated on the building
permit.
E.   The city may issue a certificate of occupancy on a temporary basis when it
determines that:
   1.   The construction project has been substantially completed except for
noncode finishing details which can be completed within thirty (30) days;
   2.   Occupancy does not constitute a danger to the health, safety, and
general welfare of the city. (Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.52.080: REPORTS:
A designated city official shall inform the city council, at its regularly
scheduled monthly meeting, of any action taken by the city with regard to the
issuance of building permits during the previous calendar month. (Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
CHAPTER 19.54
SPECIAL USE PERMIT
SECTION:
19.54.010: Purpose
19.54.020: Residential Or Commercial Zoning Districts
19.54.030: Additional Uses Permitted
19.54.040: Application Procedure
19.54.050: Special Conditions
19.54.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the special review procedure is to analyze those uses which,
because of the size of land they require or the specialized nature of the
improvements or land use, might have an impact on surrounding properties.
Therefore, they may or may not be compatible with surrounding land uses
depending upon the particular details of the development. The uses subject to
review in this chapter are also unusual in that there may be only one or two
(2) in a community, and therefore it is difficult to place them in a particular
zoning district. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.54.020: RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The city council may grant a special use permit for those situations listed in
the residential or commercial zoning districts under the category "uses subject
to review". (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.54.030: ADDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
In addition to the uses granted by right in residential and commercial zoning
districts, the city council may utilize the provisions of this chapter to grant
a special use permit to authorize the following uses:
Cemetery, mausoleum, crematorium or columbarium.
Charity games conducted under a license granted by the state of Oklahoma
pursuant to title 3A, section 401 et seq., Oklahoma Statutes and under a
business permit issued by the city pursuant to title 5 of this code.
Helicopter landing pad.
Mobile home park.
Outdoor tennis courts where a membership is required or a fee is charged for
use.
Plant nursery or greenhouse.
Private wind energy conversion system tower.
Public building erected and used by any department or agency of the city,
county, state, or federal government, telephone exchange building,
communication tower, electric substation, and lines or gas distribution
regulator stations.
Telecommunications towers and antennas, in accordance with
chapter 19.55 of this title.
Temporary commercial amusement enterprises, including, but not limited to,
circuses and carnivals.
Zoological or botanical gardens. (Ord. 915, 2000: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.54.040: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
All special use permits shall be reviewed by the planning commission.
A.   Requirements: An application for a special use permit shall be filed with
the planning commission according to the rules and procedures established for
applications for rezoning. The application shall be filed by the owner of such
property and shall be accompanied by the required application fee;
B.   Site Development Plan: A complete plan shall be filed with each
application;
C.   Public Hearing: The planning commission shall hold one or more public
hearings on the application and shall, no later than its next regular meeting
after the first meeting of the planning commission at which the application is
considered, transmit to the city council its report as to the effect of such
proposed building, structure, or use upon the character of the neighborhood,
traffic conditions, public utilities and other matters pertaining to the
general welfare, and a recommendation concerning the application. The time
frame for planning commission action established herein may be waived by the
applicant. The city council shall hold one or more public hearings, upon public
notice as established for applications for rezoning, at which time they may
authorize or deny the approval of a special use permit for the use of land,
buildings or structures as requested;
D.   Considerations: The action of the city council on any application may
include the requirement of landscaping, fences, walls and other features deemed
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter, and such features shall be
provided and maintained during the continuance of any use for which they have
been required. The following factors should be considered in determining
suitability of a special use permit application:
   1.   The location and size of main and accessory building on the site and
their relation to adjacent uses,
   2.   The number and arrangement of parking spaces, traffic circulation area,
the adequacy and manner of the lighting thereof, and its effect on the
surrounding properties,
   3.   The relationship between the off street parking areas and points of
ingress and egress, and the traffic circulation both within and adjacent to the
site,
   4.   The provision and location of proper facilities for the accumulation
and disposal of refuse and trash,
   5.   The provision of adequate off street loading facilities,
   6.   The provisions of fences, walls and landscaping,
   7.   The relationship of the number, size and location of signs identifying
the proposed use,
   8.   Such other factors as may be necessary to secure and protect the
health, safety and general welfare of the city.
E.   Automatic Withdrawal Of Application: All applicants, either personally or
through a duly authorized representative with authority to speak and take
action on the applicant's behalf, are required to attend all public hearings
provided for under subsection C of this section. In the event the applicant, or
a duly authorized representative agent, does not personally attend any public
hearing as set forth in subsection C of this section, then the application
shall be deemed withdrawn and all fees tendered to the city shall be deemed
forfeited by the applicant. In the event an applicant is unable to attend a
public hearing (including being unable to send a duly authorized
representative), the applicant may file a written request with the office of
the city clerk that the public hearing be postponed to the next regular meeting
of the public body holding the hearing. Such a request shall only be granted if
received by the office of the city clerk prior to the city incurring the
expenses (e.g., postage and publication fees) associated with notifying the
public of the holding of a public hearing on the application. The timely filing
of a request to postpone a public hearing shall have the effect of suspending
all time lines for action by a public body which are established within this
title and chapter for the duration of the postponement. (Ord. 1081 §1, 2010)
19.54.050: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
A.   No use approved under the special use permit provision shall be commenced
or maintained upon a lot or parcel except in accordance with the approved site
development plan.
B.   All special use permits shall expire by default:
   1.   If the use is not established within twelve (12) months of the date of
approval by the city council.
   2.   If the use once established has been abandoned or has been discontinued
for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
C.   Whenever the city finds that any proposed construction or occupancy does
not, in its opinion, comply with the terms of the special use permit, the city
shall refer the matter to the city council for a determination of compliance.
D.   When the holder of a special use permit determines that an extension of
time or modification of the approved site development plan is necessary, he may
apply for amendment.
E.   All amendments to a special use permit shall be processed and reviewed in
the same manner as the original application.
F.   When a recommendation is made to the city council to approve or deny the
issuance of a special use permit, the city council may overturn the
recommendation with a majority vote of the members present at their meeting. If
one or more written protests, objecting to the use being proposed in the
special use permit, are filed at least three (3) days before the time of the
public hearing before the planning commission by the owners of fifty percent
(50%) or more of the area of the lots within a three hundred foot (300') radius
of the exterior boundary of the area to be covered by the permit, a three-
fourths (3/4) majority vote of all members of the city council is required to
overturn the recommendation. (Ord. 995 §2, 2003: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832
§1, 1997)
CHAPTER 19.55
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
SECTION:
19.55.010: Purpose
19.55.020: Definitions
19.55.030: Permit Required
19.55.040: Collocation Requirements
19.55.050: Telecommunications Facility Standards
19.55.060: Alternative Structures Standards
19.55.070: Specific Standards
19.55.080: Permit Condition
19.55.090: Permit Approval Process
19.55.100: Zoning Requirements
19.55.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these regulations for telecommunications facilities are:
A.   To facilitate the provision of telecommunications services throughout the
city;
B.   To enhance the ability to provide telecommunications services to the
community quickly, effectively and efficiently;
C.   To encourage the location of towers in nonresidential zoned districts;
D.   To minimize the total number of towers in the community;
E.   To encourage the joint use of new and existing tower locations;
F.   To ensure that towers are located in areas that minimize adverse impacts;
G.   To ensure towers and antennas are configured in a way that minimizes
adverse visual impacts by careful design, appropriate siting and landscape
screening;
H.   To encourage the attachment of antennas on existing structures;
I.   To consider public health and safety effects of telecommunications
facilities;
J.   To avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through careful
engineering and locating of tower structures; and
K.   To protect residential areas and lands by minimizing adverse impacts of
towers. (Ord. 915 §1, 2000)
19.55.020: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY SUPPORT FACILITIES: Support buildings, structures and equipment
cabinets for telecommunications facilities containing electrical and mechanical
equipment and devices used for the reception of voice, data, image, graphic and
video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Clock towers, bell steeples, building structures
or building equipment normally maintained above the roofline of a structure,
light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures. An alternative
tower structure must be compatible with the natural setting and surrounding
structures, must camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and/or towers
to be a minimum of thirty feet (30') in height. This term also includes any
antenna or antenna array attached to the alternative tower structure.
ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving devices mounted on a tower
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK: The lines that connect a provider's tower/cell sites to one
or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers,
or the public switched telephone network.
COLLOCATION: The use of a single mount or tower on the ground by more than one
carrier or several antennas on an existing building or structure by more than
one carrier.
FAA: Federal aviation administration.
FCC: Federal communications commission.
FALL ZONE: The area of ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a
telecommunications tower and antenna. The fall zone is the area within which
there is a potential hazard of falling debris or collapsing material.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plan, equipment and property, including, but
not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antenna towers,
alternative tower structures, electronics and other appurtenances used to
transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease,
or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice data,
image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefits or any closed transmission medium.
TOWER: Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy
towers, or monopole towers. This term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, and other similar structures. This term also includes any
antenna or antenna array attached to the tower structure.
TOWER HEIGHT: When referring to a tower or other alternative tower structure,
the distance measured from the lowest point within ten feet (10') of the
structure to the highest point on the tower or other alternative tower
structure, including the base pad and any antenna. (Ord. 915 §2, 2000)
19.55.030: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Telecommunications facilities shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this
chapter and the zoning ordinances of the city.
A.   A telecommunications facility shall obtain a building permit as a
condition for the siting, construction or operation of the telecommunications
facility.
B.   These regulations shall apply to all towers and antennas as defined,
except:
   1.   Any tower or antenna not more than seventy feet (70') in height, owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator if it is
used exclusively as a receive only facility.
   2.   Any antenna collocated on an existing telecommunications facility,
except as expressly provided in this chapter.
   3.   A telecommunications facility located or collocated on property which
is owned by the city and designated by the city as a site suitable for location
of a telecommunications facility.
C.   Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In
addition to any other relief or penalty provided by law, the city may apply to
district court for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation
of this chapter. (Ord. 915 §3, 2000)
19.55.040: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A.   All applicants for a telecommunications facility permit shall collocate on
an existing facility if it is feasible to do so. An existing facility shall be
deemed to be available to the applicant for collocation if the facility is
within the search ring of the applicant or within a reasonable distance so as
to fit into the applicant's design; space is available on the facility; and the
facility owner will lease space to applicant at a reasonable market rate.
   1.   If the applicant finds collocation is not feasible, it shall submit to
the city a written statement of the reasons for the infeasibility. The city may
retain a technical expert in the field of radio frequency (RF) engineering to
determine whether collocation at the site is feasible. The cost for such a
technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant.
   2.   The city may deny the permit unless the applicant demonstrates to the
city by substantial evidence that existing telecommunications facilities cannot
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
B.   A telecommunications tower shall not be permitted unless the owner of the
proposed tower certifies to the city that the tower is available for use by
other telecommunications service providers on a reasonable and
nondiscriminatory basis. Towers shall be designed and built to accommodate a
minimum of three (3) telecommunications facilities.
C.   To facilitate collocation and coordination of telecommunication sites, all
telecommunications service providers shall, within ninety (90) days of the
passage hereof, provide the city with their respective master antenna plans.
Said plans shall include detailed maps showing the locations of all
telecommunications towers serving any portion of the city and indicating their
coverage areas.
D.   Providers shall also provide the city with any updates to the above
documents within ninety (90) days of their creation. (Ord. 915 §4, 2000)
19.55.050: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY STANDARDS:
A.   Finish: The exterior equipment buildings and/or metal equipment cabinets
visible from residential areas or public rights of way must have a neutral
aggregate finish or be painted to reflect the color and character of adjoining
structures or blend with adjacent landscaping and other surroundings.
B.   Blending With Natural And Built Environment: At the telecommunications
facility, the design of the buildings and related structures used in
conjunction with telecommunications facilities shall, to the extent possible,
use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the
telecommunications facilities to the natural setting and the built environment.
C.   Guywires: Guywires must be anchored no closer than twenty five feet (25')
from any property line. Guywires shall not cross or encroach any overhead
telephone or electric power lines.
D.   Height: The height of a single antenna tower shall not exceed one hundred
fifty feet (150'). The height of a tower with two (2) or more antennas shall
not exceed one hundred ninety five feet (195'). Maximum height shall be
measured from ground at base to highest point on tower and antenna. A
conditional use permit will be required for any structure that exceeds one
hundred ninety five feet (195').
E.   Interference Prohibited: Applicants will be required to demonstrate that
the planned telecommunications facility will not cause radio frequency
interference with other equipment. Such interference is prohibited.
F.   Landscaping Buffer: All telecommunications facilities must have a five
foot (5') buffer of landscaping outside the perimeter of the fenced facilities.
G.   Screening: The base of the towers and any accessory support facilities
such as anchored locations of guywires shall be screened from view with a solid
fence, which shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height.
H.   Illumination: Illumination of a tower is prohibited except as required by
the FAA. Strobes shall not be used for nighttime lighting. Any required
lighting shall be directed upward and away from adjoining properties. In
addition, the ground level security shall not be more than twenty feet (20') in
height and shall be focused to avoid conflict with vehicle operators in a
public right of way.
I.   Ingress/Egress: The applicant will be required to provide ingress/egress
only from approved access points and a minimum of one off street parking space
per provider.
J.   Fall Zone/Setback Requirements: All wireless telecommunications towers and
their equipment shelters shall comply with the building setback provisions of
the zoning district in which it is located. In addition, the following
requirements shall be observed:
   1.   In order to ensure public safety, the minimum distance from the base of
any ground mounted wireless telecommunications service facility to any property
line, road, habitable dwelling, business or institutional use, or public
recreation area shall be one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the height
of the tower and any antenna mounted on it. This setback is considered a "fall
zone".
   2.   In the event that an existing structure is proposed for  mounting an
antenna, a fall zone shall not be required but the setbacks of the zoning
district shall apply. In the case of preexisting, nonconforming structures,
wireless telecommunications service facilities and their equipment shelters
shall not increase any nonconformities, except as provided in subsection J3 of
this section.
   3.   In reviewing an application for a permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility, the director of developmental services may reduce
the required setback or fall zone by as much as fifty percent (50%) of the
required distance, if he finds that a substantially better design will result
from such a reduction. In making such a finding, the director of developmental
services shall consider both the visual and safety impacts of the proposed use.
K.   Signs: Signs on telecommunications towers shall only display the name,
registration and emergency contact number of the tower owner with the exception
of signs required by FCC regulations or signs containing warning or safety
instructions. Signs are limited to four (4) square feet in size and advertising
is expressly prohibited.
L.   Distance From Other Towers: No tower shall be closer than five hundred
feet (500') from another tower. Any new telecommunications tower in excess of
one hundred eighty feet (180') in height must be located a minimum of one mile
from any existing tower in excess of one hundred eighty feet (180') in height.
M.   Support Facilities: Support facilities can be no more than three hundred
fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area nor more than twelve feet (12') in
height per user. Minimum setback requirements of the zoning district apply to
the accessory support facilities. (Ord. 915 §5, 2000)
19.55.060: ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURES STANDARDS:
A.   Telecommunications facilities may be permitted on an alternative tower
structure at least thirty feet (30') tall under the following conditions, which
shall be in addition to the requirements of sections
19.55.050 and
19.55.070 of this chapter:
   1.   The facility and its accessory support facilities comply with all
zoning requirements applicable to the alternative structure and the provisions
of section
19.55.050 of this chapter;
   2.   If the facility or an accessory support facility is located upon the
roof of a structure, each such facility shall be set back a distance from the
roof edge at least equal to the height of the telecommunications facility
unless the facilities are screened or camouflaged in a manner that is
compatible with the surrounding property. The top of the antenna or other
facility shall not be more than thirty percent (30%) of the height of the
alternative structure or seventy five feet (75'), whichever is less;
   3.   The alternative structure must be similar in color, scale and character
to adjoining buildings or structures or blend with the landscaping and other
surroundings immediately adjacent to them so as to generally avoid the creation
of unique visual objects that stand out in the environment; and
   4.   Prior to the installation of any building/roof mounted
telecommunications facility, the applicant shall furnish to the city a
structural engineer's certification that the building structure will support
and not be adversely affected by the proposed antenna and accessory support
facility or equipment. (Ord. 915 §6, 2000)
19.55.070: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
A.   All telecommunications facilities shall be erected and operated in
compliance with current federal communications commission (FCC) and federal
aviation administration (FAA) rules and regulations and other applicable
federal, state and local standards.
B.   The tower owner is required to provide documentation that the power
density levels do not exceed federally approved levels or American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) standards, whichever provides the stricter
requirements.
C.   An applicant must provide a copy of its FCC license or, if the applicant
is not an FCC license holder, a copy of at least one letter of commitment from
an FCC license holder to locate at least one antenna on the applicant's tower.
D.   Telecommunications facilities shall not be permitted in any wetland,
floodplain, or wildlife area and disturbance to wetland buffer areas shall be
minimized. A telecommunications facility shall not be permitted in any area
where it would threaten endangered species or critical habitats.
Telecommunications facilities shall not be permitted where they would
significantly change surface area, contribute significantly to deforestation or
create significant water diversions. Stormwater runoff shall be contained on
site at all telecommunications facilities. Ground mounted equipment for
personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in excess of
fifty (50) dB at the property line. Roof mounted or side mounted equipment for
personal wireless service facilities shall not generate noise in excess of
fifty (50) dB at ground level at the base of the building closest to the
antenna.
E.   Telecommunications tower structures must conform to the most current
revision of EIA 222 standards. Guyed telecommunications towers shall be
designed and located such that, if the structure should fall, it will avoid
habitable structures and public ways (see subsection
19.55.050J of this chapter). The applicant must supply a structural engineer's
certification of the structural integrity of the tower and associated
equipment. If more than one user is involved, the applicant shall supply
certification that the tower has sufficient integrity to accommodate more than
one user.
F.   Telecommunications facilities shall be designed and engineered to
withstand wind loadings and other design standards as defined by BOCA and ANSI
for Oklahoma County, Oklahoma. (Ord. 915 §7, 2000)
19.55.080: PERMIT CONDITION:
A.   No owner or occupant of property within the city shall permit, leave or
cause to be left on said property any telecommunications facility which has
been abandoned or discontinued for use. The provider shall remove its facility
within ninety (90) days of the date that it discontinues its use of the
facility. If the provider fails to remove the facility within the required
time, the facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. The city shall have
authority to enter the premises and remove the abandoned facilities. All costs
of removal shall be collected from the provider in the manner provided for
summary abatement of nuisance. This requirement shall apply to collocated
facilities unless the collocation agreement provides for the removal of
abandoned facilities by the tower operator.
B.   Defective or unsafe antennas, telecommunications towers or
telecommunications facilities are to be repaired or removed within ninety (90)
days at the owner's or operator's expense. If the facilities are not operated
for a continuous period of twenty four (24) months they shall be considered
abandoned and must be removed within ninety (90) days. If not removed, the city
may remove at the expense of the owner or operator.
C.   Any telecommunications towers or telecommunications facilities existing at
the time of the adoption hereof and not conforming to these provisions shall be
considered legal and nonconforming. These facilities shall be permitted to
remain provided that they are not:
   1.   Expanded or increased in height.
   2.   Restored after damage or destruction, by any means, exceeding fifty
percent (50%) of the estimated replacement value.
   3.   A hazard to safety, health, or welfare. (Ord. 915 §8, 2000)
19.55.090: PERMIT APPROVAL PROCESS:
A.   Except for a proposed telecommunications facility which will collocate on
an existing tower, the applicant for a telecommunications facility permit shall
notify all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the outer
boundary of the property proposed for location of the facility. Such notice
shall describe the boundaries of the property included in the application,
explain the character and dimensions of the proposed telecommunications
facility and give an address for the property owners to submit written comments
to the applicant. The notice shall include a drawing or other representation of
the visual aspect of the proposed facility. The notice shall also contain the
date, which shall be not less than fifteen (15) days after the mailing date,
set for consideration of the application by the development services
department.
B.   The permit process will be administered by the planning commission and
approved by the city council.
C.   Applicant shall pay a fee of three thousand five hundred dollars
($3,500.00) to cover the cost of the permit process. Five hundred dollars
($500.00) of that permit fee is nonrefundable if the permit is denied.
D.   The applicant must submit to the office of the building inspector along
with his application an inventory and contour map of existing facilities that
are within the city and at least five (5) miles from the city limits, including
specific information about the location height, coverage, capacity and design
of each telecommunications facility, telecommunications tower and antenna.
E.   The building inspector will develop, update and maintain an inventory of
towers and antennas. (Ord. 915 §9, 2000)
19.55.100: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
Applicants for telecommunications facilities must verify zoning compliance.
This title denotes the applicable requirements. Conditional use permit
approvals may be necessary to gain compliance. (Ord. 915 §10, 2000)
CHAPTER 19.56
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
19.56.010: Authorization
19.56.020: Alteration Or Enlargement
19.56.030: Nonconforming Building Vacancy
19.56.040: Expansion Or Extension
19.56.050: Changes In Use
19.56.060: Inspection And Approval
19.56.070: Compatibility
19.56.080: Completion Of Moving Building And Installation
19.56.090: Restoration Of Damaged Buildings Or Structures
19.56.100: Continuance Of Nonconforming Use
19.56.110: Effect Of Requirements
19.56.120: Violation Of Requirements
19.56.130: Emergency Discontinuance
19.56.140: Enabling Permit
19.56.010: AUTHORIZATION:
A nonconforming building or structure, existing at the time of adoption hereof,
may be continued and maintained except as otherwise provided for in this
chapter. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.020: ALTERATION OR ENLARGEMENT:
A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any
manner unless the building or structure, including additions and enlargements,
is made to conform to all of the requirements of the district in which it is
located; provided, however, that if a building or structure is conforming as to
use, but nonconforming as to yards, height, or off street parking space, the
building or structure may be enlarged or added to, provided, the enlargement or
addition complies with the yard or height requirements, and the existing
building plus the addition comply with the off street parking requirements. No
nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to
another location on the lot unless every portion of the building or structure
is made to conform to all of the requirements of the district in which it is
located. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.030: NONCONFORMING BUILDING VACANCY:
A nonconforming building, structure or portion thereof which is or hereafter
becomes vacant and remains vacant for a continuous period of three (3) months
shall not be occupied except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of
the district in which it is located. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.040: EXPANSION OR EXTENSION:
A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure (i.e., commercial use
in a dwelling, etc.) shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion
of such conforming building or structure nor changed, except to a conforming
use. In the case of such nonconforming use, any future use of such building,
structure or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the requirements of
the district in which the building or structure is located. A vacant or
partially vacant nonconforming building or structure may be occupied by a use
for which the building or structure was designed or intended if occupied within
a period of three (3) months after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.56.050: CHANGES IN USE:
The use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a use of the
same or more restricted district classification. If the nonconforming building
or structure is changed to a more restricted district classification, it cannot
be changed back to a less restricted use. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.060: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
No building permit and/or certificate of occupancy for any building or
structure to be moved onto property within the city shall be issued until the
building or structure has been inspected by and approved for such move by the
city. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.070: COMPATIBILITY:
Any building to be moved onto property within the city shall be compatible to
the neighborhood and area to which it is being moved. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.080: COMPLETION OF MOVING BUILDING AND INSTALLATION:
The move and installation of a building onto property within the city will be
completed within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the permit and/or
certificate. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.090: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
When a building or structure, the use of which does not conform to the
provisions of this title, is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the
public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its actual cash
value, it shall be restored in conformity with the current district
requirements. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.100: CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
Where the aggregate value of all permanent buildings or structures is less than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), existing at the time of adoption hereof, a
nonconforming use may be continued for a period of not more than three (3)
years provided:
A.   The nonconforming use may not be extended or expanded;
B.   If the nonconforming use or any portion thereof is discontinued for a
period of three (3) months, or changed, any future use of such land, or change
in use, shall be in conformity with the requirements of the district in which
the land is located. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.110: EFFECT OF REQUIREMENTS:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in plans,
construction, or designated use of a building or structure for which a building
permit has been issued, and plans for which are on file with and approved by
the city at the time of the passage hereof; provided, however, that the
construction shall be completed within one year of the date of such permit.
(Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.120: VIOLATION OF REQUIREMENTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval
of the continuance of the use of a building, structure, or premises in
violation of zoning requirements in effect at the time of the effective date
hereof. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.130: EMERGENCY DISCONTINUANCE:
Nothing in this title shall prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use, as
authorized in this chapter, unless a discontinuance is necessary for the safety
of life or property. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.56.140: ENABLING PERMIT:
A.   An applicant for any structure or use not listed in this title shall
receive the express authorization of the city council, shall file an
application with the city clerk, and shall pay a filing fee as provided for in
this title at the time the application is filed for an enabling permit.
Thereafter, the planning commission shall review the application and submit
their recommendation to the city council as to the effect such proposed
structure or use will have upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic
conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to the
general health and welfare of the public.
B.   Upon receipt of the application, the city shall publish a notice of
hearing letter to property owners setting forth public hearing dates for both
the planning commission and the city council. The planning commission shall
then hold a public hearing for the express purpose of determining their
recommendation to the city council. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the
planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing to authorize
or deny the issuance of an enabling permit, as provided for in
chapter 19.60 of this title.
C.   This shall also include any public building erected and used by any
department or agency of the city, county, state or federal government,
telephone exchange buildings, electric substations and lines or gas
distribution regulator stations.
D.   When a recommendation is made to the city council to approve or deny the
issuance of an enabling permit, the city council may overturn the
recommendation with a majority vote of the members present at their meeting. If
one or more written protests, objecting to the use being proposed in the
enabling permit, are filed at least three (3) days before the time of the
public hearing before the planning commission by the owners of fifty percent
(50%) or more of the area of the lots within a three hundred foot (300') radius
of the exterior boundary of the area to be covered by the permit, a three-
fourths (3/4) majority vote of all members of the city council is required to
overturn the recommendation. (Ord. 995 §3, 2003: Ord. 968 §1, 2002)
CHAPTER 19.60
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
19.60.010: General Description
19.60.020: Referral To City Council
19.60.030: Notice Of Hearings
19.60.040: Proposal From Property Owners
19.60.050: Application Fee
19.60.055: Fee Schedule For Closing Of Public Way Or Easement
19.60.060: Rehearings
19.60.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion, on petition from a
property owner, or on the recommendation of the planning commission, amend,
supplement, change, modify, or repeal (amendment) the requirements,
restrictions, or zoning district classification of property on the official
zoning districts map. No amendment shall become effective until:
A.   The planning commission has reviewed the change and made its
recommendations.
B.   After a public hearing is held in relation thereto, at which time the
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At
least ten (10) calendar days' notice of the date, time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a legal newspaper having general circulation
within the city. A notice of a public hearing shall be mailed to all affected
property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the area that is subject to
the hearing. The cost of the notice shall be paid from the fees accompanying
the zoning application. (Ord. 990 §1, 2003: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.60.020: REFERRAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
A.   Whenever a proposed amendment involves a change in the language of the
text of any provision of this title, it shall be referred to the planning
commission for review at a public hearing followed by a recommendation to the
city council. A majority vote of the members of the city council present at
their meeting will constitute approval or disapproval of any such amendment,
regardless of the planning commission recommendation.
B.   Whenever a proposed amendment involves a change to the official zoning
districts map, commonly known as the rezoning or redistricting of property, it
shall be referred to the planning commission for review at a public hearing
followed by a recommendation to the city council. If a protest against such
amendment is filed at least three (3) days before the time of the public
hearing before the city council by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more
of the area of the lots included in such proposed amendment or by the owners of
fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots within a three hundred foot
(300') radius of the exterior boundary of the territory included in such
proposed amendment or separated only by an alley or street less than three
hundred feet (300') wide, such amendment shall not become effective unless
approved by a three-fourths (3/4) majority vote of all members of the city
council. The requirements of this chapter relative to public hearing and
official notice shall apply equally to all amendments.
C.   In addition to the city council public hearing notice provided for in this
chapter, notice of public hearing of any zoning change shall be given ten (10)
calendar days prior to the planning commission hearing by mailing written
notices signed by the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk to
all owners of property within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the
exterior boundary of the subject property. The notice shall contain all of the
following:
   1.   The legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the city;
   2.   The present zoning and classification of the property and the
classification sought by the applicant;
   3.   The date, time, and place of the public hearing.
D.   In addition to the written notice requirements, notice may also be given
by posting notice of such hearing on the affected property at least twenty (20)
days before the date of the hearing. The notice and the lettering thereon shall
be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public
street or streets toward which it faces. The notice shall contain:
   1.   The date, time and place of the public hearing;
   2.   Who will conduct the public hearing;
   3.   The desired zoning classification;
   4.   The proposed use of the property;
   5.   Other information as deemed necessary to provide adequate and timely
public notice. (Ord. 990 §1, 2003: Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.60.030: NOTICE OF HEARINGS:
The following is the form for the notice of hearings:
Dear Property Owner:
This notice is to inform you that a neighboring property owner has filed an
application with the City of Warr Acres to change the zoning of his property.
All proposed zoning changes within the City limits are reviewed by the Planning
Commission and the City Council at public hearings to determine whether the
proposal would be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan for the City.
During these public hearings the applicant for the zoning change presents his
case, and all interested property owners in this area are invited to appear and
state whether they are for or against the proposal. We would like to emphasize
that the Planning Commission makes recommendations on zoning matters. The final
decision rests with your City Council. This is the reason for two public
hearings.
The reverse side, or second page of this notice contains information about the
location of the property, the zoning category requested, the scheduled dates
for the hearings and other pertinent information.
Your participation in these hearings can be important to you and your neighbors
because City ordinances and State law provide that if the owners of twenty
percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in a proposed change, or
the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the area of the lots within a
three hundred foot (300') radius of the exterior boundary of the territory
included in a proposed change file a written protest, it will take a three-
fourths (3/4) majority vote of all members of the City Council to approve a
zoning change over that protest. The same requirement exists when the Planning
Commission recommends that an application not be approved. If you wish to
oppose this zoning change, your written protest must be filed with the Planning
Commission at least three (3) days prior to the date of the hearing. Your
protest will be forwarded to the City Council with the Planning Commission
recommendation. If you had not previously done so, you may initiate a written
protest prior to the City Council meeting which also must be filed at least
three (3) days prior to the date of that hearing.
The time schedule shown on the reverse side, or second page, will show you how
an application for a zoning change is processed.
Your questions and comments about this case and all other matters of community
development are invited. We are here to serve you.
City of Warr Acres
5930 N.W. 49th Street
Warr Acres, Oklahoma 73122-4199
PLEASE SEE REVERSE SIDE OR SECOND PAGE
GENERAL AREA MAP
Case Number:                        Date:                    
Planning Commission Hearing:   City Council Hearing:
Date:                          Date:                        
Time:                          Time:                        
Proposed Zoning Changes:
Location of Property:
PUBLIC HEARING INFORMATION
A. Hearing Schedule:
1. The Planning Commission meeting and public hearing will be held on the date
shown above. You are invited by this notice to appear and be heard. You may
file a petition with the Planning Commission three (3) days prior to the
hearing date and offer argument and evidence for or against the granting of the
application.
2. The Planning Commission recommendation is forwarded to the City Council for
a public hearing which has been set for the date listed above. All protest
petitions filed with the Planning Commission are forwarded to City Council. If
you did not file a petition prior to the Planning Commission meeting, you may
still file a petition with the City Council three (3) days prior to its hearing
date and offer argument and evidence for or against the granting of the
application.
3. Should the Planning Commission not complete its recommendation and continue
its public hearing, the City Council will not consider the application on the
above date but will continue the scheduled public hearing to a new date. NOTE:
Continuing a public hearing to a date certain does not require publication or
mailing of a new notice.
B. Location Of Hearings: The Planning Commission and the City Council meet in
the City Council Room, Municipal Building, 5930 N. W. 49th Street, Warr Acres,
Oklahoma.
(Ord. 990 §1, 2003: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.60.040: PROPOSAL FROM PROPERTY OWNERS:
Whenever the owners of fifty percent (50%) or more of the land in any area
present an amendment to the requirements prescribed for such area, it shall be
the duty of the city council to vote upon such amendment within ninety (90)
days of the filing. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.60.050: APPLICATION FEE:
The fee for filing an application to change the zoning of property, special use
permit, and to amend the district boundaries is fixed and established according
to the following schedule:
 
Land Areas Involved                                          Fees
Less than 43,560 square feet                                 $175.00
43,560 square feet or more but less than 217,800 square feet 250.00
217,800 square feet or more                                  325.00
 
The application fee for a PUD district is two (2) times the land area rate.
(Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.60.055: FEE SCHEDULE FOR CLOSING OF PUBLIC WAY OR EASEMENT:
The fee for filing an application to close a public way or easement within the
city or any thereto is fixed and established according to the following
schedule:
 
Application to close alleys or any easement other than a street $100.00
easement
Application to close any public street or street easement       150.00
 
In addition, the applicant shall reimburse the city, or pay directly, any
publication costs incurred as a result of the application. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.60.060: REHEARINGS:
Applications to amend the zoning ordinances that are heard and decided by the
city council will not be heard again within six (6) months of the date of such
decision, and then only:
A.   Where the application can show a material change in the surroundings;
B.   Where new evidence which might affect the decision can be produced;
C.   Upon a new application. Motions for rehearings will not be entertained. An
application that is withdrawn prior to a decision by the city council shall not
be refiled or heard within six (6) months of the date of such withdrawal. (Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 19.64
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
19.64.010: General Description
19.64.020: Officers And Rules
19.64.030: Ex Officio Members
19.64.040: Advisors
19.64.050: Compensation
19.64.060: Duties
19.64.070: Action On Plats Or Replats Of Land
19.64.080: Subdivision Approval
19.64.090: Cooperation
19.64.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
There is created within and for the city, a planning commission to fulfill the
duties as set forth in this chapter. It shall consist of seven (7) members, one
member from each ward and three (3) members from the city at large. The
nomination for ward vacancies shall be made by the respective ward council
members, and the nominations for at large vacancies shall be made by the mayor,
with no more than two (2) members from each ward. All nominations shall be
confirmed by the city council. Members of the planning commission shall be
residents of the city and shall serve for a term of three (3) years without
compensation. In the first instance, three (3) members shall be appointed for
one year, three (3) members for two (2) years, and one member for three (3)
years. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business; provided, however, that no action shall be taken as binding upon the
planning commission unless it is concurred in by not less than a majority of
all voting members present. All recommendations of the planning commission,
with the exception of those relating to the issuance of building permits, shall
be approved by the city council. If any member is absent without cause from two
(2) consecutive regular meetings of the planning commission actually held, he
shall thereupon cease to be a member of the planning commission. A vacancy
shall be declared, and the subsequent appointment shall be for the remaining
unexpired term of the former member. (Ord. 1016 §1, 2006: Ord. 968 §1, 2002:
Ord. 878 §5, 1999: Ord. 846 §1, 1998: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.64.020: OFFICERS AND RULES:
The planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from its
membership in November of each year and create and fill such other of its
offices as it may determine. The planning commission may also adopt rules for
the transaction of business and shall maintain a public record of its
activities to be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.64.030: EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:
The mayor, city engineer, city planner, fire chief, police chief, public works
director, code officials and inspectors, and city clerk shall be ex officio
members of the planning commission, but they shall have no power to vote. (Ord.
968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.64.040: ADVISORS:
The other department heads shall serve as advisors to the planning commission
and shall make such recommendations as they deem necessary or, on request of
the planning commission, upon matters within their expertise. (Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.64.050: COMPENSATION:
The planning commission shall serve without pay, and it shall be its duty, from
time to time, to prepare plans for the systematic development and betterment of
the city as a place of residence and business. With the prior approval of the
city council, the planning commission can employ engineers, attorneys, clerks,
and other persons deemed necessary to carry out its duties for a temporary
period of time. The money for these persons shall come from appropriations made
by the mayor and city council to the planning commission. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.64.060: DUTIES:
A.   The planning commission shall consider and investigate any subject related
to the development and betterment of the city as specified in this title.
B.   The planning commission shall review this title every ten (10) years and
recommend changes, if any, to the city council for adoption.
C.   At the request of city staff who are charged with application,
interpretation and enforcement of this title, the planning commission may
render assistance and counsel to city staff regarding the application,
interpretation and/or enforcement of this title. Any assistance or counsel
rendered pursuant to this subsection shall be advisory only and shall not
require ratification by the city council. (Ord. 1121, 2012)
19.64.070: ACTION ON PLATS OR REPLATS OF LAND:
All plats or replats of land laid out in lots or plats, and the streets,
alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public or
for private use within the city limits, shall first be submitted to the
planning commission for review and recommendation. Before such plats or replats
are entitled to be recorded in the office of the county clerk, they must first
be approved by the city council, by ordinance. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.64.080: SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
The planning commission shall review and recommend and the city council shall
approve all subdivisions of land in accordance with Oklahoma Statutes. The
following procedures are established for the review of subdivisions:
A.   Minor Subdivision:
   1.   Approval Procedure: A minor subdivision, also known as a lot split,
shall be referred to the planning commission for initial review and
recommendation and may subsequently be approved by the city council upon
submission of a plat of survey and the deeds for the lots created. Approval
shall be indicated by placing an official stamp on the deed prior to its filing
of record.
   2.   Approval Effect: No lot shall be sold or building permit issued for any
lot created as a result of a minor subdivision until the subdivision has been
approved in accordance with the requirements of this section and all other
applicable requirements of the city.
   3.   Preexisting Lots: Any lot which has been created through a lot split
and which has been in existence prior to the effective date hereof shall be
exempt from these requirements. Upon request and submission of proof of the
original date of such minor subdivision, the city shall place its stamp on the
deed for the filing of record.
B.   Major Subdivision:
   1.   Purpose:
      a.   The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban
development. The arrangement of land parcels in the community for residential
and commercial uses and for streets, alleys, schools, parks and other public
purposes, will determine, to a large degree, the conditions of health, safety,
economy and amenity that prevail in the urban area. The quality of these
conditions is of public interest. Those regulations and standards for the
subdivision and improvement of land for urban use are to make provision for
adequate light, air, open spaces, drainage, transportation, public utilities
and other needs, to ensure the development and maintenance of a healthy,
attractive and efficient community that provides for the conservation and
protection of its human and natural resources.
      b.   This section is designed, intended and should be administered in a
manner to fulfill the following:
         (1)   Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of
slums and blight;
         (2)   Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of and
to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining
tracts;
         (3)   Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit
the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the
tract;
         (4)   Provide the best possible design for the tract;
         (5)   Reconcile any differences of interest; and
         (6)   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision.
   2.   Jurisdiction: This section shall apply to all subdivisions of land
within the corporate limits of the city of Warr Acres. No building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land, which
is not in conformity with the provisions of this section.
   3.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, certain terms used herein
shall have meaning as set forth in section
19.08.010 of this title.
   4.   Violation; Penalty:
      a.   No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change,
improvement or alteration of any existing structure on any tract of land, which
does not comply, with all of the provisions of this section.
      b.   The city hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold
all public improvements of whatever nature, including the maintenance of
streets and the furnishing of sewerage facilities and water service from all
subdivisions and/or lot splits, which have not been approved according to the
provisions contained in this section and from all areas dedicated to the public
which have not been accepted by the city in the manner prescribed therein.
      c.   Any violation of this section shall be deemed to be punishable by a
fine. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions
of this section shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of up to
five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus court costs.
C.   Plat Preparation And Approval Procedures:
   1.   In General: For all cases of subdividing within the scope of these
regulations as provided by this section, a plat of the property in question
shall be prepared and submitted to the planning commission and city council for
their approval or disapproval, as provided below:
      a.   No plat or other land subdivision instrument shall be filed with the
office of the county clerk until it shall have been approved by the planning
commission and the city council as hereinafter set forth. All final plats shall
be filed within two (2) years of the day of approval by the city council, and
no lots shall be sold from any plat until recorded. Failure to record the plat
within two (2) years of the date of approval by the city council shall void all
approvals thereto, unless extended by the planning commission and city council
upon application prior to the expiration date.
      b.   Each plat submitted for preliminary or final approval shall be
placed on the agenda of the planning commission only after fulfilling the
appropriate requirements of these regulations.
      c.   To defray partially the costs of administrative procedures, there
shall be paid to the city clerk, at the time of submission of the preliminary
plat, a fee in an amount set by the city council.
   2.   Preapplication Plans And Data: Not less than fourteen (14) days prior
to the filing of an application for approval of a preliminary plat, the
subdivider or developer shall submit to the building inspector the following
information:
      a.   A general description of the existing conditions of the site and the
suitability of the site for the proposed development. This information may
include data on existing covenants and agreements, the availability of
utilities and community facilities, the proposed use of each portion of the
subdivision, proposed lot sizes and building sizes, proposed business areas,
playground, park sites and other pertinent data as may be needed to supplement
the sketches required in subsections C2b and C2c of this section.
      b.   A general location map shall be submitted and shall show the
proposed subdivision and its relationship to existing utilities, schools,
parks, traffic arteries and other features that will affect and influence the
subdivision such as churches, and shopping and employment centers.
      c.   A sketch plan drawn to approximate scale shall be submitted and
shall show topography, using a contour interval of not greater than five feet
(5'), the proposed street layout, lots and other planning features. The street
and lot plan may be in the form of a freehand pencil sketch.
   3.   Preliminary Plat:
      a.   Upon completion of the preapplication review with the building
inspector, the subdivider or developer shall prepare a preliminary plat for
submission to the planning commission. Four (4) full size and twenty (20)
reduced size prints of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the building
inspector not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting at which it is
to be considered.
      b.   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a statement, signed by
a professional engineer registered in the state of Oklahoma who is responsible
for preparing the plat, stating that he is familiar with the contents of the
preliminary plat and that the preliminary plat has been prepared in accordance
with the ordinances and regulations governing the subdivision of land.
      c.   The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet
to one inch (100' = 1") and shall contain or be accompanied by the following
information:
         (1)   The scale, north point and date.
         (2)   The proposed name of the subdivision.
         (3)   The name and address of the owner of record, the subdivider or
developer and the name of the registered engineer preparing the plat.
         (4)   A key map showing the location of the proposed subdivision
referenced to existing or proposed major streets and to government section
lines, and including the boundaries and number of acres of the drainage area of
which the proposed subdivision is a part.
         (5)   The names, with location of intersecting boundary lines, of
adjoining subdivisions, and the location of city limits if falling within or
immediately adjoining the tract.
         (6)   The land contours with vertical intervals not greater than two
feet (2') referenced to a United States geological survey or coast and geodetic
survey bench mark or monument.
         (7)   The location of existing buildings, water, watercourses, and the
location of dedicated streets at the point where they adjoin and/or are
immediately adjacent to the subdivision; provided, however, that actual
measured distances shall not be required.
         (8)   The length of boundaries of the tract, measured to the nearest
foot, and the proposed location and width of streets, alleys, and easements and
setback lines and the approximate lot dimensions.
         (9)   The location, size and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water
mains, culverts, power and natural gas lines and other surface and subsurface
structures and pipelines existing within or immediately adjacent to the
proposed subdivision and the location, layout, type and proposed size of the
following structures and utilities:
            (A)   Water mains.
            (B)   Sanitary sewer mains, submains and laterals.
            (C)   Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures.
            (D)   Street improvements.
         (10)   The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage
structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the
proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements
relating thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed
plat.
         (11)   The classification of every street within or adjacent to the
subdivision in accordance with the intended use of the street based on the
proposed design. This shall be done by placing the appropriate term, primary
arterial, minor arterial, collector street, or local street in parentheses,
directly on each street.
         (12)   The following items associated with oil or gas drilling or
producing operations and existing within or immediately adjacent to the
proposed subdivision:
            (A)   Scale drawing of the drilling site, showing dimensions.
            (B)   Location of all existing physical facilities, to include
existing wells, structures, tank batteries, and oil, gas or water lines
utilized.
            (C)   Location and dimension of all existing vehicular entrances,
exits and drives.
            (D)   Location and size of all existing mud pits.
      d.   The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove the plat within sixty (60) days of the date of its submission by the
applicant. If the preliminary plat is disapproved or approved with conditions,
the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall
be signed by the planning commission chairman and shall be attached to one copy
of the plat and transmitted to the subdivider or developer. The reasons for
disapproval or approval with conditions shall refer specifically to regulations
or ordinances with which the plat does not conform. On approving a plat with
conditions, the planning commission may require submission of a revised
preliminary plat. If the plat conforms to all of the standards or after the
applicant and the planning commission agree upon any revision, the plat shall
be submitted to the planning commission on a revised copy for approval of the
preliminary or revised preliminary plat.
   4.   City Council Review And Recommendation Of Preliminary Plat: The
preliminary plat approved by the planning commission shall be submitted to the
city council for review and comment at the next scheduled meeting of the city
council. Any suggestions or recommendations of the city council shall be
referred to the planning commission for consideration at its next meeting at
which time such information may be considered by the planning commission for
the final approval of the preliminary plat. Upon final approval of the
preliminary plat as may be amended, the subdivider may proceed with the laying
out of streets and roads, the preparation of utility plans and with the
preparation of a final plat.
   5.   The Final Plat:
      a.   A final plat, neatly drawn in ink on Mylar and four (4) full size
and twenty (20) reduced size dark line prints shall be submitted to the
building inspector not less than fourteen (14) days before the planning
commission meeting at which it is to be considered for final approval. At the
same time, there shall be submitted to the city engineer three (3) sets of the
proposed plans and specifications for all improvements and the proposed
restrictions in final form.
      b.   The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the
planning commission and city council for final approval within one year of the
date on which the preliminary plat was approved. If not submitted for final
approval within such time, the preliminary plat shall be considered as having
been disapproved unless the planning commission agrees to an extension of time.
The final plat shall be filed in the office of the county clerk within two (2)
years after approval by the city council and, if not filed within such time,
said approval shall be considered as having been voided, unless extended by the
city council upon application prior to expiration date.
      c.   The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet to the
inch (100' = 1") from an accurate on the ground boundary survey and on sheets
the dimensions of which are twenty one inches by thirty three and one-half
inches (21" x 331/2") between borderlines. On the first sheet of every plat,
there shall be a key map showing the location of the subdivision referenced to
government survey section lines and major streets. If more than two (2) sheets
are required for the plat, the key map shall show the number of the sheet for
each area. A border of one-half inch (1/2") surrounding the sheet shall be left
blank at the top, bottom, and right hand side, and a margin of two inches (2")
at the left hand side for binding purposes.
      d.   The final plat shall show the following:
         (1)   The location and description of all section corners and
permanent inequity, survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of
which the subdivision shall be referenced.
         (2)   The length of all required lines dimensioned in feet and
decimals thereof and the value of all required true bearings and angles
dimensioned in degrees and minutes, as hereafter specified.
         (3)   The boundary lines of the land being subdivided fully
dimensioned by lengths and bearings and the location of boundary lines of
adjoining lands, with adjacent subdivisions identified by official names.
         (4)   The lines of all proposed streets fully dimensioned by lengths
and bearings or angles.
         (5)   The lines of all proposed alleys. Where the length and/or
direction of an alley are not readily discernible from data given for lot and
block lines, the length and/or bearings shall be given.
         (6)   The widths, and names where appropriate, of all proposed
streets, alleys and easements which shall be properly located.
         (7)   The lines of all proposed lots fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings or angles, except where a lot line meets a street line at right
angles, the angle or bearing angle value may be omitted.
         (8)   The outline of any property, which is offered for dedication to
the public usefully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with area, marked
"public".
         (9)   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire
subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with
areas to be excluded from platting marked "Reserved" or "Not a Part".
         (10)   The location of all building lines, setback lines, and
easements for public services or utilities with dimensions showing their
location.
         (11)   The location of all easements for drainage with dimensions
showing their location.
         (12)   The radii, area, points of tangency, points of intersection,
and central angles for curvilinear streets and radii for all property returns.
         (13)   The proper acknowledgments of owners and the consent by the
mortgagee to plat restrictions.
         (14)   The following, which shall be made and shown on Mylar:
            (A)   Owner's certificate and dedication, signed.
            (B)   A registered surveyor's signature and his seal.
            (C)   Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated
to the public.
            (D)   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the office of the county clerk, which directly affect the
land being subdivided.
            (E)   Certificates of planning commission approval.
            (F)   Certificates of city council acceptance of ways, easements,
and public land dedications.
            (G)   A certificate by the county treasurer.
         (15)   A title, which shall include:
            (A)   Name of the subdivision.
            (B)   Name of city, county, and state.
            (C)   Location and description of the subdivision referenced to
section, range, and township.
      e.   The planning commission shall act upon the final plat within forty
five (45) days after it has been submitted for final approval. The
recommendation for approval and date thereof shall be shown on the plat over
the signature of the planning commission chairman.
      f.   If the final plat is disapproved, grounds for this refusal shall be
stated in writing, a copy of which shall be transmitted with the tracing and
prints to the applicant. The reasons for disapproval shall refer specifically
to those parts of regulations and/or ordinances with which the plat does not
comply.
      g.   Before recording the final plat, it shall be submitted to the city
council for approval and for acceptance of the public ways and service and
utility easements and land dedicated to public use. This approval of the plat
shall be shown over the signature of the mayor and attested to by the city
clerk. The disapproval of any plat or plan by the city council shall be deemed
a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon.
      h.   After final approval of the plat and the affixing of all required
signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide the city with
three (3) dark line prints thereof, and one contact reproducible Mylar, said
copies to be filed with the city clerk. The applicant shall file the original
one dark line print, and one contact reproducible Mylar or film in the office
of the county clerk.
   6.   Bonding Of Subdividers Or Developers: All public improvements, which
are to be dedicated to and accepted by the city in accordance with the final
plat, shall be installed at the sole expense of the subdivider or developer and
approved by the city engineer prior to approval of the final plat by the city
council. Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not be
deemed to constitute or imply acceptance of such improvements by the city. No
building construction shall be permitted nor municipal utility service
furnished on any lot that does not comply with the provisions of these
regulations and other applicable ordinances.
      a.   Performance Bond; Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: In lieu of
completion of the improvements herein required, the city council shall require
the subdivider or developer to file a performance bond or irrevocable letter of
credit, approved by the city council and filed with the city clerk to ensure
the actual construction of improvements according to the plans and
specifications approved by the planning commission and city council within a
period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date of approval of the
final plat. Such bond shall be on such terms and conditions acceptable to the
city and shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of
the city engineer's estimate of costs necessary to construct the improvements.
The performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be for a period not
to exceed three (3) years. Performance bonds shall only be acceptable when
issued by a triple A surety licensed to do business within the state of
Oklahoma. Irrevocable letters of credit shall be acceptable only when issued by
a financial institution insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or
the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. Such bonds and letters of
credit shall be issued on behalf of and for the benefit of the city of Warr
Acres to assure prompt and proper performance of the subdivider or developer
under the terms of the final plat and all ordinances of the city of Warr Acres.
      b.   Inspection: Upon completion of the improvements required, the
subdivider shall notify the city engineer of such completion, requesting that
the city engineer so inspect the completed improvements, determining whether
the improvements have been constructed and installed in compliance with those
pertinent provisions of this code. The city engineer shall prepare a report
regarding his inspection and file the same with the city council for their
final approval and acceptance of the improvements. When so approved, the
performance bond posted to ensure the actual construction of the improvements
shall be returned to the subdivider.
      c.   Terms Of Acceptance: The city council shall not accept the
improvements until the subdivider's or developer's engineer shall submit to the
city engineer a certified "as built" set of plans on Mylar reproducible and a
digital copy of such plans in a format compatible with the city's software
indicating location, dimensions, materials and other information required by
the city engineer. The subdivider's or developer's engineer shall also certify
to the city that all improvements are in accordance with plans approved by the
city and are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. The plans shall be
filed with the city inspector.
      d.   Maintenance Bond: In addition to the performance bond and before the
acceptance of any public improvement for maintenance by the city council, the
subdivider or developer shall provide a maintenance bond for the full amount of
the contract and for a period of two (2) years which shall be approved by the
city council and filed with the city clerk to ensure the correction of any
defect in materials or workmanship that may be found in the improvements. The
maintenance bond shall be issued on behalf of and for the benefit of the city
of Warr Acres by such entities as herein authorized to issue performance bonds.
D.   Design And Improvements:
   1.   Urban Design Principles: The quality of design of the urban area is
dependent on the quality of design of the individual subdivisions that compose
it. Good community design requires the coordination of the efforts of each
subdivider and developer of land within the urban area; therefore, the design
of each subdivision shall be prepared in accordance with the following general
principles:
      a.   It is intended that the urban area shall be designed as a group of
integrated residential neighborhoods and appropriate commercial and public
facilities. The neighborhood, as a planned unit, is intended as an area
principally for residential use. Space for recreational, educational and
shopping facilities to serve the residents of the neighborhood should be
provided and designed as an integral part of each neighborhood.
      b.   The size of the blocks and other areas for residential, commercial
and public uses should be designed to provide adequate light, air, open space,
landscaping of lots and blocks, and the street system should be designed to
make the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical features.
Tree masses and large individual trees should be preserved. The system of
sidewalks and roadways and the lot layout should be designed to take advantage
of the visual qualities of the area.
      c.   Circulation within the urban area shall be provided in accordance
with the following design criteria:
         (1)   Each subdivision shall provide for the continuation of all
primary and minor arterial streets and highways as shown on the major street
plan as and when adopted. Arterial streets should be located on the perimeter
of the residential neighborhood.
         (2)   Collector streets should be designed to provide access to each
parcel of land within the residential neighborhood and within commercial areas,
and in a manner that will discourage use by through traffic. They should be
planned so that future urban expansion will not require the conversion of local
streets to arterial routes.
         (3)   Collector streets should be designed to provide a direct route
from other local streets to the major street system.
         (4)   Ingress and egress to residential properties should be provided
only on local streets.
      d.   Minimum standards for development are contained in the zoning
ordinance, the building code and in these regulations.
      e.   The planned unit development standards and process found in the
zoning ordinance are an appropriate design base for future subdivisions under
condominium, common sharing, or one ownership.
   2.   Improvements In General: All improvements shall be designed and
installed in accordance with all of the minimum standards established by
ordinances and regulations relating thereto.
   3.   Plan Preparation: Plans for the improvement herein required shall be
prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state of Oklahoma. Three
(3) sets of prints of the proposed plans and specifications for all
improvements shall be filed with the city inspector at the time of submission
of the final plat.
   4.   Blocks:
      a.   The lengths, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard for the following:
         (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special
needs of the type of use contemplated.
         (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
         (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic.
         (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
      b.   Blocks for residential use shall not be longer than one thousand
eight hundred feet (1,800'), measured along the centerline of the block. When a
block exceeds six hundred feet (600') in length, the city council may require a
dedicated six foot (6') crosswalk easement and not less than a four foot (4')
crosswalk to provide an access through the block.
      c.   Blocks used for residential purposes should be of sufficient width
to allow for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for
business use should be of a width suitable for the intended use, with due
allowance for off street parking and loading facilities.
      d.   Blocks are not required for planned unit developments to be
developed pursuant to the unit ownership estate act.
   5.   Lots:
      a.   Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles or radial to
the street lines except for minor deviations on cul-de- sac or curvilinear
streets.
      b.   Lots are not required for subdivisions for commercial use, or
planned unit developments that are being developed pursuant to the unit
ownership estate act, but, when provided, should be of appropriate size and
arrangements to provide for adequate off street parking and loading facilities
based on the intended use.
      c.   Access to all buildings in any subdivision must be from an approved
street.
      d.   All corner lots or building locations shall have a sight triangle
with legs of twenty five feet (25') along each lot line or street right of way
line from the point of intersection.
      e.   All lots shall have two (2) separate directions of access, except
cul-de-sac streets.
      f.   Drainage shall be away from all buildings and shall be in accordance
with the general drainage for the location.
      g.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except
where they are needed to provide for the separation of residential development
from the traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography
and provided along the portion of the lots abutting such a traffic artery or
other use where screening is required.
      h.   Foundations in fill areas shall be designed to adequately support
any proposed structure.
      i.   Permanent markers shall be placed on all lot corners, and change in
alignment (PC and PT curves). Permanent bench marks shall be set at locations
to effectively serve the subdivision. The elevation on such bench marks shall
be based on USGS data. Markers shall be either iron pipes or pins, which are
not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and twenty four inches (24")
long. All such markers shall be placed at least one inch (1") below finished
grade.
   6.   Building Lines: Building lines shall be provided in all residential
subdivisions as provided in this title.
   7.   Easements:
      a.   Where alleys are not provided, easements not less than fifteen feet
(15') wide shall be provided for use by public and private utilities along rear
lot lines, and along side lot lines where necessary. All lots shall border on a
utility easement. In planned unit developments being developed pursuant to the
unit ownership estate act, a utility easement shall be provided at the rear of
each structure and along the side of each structure when necessary.
      b.   Easements shall be maintained free of buildings or other permanent
structures, except for fences located on or near the side or rear property
line. Any fence so constructed shall not constitute abandonment by the easement
owner or operate to extinguish the easement. The city council may require area
easements and easements of greater width for the extension of main storm and
sanitary sewers and other utilities where deemed necessary.
      c.   The subdivider or developer shall file a utility easement which
shall release or hold harmless a public utility, or private contractor
representing a public utility, from any damages resulting from the removal of
any fence or screening located on the utility easement, in order to gain access
for the purpose of installation, removal, extension or repair of utility lines
and equipment.
      d.   The final grade across any utility easement shall not exceed a slope
of fourteen degrees (14°) (25 percent gradient) except where unusual
topographic conditions justify, in the opinion of the city council, a
modification of this standard. Slopes less than the maximum may be required at
specific locations by an individual utility for certain surface structures or
equipment.
      e.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage channel
or stream, which drains one hundred sixty (160) acres, or more of land, there
shall be provided a right of way for drainage and public utility purposes,
adequate to contain all of the runoff from a 100-year maximum flood. The right
of way shall include all of the land within the subdivision that has an
elevation below the 100-year maximum flood elevation as calculated by the city
engineer.
   8.   Streets: The arrangement, character, extent, width, design, grade, and
location of all streets shall be designed in accordance with the following
provisions:
      a.   Major streets, primary and minor arterials, shall be planned to
conform to the major street plan.
      b.   Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
      c.   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned
or intended for development by the subdivider or developer, a tentative plan of
proposed future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared
and submitted by the subdivider or developer.
      d.   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or
parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical
location and openings of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with
provision for adequate utility easements and connections for such
resubdivision.
      e.   Street jogs and centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') should be avoided.
      f.   Streets shall intersect at approximately right angles.
      g.   Street rights of way and paving widths shall be in accordance with
the following standards:
         (1)   Major Streets: Primary arterial, a one hundred foot (100') right
of way with a paving width of at least forty eight feet (48') to face of curb.
Boulevard with median, eighty feet (80') of right of way with a paving width of
at least twenty four feet (24') to face of curb on each side of the median.
         (2)   Minor Streets: Collector streets, sixty feet (60') of right of
way with a paving width of thirty two feet (32') to face of curb. Residential
streets, public and private, fifty feet (50') of right of way with a paving
width of twenty six feet (26') to face of curb.
         (3)   Cul-De-Sacs; Short Loops: Cul-de-sac streets and short loops may
have a paving width of less than twenty six feet (26') provided they are of
limited length and have only one access point; however, in no case shall the
paving width be less than twenty four feet (24').
      h.   Maximum street grade shall be six percent (6%). Minimum street grade
shall be four tenths percent (0.4%).
      i.   Dead end streets shall have a maximum length of five hundred feet
(500') ending in a cul-de-sac with a paving radius of forty feet (40'), with a
fifty foot (50') right of way radius.
      j.   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with other requirements
of these regulations, and provided that the city council finds it will be
practical to obtain the dedication of the other half of the street easement
when the adjoining property is subdivided. Whenever a half street is adjacent
to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted
within such tract.
      k.   The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no hardship in
the subdividing of adjacent properties.
      l.   No street names will be used that will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Streets obviously in alignment with existing
streets shall bear the same name, unless otherwise approved by the city
council. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the city council.
      m.   Access to major streets shall be limited.
      n.   In addition to the paving requirements contained in title 12 of this
code, all streets shall be designed to support the traffic generated or
expected for that location. Street design standards shall apply as follows:
         (1)   Paving must be designed for any special loading.
         (2)   The minimum curb radius at intersections shall be thirty feet
(30').
         (3)   No drive shall be permitted closer than sixty feet (60') from
the centerline of intersecting minor streets. Major intersections may require
special review.
         (4)   Modifications of the above standards may be considered only if
acceptable engineering justification is provided.
      o.   Except as provided in subsection D8n(4) of this section, the
subdivider or developer of any subdivision designed to be used for residential,
commercial or other purposes, shall pave all streets that are designed on the
approved plat, or that directly serve the subdivision by being adjacent
thereto, in accordance with the plans and specifications established by
ordinance or resolution in accordance with the following provisions:
         (1)   The design of an improvement of an intersection of any new
street with an existing state highway shall be in accordance with the standards
of the Oklahoma department of transportation, but in no case shall the design
be less than required by the applicable city specifications.
         (2)   All driveways which connect with public streets shall be
constructed in accordance with the standard design of the city as set forth in
section
19.44.070 of this title.
         (3)   Whenever a subdivision is adjacent to an already existing
unpaved street, the subdivider or developer shall be required to pave the
entire breadth of said street.
         (4)   In planned unit developments, private driveways may be
maintained by the owners of said subdivision upon execution of a private
driveway maintenance agreement between the owners, their heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns, and the said city agreement shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following requirements:
   (A) The owner shall agree to maintain private driveways of the subdivision.
   (B) The agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk for
the purpose of reflecting the provisions of said agreement within the abstracts
of title of the lots within the subdivision.
   (C) When in the interest of providing public access to internal property or
properties, the city council may require the dedication to the public of rights
of way and/or private driveway areas and may further require that said rights
of way or private driveway areas meet the applicable paving and right of way
standards of the city as found in this chapter.
   9.   Alleys:
      a.   Alleys shall be provided in commercial districts, except where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off street
loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses
proposed.
      b.   Alleys serving commercial areas shall be not less than thirty feet
(30') in width.
      c.   Alleys are not required for residential areas, but, when provided,
shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in width.
      d.   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided,
but, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe
vehicular movement.
      e.   Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnabout facilities at the dead
end as determined by the city council.
   10.   Sidewalks:
      a.   Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets classified
as primary or minor arterial and on one side of all collector and local
streets. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable
standard specifications of the city.
      b.   On section line roads or designated major roadways, the subdivider
or developer shall construct a sidewalk on the side of the road abutting the
subdivision.
      c.   Sidewalks may be waived by the city council in one of the following
conditions:
         (1)   When the density of the subdivision has a density of two and
one-half (21/2) dwellings or less per gross acre.
         (2)   In the interior of planned unit developments where adequate
provisions have been made for pedestrian flow and safety.
      d.   The following shall serve as the sidewalk requirements:
 
Roadway Classification Residential        Nonresidential
Primary arterial       Both sides, 4 feet Both sides, 6 feet, 2 feet back of
                                          curb
Minor arterial         Both sides, 4 feet Both sides, 6 feet, 2 feet back of
                                          curb
Collector              One side, 4 feet   Both sides, 6 feet
Local1                 One side, 4 feet   Both sides, 6 feet
 
Note:
   1.   
      e.   Sidewalks shall be the responsibility of the homebuilder in
residential subdivisions and not a part of the subdivider's or developer's
improvements. An occupancy permit shall not be issued for any dwelling which
has not been built in conformance with these sidewalk requirements.
   11.   Utilities In General:
      a.   Public easements at least fifteen feet (15') in width shall be
provided for public utilities. Storm sewers are not considered to be utilities.
      b.   Easements for private utilities shall be required if sufficient
space is not available in public easements.
      c.   Private utilities may not be buried in street easements without
written approval of the city engineer.
      d.   The minimum horizontal separation of parallel water and sewer lines
shall be ten feet (10').
      e.   Gas, electric, telephone and television cables must maintain a
horizontal separation of at least four feet (4').
      f.   All primary and secondary electric feeders, telephone and television
cables installed within any new subdivision shall be placed underground.
      g.   Trenches under areas to be paved shall be backfilled with a
combination of rock screenings and sand compacted by water and a vibrating
compactor.
   12.   Water Lines:
      a.   The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for the
installation of the water lines. All water mains shall be dedicated to the
appropriate water service provider.
      b.   The subdivider or developer shall provide a water distribution
system of sufficient size meeting water use and fire protection requirements in
accordance with these regulations and other applicable ordinances, standards
and specifications of the city of Warr Acres and the Oklahoma City public works
department governing water line construction.
      c.   The water system design shall provide as follows:
         (1)   Fire hydrants with steamer connections shall be required
throughout the development area. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance
with city, state, and national fire codes; however, in no case shall fire
hydrants be placed greater than five hundred feet (500') apart or on any main
less than six inches (6") in diameter. The placement of all fire hydrants shall
be approved by the fire chief.
         (2)   Prior to the initiation of installation of any combustible
materials within any subdivision, the public water mains and fire hydrants
serving the location shall be installed.
   13.   Fire Lanes:
      a.   Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings that are set back
more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a public road or exceed thirty
feet (30') in height and are set back over fifty feet (50') from a public road.
      b.   Fire lanes shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width with the
road edge closest to the building at least ten feet (10') from the building.
      c.   Fire lanes and driveways shall be located so that all buildings
served by them are accessible to fire equipment. The designation and
maintenance of fire lanes on private property shall be determined by the fire
chief.
      d.   An all weather road, which is designed to support firefighting
apparatus and approved by the city engineer, shall be provided for access to
all construction sites prior to the placement of combustible materials on the
site.
   14.   Sanitary Sewers:
      a.   The subdivider or developer shall install sanitary sewers to serve
the subdivision in accordance with specifications governing sanitary sewer
construction. All sanitary sewer mains shall be public and shall be dedicated
to the city of Warr Acres.
      b.   Any new or replacement sanitary sewer system shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate the following:
         (1)   Infiltration of floodwaters into such systems, and
         (2)   Discharges from such systems into floodwater.
         (3)   Vandalism.
      c.   Manholes shall be installed at the end of each sanitary sewer line.
      d.   Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in grade, size, or
alignment at all intersections and at distances not greater than four hundred
feet (400') for sewers fifteen inches (15") in diameter or less, and five
hundred feet (500') for sewers eighteen (18) to thirty inches (30") in
diameter.
      e.   Access to existing sanitary sewers shall be limited to the
additional capacity available.
      f.   Subdividers or developers shall be responsible for installing a
backwater valve on all new buildings constructed within the subdivision.
Backwater valves shall be sized in accordance with the building sewer and shall
have directional cleanouts installed on the inlet and outlet of the backwater
valve. Bidirectional cleanouts shall not be permitted. Backwater valves shall
be installed so their working parts will be readily accessible for service and
repair and shall be enclosed by a valve box with surface cover for easy access
to valve materials. Backwater valve boxes shall be constructed of corrugated
steel, formed concrete, mortar and brick, or manufactured plastic, and shall
withstand moisture, rust, corrosion and temperature. Buildings without
backwater valves in original construction shall at the time of sewer
replacement be provided with a backwater valve meeting the requirements
specified herein.
      g.   No occupancy permit shall be issued for any structure, which has not
been provided an approved connection to the public sewer system.
   15.   Storm Sewers And Drainage:
      a.   The subdivider/developer shall provide storm sewers, storm water
detention facilities and drainage as needed to properly drain all property
within the development area. Storm water drainage requirements shall be in full
compliance with federal mandates as may be hereinafter adopted by the city.
      b.   The storm drainage system shall be separate from the sanitary sewer
system.
      c.   Drainage from adjacent property shall not be restricted.
      d.   Roadways shall be free from standing water during storms of a 25-
year return frequency.
      e.   No building or structure shall be constructed over a storm sewer.
      f.   Drainage easements of sufficient width shall provide unobstructed
access to all storm sewers. The minimum easement width shall be fifteen feet
(15').
      g.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments shall
be reviewed to ensure that all such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage that all public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed so as
to minimize or eliminate flood damage and that adequate drainage is provided so
as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   16.   Open Spaces: Public parks, playgrounds and other public areas and open
spaces shall be provided as follows:
      a.   One-third (1/3) acre for every ten (10) acres of area to be
subdivided.
      b.   This section shall not apply to planned unit developments where
adequate common areas are provided for open space. (Ord. 1036 §2, 2007: Ord.
968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.64.090: COOPERATION:
The planning commission shall cooperate with the Oklahoma City and Bethany
planning commissions in connection with the use of areas adjacent to and beyond
the city limits, and may make surveys and studies of present conditions and
further growth of the city giving due regard to the neighborhood territory.
(Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 19.68
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
19.68.010: General Description
19.68.020: Officers And Rules
19.68.030: Meeting Procedures
19.68.040: Appeals
19.68.050: Powers; Designated
19.68.060: Powers; Limitations
19.68.070: Hearings; Notice
19.68.080: Notice Of Appeal To District Court
19.68.090: Stay Of Proceedings
19.68.010: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
There is created within and for the city a board of adjustment to fulfill the
duties as set forth in this chapter. It shall consist of five (5) members, one
member from each ward and one member from the city at large. The nominations
for ward vacancies shall be made by the respective ward council members. The at
large member shall be filled ex officio by the chair of the planning commission
or, in his/her absence, the vice chair of the planning commission, such ex
officio member to have full voting rights. For the purpose of implementation of
this section in 2015, the chair of the planning commission shall serve as a
sixth member of the board (who shall only vote in the case of a tie) until such
time as the current at large member vacates office through resignation, removal
or expiration of the person's current term of office at which point in time the
board's membership shall return to five (5) voting members with the chair of
the planning commission taking over as the at large member. All nominations
shall be confirmed by the city council. Members of the board of adjustment
shall serve without compensation. All members shall be residents of the city
and ward representatives shall serve for a term of three (3) years. If the
chairman or any member shall be absent from more than one-half (1/2) of any
four (4) consecutive meetings of the board of adjustment, he shall thereupon
cease to be a member of the board of adjustment. A vacancy shall be declared
and the subsequent appointment shall be for the remaining unexpired term of the
former member. (Ord. 1152, 2015)
19.68.020: OFFICERS AND RULES:
The board of adjustment shall elect a chairman from its membership to serve for
a term of two (2) years. The board of adjustment may also adopt rules in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.68.030: MEETING PROCEDURES:
The meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the
chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman or,
in his absence, the acting chairman may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings, deliberations, and voting of the board
of adjustment shall be open to the public. The minutes of its proceedings shall
be maintained showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and such minutes shall be filed with the
city clerk and become a public record. The concurring vote of four (4) members,
or three (3) members if no protests are registered, shall be necessary to
reverse any other requirement, decision or determination of any city official,
or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required
to pass under any such ordinance or to effect any variation in such ordinance.
(Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.68.040: APPEALS:
A.   Appeals to the board of adjustment may be filed by any person aggrieved by
any decision of an administrative official, the planning commission or the city
council. Within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision, the aggrieved
party shall pay a fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00), if appealing a
residential ruling, or two hundred dollars ($200.00), if appealing a commercial
ruling. The administrative official shall immediately transmit to the board of
adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action being
appealed was taken. An appeal delays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the administrative official certifies to the board
of adjustment that a delay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such cases, the proceedings shall not be delayed except by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on the
cause shown.
B.   The board of adjustment shall set a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal, giving public notice as well as due notice to the parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person,
or be represented by an agent, or an attorney. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1,
1997)
19.68.050: POWERS; DESIGNATED:
A.   The board of adjustment shall have the power to:
   1.   Hear and decide appeals if it is alleged there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official, the planning commission or the city council in the interpretation or
enforcement of this title.
   2.   Authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the terms, standards and
criteria that pertain to a permitted use or use subject to review category
within a zoning district, as authorized by the zoning ordinance, when such
cases are shown not to be contrary to the public interest, if, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the requirements of this title will result
in unnecessary hardship so that the spirit of this title shall be observed and
substantial justice done.
B.   Variances may be allowed by the board of adjustment only after notice and
a hearing as provided for in this chapter.
C.   A variance may be granted upon a finding by the board of adjustment that:
   1.   The application of this title to the particular piece of property would
create an unnecessary hardship;
   2.   Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property
involved;
   3.   Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public
good, or impair the purposes and intent of this title or the city's
comprehensive plan; and
   4.   The variance, if granted, would be the minimum necessary to alleviate
the unnecessary hardship.
D.   The record of the meeting at which either a variance was granted or a
ruling was overturned, shall show that each element of a variance or overturned
ruling was established at the public hearing on the question, otherwise, said
variance or overturned ruling shall be voidable on appeal to the district
court. (Ord. 1136, 2014)
19.68.060: POWERS; LIMITATIONS:
A.   In exercising the powers set out in this chapter, the board of adjustment
may, in conformance with the provisions of this title, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partially, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made. To that end, the board of adjustment shall
have all the powers of the administrative official, the planning commission or
the city council from whom the appeal is filed. In considering all appeals from
rulings under this title, the board of adjustment shall, in making its findings
on any specific case, determine the effect of the proposed change upon:
   1.   The supply of light and air to adjacent property;
   2.   The congestion in the public streets;
   3.   The public safety from fire and other hazards;
   4.   The established property values within the surrounding area;
   5.   Other factors relating to the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the city.
B.   Every ruling, made on any appeal to the board of adjustment, shall be
accompanied by a written finding of fact based on the testimony received at the
hearing. The ruling shall specify the reason for granting or denying the
appeal. Every ruling or decision by the board of adjustment shall not be
effective and no action can be taken until the appeal time as set forth in this
chapter has lapsed. A copy of the ruling shall be mailed or delivered within
five (5) working days to:
   1.   Each member of the city council;
   2.   Each member of the planning commission;
   3.   The mayor;
   4.   The administrative official;
   5.   The aggrieved party. (Ord. 968 §1, 2002: Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.68.070: HEARINGS; NOTICE:
A.   A notice of the public hearing before the board of adjustment shall be
given by publication in a legal newspaper having general circulation within the
city and by mailing a notice to all owners of property within a three hundred
foot (300') radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. A copy of
the published notice may be mailed to the property owners in lieu of a written
notice, however, the notice by publication and written notice shall take place
at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Additionally, a copy of
the notice shall be delivered to each member of the city council and to the
chair of the planning commission. The notice shall contain:
   1.   A legal description of the property and the street address or
approximate location in the city;
   2.   The present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the
variance or exception requested;
   3.   The date, time and place of the hearing.
B.   The board of adjustment shall be subject to the open meeting laws of this
state. (Ord. 1136, 2014)
19.68.080: NOTICE OF APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT:
An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the board of
adjustment may be filed by any person or persons, jointly or severally, or any
taxpayer, or any official of the city, to the district court by filing a notice
of appeal with the city clerk and the board of adjustment within thirty (30)
days from the issuance of the decision. The notice shall specify the grounds of
the appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal the board of adjustment shall
immediately transmit to the court clerk, the original or a certified copy of
the original papers constituting the record in the case, together with the
order, decision or ruling of the board of adjustment. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
19.68.090: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
An appeal to the district court from the board of adjustment delays all
proceedings relating to the action appealed from, unless the chairman of the
board of adjustment, from which the appeal is filed, certifies to the court
clerk, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a delay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril
to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be delayed other than
by a restraining order, which may be granted by the district court upon
application or notice to the city and upon notice to the chairman of the board
of adjustment for which the appeal is filed, and upon due cause being shown,
the court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision
brought up for review. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
CHAPTER 19.72
VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
19.72.010: Penalties
19.72.020: Action To Prevent
19.72.010: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the
requirements of this title shall be guilty of an offense and, if convicted in
municipal court, be subject to a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) but
not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), to be determined by the municipal
court, plus court costs. Each day such violation is permitted to exist
constitutes a separate offense. The number of days of said separate offenses
shall be determined by the municipal court. It shall not be necessary for a
citation to be issued on each day of the continuing offense after the initial
citation is issued. The owner, or owners, of any building, structure, or land
or part thereof where anything in violation of this title exists, and any
architect, builder, contractor, individual, person, firm or corporation
employed in connection therewith who may assist in the commission of any such
violation, is guilty of a separate offense and, if convicted in municipal
court, shall be fined as provided for in this section. (Ord. 878 §7, 1999: Ord.
832 §1, 1997)
19.72.020: ACTION TO PREVENT:
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or
land is used in violation of this title, the city, in addition to any other
remedy, may:
A.   Institute proper action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or
use;
B.   Restrain, correct, or abate such violation;
C.   Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land;
D.   Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the
premises. (Ord. 832 §1, 1997)
 
