CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF YUKON, OKLAHOMA 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
YUKON CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Michael McEachern (Ward 4) 
Mayor 
____________ 
Richard Russell (Ward 1) 
John Alberts (Ward 2) 
Donna Yanda (Ward 3) 
Earline Smaistrla (Councilmember at Large) 
City Council 
____________ 
James D. Crosby 
City Manager 
____________ 
Gary Miller 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Doug Shivers 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1995 Code, as supplemented through October 21, 2014, and ordinances adopted by city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1995 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Code Attorney, and Amy Norton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Gary Miller, City Attorney, and Mr. Michael Segler, former City Attorney, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 2017. 
ORDINANCE NO. 1347 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF YUKON, OKLAHOMA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL FOR THE CITY OF YUKON, OKLAHOMA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Yukon, Oklahoma," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 213, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 18, 2017, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine up to $750.00, except that the maximum fine for traffic-related offenses relating to speeding or parking shall not exceed $200.00 unless otherwise allowed by state law. Except as otherwise provided: (i) With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense; provided however, if the violation involved the sale of goods or products, each sale shall constitute a separate offense; and (ii) With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 18, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. WHEREAS, it being immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health, safety and public good of the City of Yukon and the inhabitants thereof that the provisions of this ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to exist by reason whereof this ordinance shall take effect, and be in full force from and after its passage, as provided by law. 
PASSED AND APPROVED this 15th day of August, 2017, with the Emergency Clause passed separately. 
      MAYOR   ATTEST 
      CITY CLERK   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 2015-14 (Res.)  8-18-2015 Include 1 1347  8-15-2017 Include 1 1348  8-15-2017 Include 1 1349 10-17-2017 Include 1 1350 11- 7-2017 Include 1 1351 11- 7-2017 Include 1 1352 11- 7-2017 Omit 1 YMA-2018-02 (Res.)  6- 5-2018 Omit 2 2018-04 (Res.)  3-20-2018 Omit 2 2018-05 (Res.)  3-20-2018 Omit 2 2018-10 (Res.)  6- 5-2018 Omit 2 1353  2- 6-2018 Include 2 1354  3- 6-2018 Omit 2 1355  3-20-2018 Include 2 1356  4- 3-2018 Omit 2 1357  7-17-2018 Include 2 1358  5-15-2018 Include 2 1359  7- 2-2018 Include 2 1360  5-15-2018 Include 2 YMA-2018-01(Res.)  5-15-2018 Omit 3 YMA-2018-03(Res.)  7- 2-2018 Omit 3 YMA-2018-04(Res.)  8- 7-2018 Omit 3 YMA-2018-05(Res.) 11- 6-2018 Omit 3 2018-09(Res.)  5-15-2018 Omit 3 2018-13(Res.)  8- 7-2018 Omit 3 2018-16(Res.) 11- 6-2018 Omit 3 2019-02(Res.)  2-19-2019 Omit 3 1361  8- 7-2018 Include 3 1362  8- 7-2018 Omit 3 1363  8-21-2018 Include 3 1364  8-21-2018 Include 3 1365  9-18-2018 Include 3 1366  9-27-2018 Include 3 1367 10-16-2018 Include 3 1368 10-16-2018 Include 3 1369 10-16-2018 Include 3 1370 10-16-2018 Omit 3 1371 10-16-2018 Omit 3 1372 11- 6-2018 Include 3 1374 11- 6-2018 Omit 3 1375 11- 6-2018 Omit 3 1377 11- 6-2018 Include 3 1378 11-20-2018 Omit 3 1379 12- 4-2018 Include 3 1380  2- 5-2019 Omit 3 1381  2- 5-2019 Omit 3 1382  2- 5-2019 Omit 3 1383  2- 5-2019 Omit 3 1384  2- 5-2019 Include 3 1385  2-19-2019 Include 3 1386  2-19-2019 Include 3 1387  2-19-2019 Include 3  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the city Charter, as adopted by the voters on August 18, 1959, approved by the governor on August 31, 1959, effective at 7:30 p.m., September 28, 1959. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Yukon, exercising the powers of home rule granted to us by the Constitution and laws of the State of Oklahoma, in order to provide for more efficient, adequate and economical government, do hereby ordain, ratify and establish this Charter of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
(Code 1995, Charter, Preamble) 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation, consolidation, merger. 
    When this charter goes into full effect, the Town of Yukon, Oklahoma, shall become a city, and within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter may be established, shall be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Yukon, Oklahoma." The city shall be the legal successor of the town; and as such, it shall succeed to and possess all the property and rights belonging to the town, and shall be liable for all debts and other obligations for which the town is legally bound at the time of the succession in government. 
    The City of Yukon, Oklahoma, may not be annexed by nor consolidated with any other municipality, nor be merged into a combined county-city government or other governmental unit unless a majority of the registered voters of the City of Yukon voting on the question at an election approve such annexation, consolidation or merger. 
(Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 2. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or, if the manner is not thus prescribed, then in such manner as the council may prescribe. 
Sec. 3. - Powers of the city. 
    The city shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and immunities granted to cities by the state constitution and law, and all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. Except as prohibited by the state constitution and law, the city shall have all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, franchises and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
    The city shall have power to adopt a corporate seal and to alter it at pleasure, to sue and to be sued, and to make contracts. It shall have power to acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose, including public utilities, works and ways, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, condemnation or other legal means; and to hold, maintain, improve, enlarge, manage, control, operate, lease, sell, convey or otherwise dispose of, such property as its interests may require, including public utilities, works and ways. It shall have power to issue bonds in the manner and within the limitations prescribed by the state constitution and law. It shall have power, within the limits prescribed by the state constitution and law, to accept and administer federal and state grants-in-aid and to do everything necessary to accomplish the purpose or purposes for which such grants may be made. It shall have power to ordain and to enforce local legislation, consistent with the state constitution and law, for the proper organization and functioning of the city government, for the preservation and enforcement of good government and/order, for the protection of health, life, morals and property, for the prevention, summary abatement and removal of nuisances, and otherwise for the promotion of the common welfare. It shall have power to grant, extend and renew franchises in accordance with the state constitution and law. 
    The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive or limiting; and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, the city shall have all powers which, under the state constitution and law, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate. 
    Provisions of state law relating to matters which may be regulated by cities operating under charters shall be in effect only insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this charter or by ordinance. 
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL 

Sec. 4. - Council-Created, number of members, qualifications. 
    The city shall be divided into four wards as nearly equal in population as practicable. There shall be a council of five members, which shall consist of a councilman at large and one councilman from each of the four wards of the city as the wards are constituted in this charter or as they may hereafter be constituted from time to time by ordinance. Only registered voters of the city shall be qualified for the offices of council members; and council members from the wards shall also be registered voters of their respective wards at the time of their election. A change in ward boundaries shall not disqualify a councilman from completing the term for which he was elected. However, removal of a councilman from one ward to another after his election shall disqualify him from office. No councilman may hold any office or position in the city government by appointment by the city manager. 
(Res. No. 92-3, § 1, 5-5-1992; Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 5. - Mayor and vice mayor. 
    At the first meeting after the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a newly elected councilman or council members, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall elect from its membership a mayor and a vice mayor, who shall serve until the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of the next newly elected councilman or council members and until their respective successors have been elected and qualified. 
    The mayor shall preside at meetings of the council, and shall certify to the correct enrollment of all ordinances and resolutions passed by it. He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law. He shall have no regular administrative duties except that he shall sign such written obligations of the city as the council may require. As a councilman, he shall have all powers, rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of councilman, including the right to vote on questions. 
    The vice mayor shall act as mayor during the absence, disability or suspension of the mayor, or, if a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, until another mayor is elected by the council from its membership for completion of the unexpired term and qualifies. If the office of vice mayor becomes vacant, the council shall elect from its membership another vice mayor for completion of the unexpired term. 
Sec. 6. - Council members; compensation. 
    Neither the mayor nor any other councilman may receive any compensation as mayor or councilman nor for any other service rendered [to] the city, other than expenses. 
Sec. 7. - Council-Powers. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the city, including the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the council. Without limitation of the foregoing, the council may: 
(1)  Appoint and remove the city manager as provided in this charter; 
(2)  By ordinance, enact municipal legislation; 
(3)  Raise revenue and make appropriations, regulate bond elections, the issuance of bonds, sinking funds, the refunding of indebtedness, salaries and wages, and all other fiscal affairs of the city, subject to the provisions of the state constitution and law and this charter; 
(4)  Establish or adopt a pension, retirement and/or social security system or systems for any or all of the officers and employees in the service of the city except members of the council, either alone or in cooperation with the state or federal government or both; 
(5)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city, and investigate municipal affairs; 
(6)  Appoint or elect and remove its own subordinates, the members of the personnel board, the members of the planning commission, the members of the board of adjustment, and other quasi-legislative, quasi-judicial or advisory officers and authorities, now or when and if established, or prescribe the method of appointing or electing and removing them; 
(7)  Grant pardons for violations of the charter and/ordinances, including the remission of fines and costs, upon the recommendation of the municipal judge; 
(8)  Regulate elections, the initiative and referendum, and recall, within the limits prescribed by the state constitution and law and this charter; 
(9)  Regulate the organization, powers, duties and functions of the municipal court and of the minor violations bureau, when and if established, within the limits prescribed by the state constitution and law and this charter; 
(10)  Create, change and abolish all offices, departments and agencies of the city other than the offices, departments and agencies created by this charter; and assign additional powers, duties and functions to offices, departments and agencies created by this charter. 
Sec. 8. - Council not to interfere in appointments and removals. 
    Neither the council, the mayor nor any of its other members may direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office or employment by the city manager or by any other authority, or, except as provided in this charter, participate in any manner in the appointment or removal of officers and employees of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager; and neither the council nor any member thereof may give orders on administrative matters to any subordinate of the city manager either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 9. - City clerk to be clerical officer of council. 
    The city clerk, hereinafter provided for, shall also serve as clerical officer of the council. He shall keep the journal of its proceedings, and shall enroll in a book or books kept for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions passed by it; shall be custodian of such documents, records and archives as may be provided by applicable law or ordinance; shall be custodian of the seal of the city; and shall attest, and affix the seal to, documents when required in accordance with applicable law or ordinance. 
Sec. 10. - Council-Induction into office, meetings. 
    The terms of office of council members shall begin at 7:00 o'clock p.m. on the first Tuesday in May following their election. The council shall hold a meeting at that time, and those whose terms are beginning shall be inducted into office. If a councilman-elect fails to qualify within one month thereafter, his office shall become vacant; and the council shall fill the vacancy. The council shall hold at least one regular meeting every month at such time or times as it may prescribe by ordinance or otherwise. The mayor or any three council members may call special meetings. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, and the journal of its proceedings shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ref. of 9-13-2005) 
Sec. 11. - Council-Absences to terminate membership. 
    If the mayor or any other councilman shall be absent from more than one-half of all the meetings of the council, regular and special, held within any period of four consecutive months, he shall thereupon cease to hold office. 
Sec. 12. - Council members; removal. 
    The mayor or any other councilman may be removed from office for any cause specified by applicable state law for the removal of officers, and by the method or methods prescribed thereby; and may also be removed by recall as provided in this charter. 
Sec. 13. - Council-Vacancies. 
    The council, by majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill vacancies in its own membership for the unexpired terms; provided that, if a vacancy begins before the beginning of a regular filing period for candidates for council members, and the unexpired term extends beyond 7:30 o'clock p.m. on the next first Monday in May, then a councilman for that place shall be elected at the election of that year to serve the rest of the unexpired term beginning at 7:30 o'clock p.m. on said first Monday in May. If the council fails to fill a vacancy in its membership within one month after the vacancy begins, then the mayor on his own initiative may, and upon petition of fifty registered voters shall within ten days after receiving the petition, issue a proclamation calling a special election to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. The special election shall be held not less than forty-five (45) days nor more than ninety (90) days after the issuance of the proclamation. The provisions of this charter relating to regular elections shall govern such special elections insofar as they are applicable. After issuance of such proclamation, the council may not fill the vacancy. 
(Res. No. 92-3, § 2, 5-5-1992; Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 14. - Council-Quorum, rules, yeas and nays. 
    A majority of all of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day or from time to time. The council may determine its own rules. On the demand of any member, the vote on any question shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal. 
Sec. 15. - Ordinances-Enacting clause. 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be, "Be it ordained by the Council of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma," and all ordinances proposed by the voters under their power of initiative, "Be it ordained by the People of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma." 
Sec. 16. - Ordinances-Passage, when in effect. 
    Every proposed ordinance shall be read, and a vote of a majority of all the council members shall be required for its passage. The vote on final passage of every ordinance shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal. The mayor shall have no power of veto. Within ten days after its passage, every ordinance shall be published in full or by number and title in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Every ordinance except an emergency ordinance, so passed and published, shall become effective thirty days after its final passage and publication unless it specifies a later time; provided that an ordinance granting a franchise to a public utility shall not go into effect until it has been published in full in a newspaper of a general circulation within the city and has been approved at an election by a vote of a majority of the registered voters voting on the question. 
(Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 17. - Ordinances-Emergency. 
    An emergency ordinance is an ordinance which in the judgment of the council is necessary for the immediate preservation of peace, health or safety, and which should become effective prior to the time when an ordinary ordinance would become effective. Every such ordinance shall contain, as a part of its title, the words, "and declaring an emergency;" and in a separate section, herein called the emergency section, shall declare the emergency. The council shall vote on the emergency section separately, and must adopt the section by a vote of at least four-fifths of all the members of the council; which vote shall be by yeas and nays, and shall be entered in the journal. An emergency ordinance shall take effect upon passage unless it specifies a later time. 
Sec. 18. - Ordinances-Adoption by reference. 
    The council by ordinance may adopt by reference Codes, ordinances, standards and regulations relating to building, plumbing, electrical installations, milk and milk products, and other matters which it has power to regulate otherwise. Such Code, ordinance, standard or regulation so adopted need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances; but a copy shall be filed and kept in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep copies of all such Codes, ordinances, standards and regulations in force for distribution or sale at their approximate cost. 
Sec. 19. - Ordinances-Codification. 
    The ordinances of the city shall be codified and published in book or pamphlet form at least every ten years unless the council, by use of a loose-leaf system and process of amendment, keeps the Code up-to-date. Titles, enacting clauses and emergency sections may be omitted from the Code and temporary and special ordinances and parts of ordinances may be omitted. Permanent general ordinances and parts of ordinances which are to be repealed by the Code, shall be omitted from the Code. The ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the Code may be revised, rearranged and reorganized; and the Code may contain new matter, provisions of the state constitution and law relating to the city and provisions of this charter. A copy of the published Code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk after the council adopts the Code by ordinance; but the Code need not be enrolled in the book of ordinances. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER AND ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 20. - City manager: appointment, term, qualifications, removal. 
    There shall be a city manager. The council shall appoint him for an indefinite term by a vote of a majority of all its members. It shall choose him solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or state; but, during his tenure of office, he shall reside within the city. Neither the mayor nor any other councilman may be appointed city manager or acting city manager during the term for which he shall have been elected nor within two years after the expiration of his term. The council may suspend or remove the city manager at any time by a vote of a majority of all its members. 
Sec. 21. - Acting city manager. 
    If the city manager is absent from the city or is unable to perform his duties, if the council suspends the city manager, or if there is a vacancy in the office of city manager, the council may appoint an acting city manager to serve until the city manager returns, until his disability or suspension ceases, or until another city manager is appointed and qualifies, as the case may be. The council may suspend or remove an acting city manager at any time. 
Sec. 22. - City manager; powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall execute the laws and/ordinances and administer the government of the city, and shall be responsible therefor to the council. He shall: 
(1)  Appoint, and, when deemed necessary for the good of the service, lay off, suspend, demote or remove, all directors, or heads, of administrative departments and all other administrative officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter, and except as he or the council by ordinance may authorize the head of a department, an officer or an agency to appoint, lay off, suspend, demote and/or remove subordinates in such department, office or agency, subject to such merit-system regulations as the council may adopt; 
(2)  Supervise and control, directly or indirectly, all officers and employees whose appointments are provided for above in this section; 
(3)  Prepare a budget annually and submit it to the council, be responsible for the administration of the budget after it goes into effect, and recommend to the council any changes in the budget which he deems desirable; 
(4)  Submit to the council a report as of the end of the fiscal year on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
(5)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations on matters of policy and other matters to the council as may seem to him desirable; 
(6)  Have such other powers, duties and functions as this charter may prescribe, and such powers, duties and functions consistent with this charter as the council may prescribe. 
Sec. 23. - Administrative departments, offices and agencies. 
    There shall be a department of finance and such other administrative departments, offices and agencies as this charter establishes and as the council may establish. 
Sec. 24. - Public library. 
    Any public library or libraries, when established, shall constitute, or be a part of, an administrative department; and shall be under the supervision and control of an officer or of a board established by ordinance and appointed by the city manager, as the council may ordain. Also, the council may authorize, or enter into arrangements for, a joint or cooperative library service with other units or agencies of government. 
Sec. 25. - City attorney. 
    There shall be a city attorney, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the council for an indefinite term, and who shall be head of the department of law. He shall have such powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by applicable law or by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE; FISCAL AFFAIRS 

Sec. 26. - City clerk: office created, duties. 
    There shall be a city clerk, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term, and who shall be head of the department of finance. Except as the council may provide otherwise by ordinance, the city clerk shall collect or receive revenue and other money for the city, and shall deposit the same with the city treasurer or for the city treasurer in an account or accounts maintained by the city treasurer in a depository or depositories. The city clerk shall maintain or have maintained a general accounting system for the city government. He shall have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by applicable law or by ordinance. 
Sec. 27. - City treasurer: office created, duties. 
    Within the department of finance, there shall be a city treasurer, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. Subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe, the city treasurer shall deposit funds received for the city in such depositories as the council may designate. He shall have such other powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by the charter, by applicable law or by ordinance. 
Sec. 28. - Purchases and sales. 
    The city manager, subject to any regulations which the council may prescribe, shall contract for and purchase, or issue purchase authorizations for, all supplies, materials and equipment for the offices, departments and agencies of the city government. Every such contract or purchase exceeding an amount to be established by ordinance, shall require the prior approval of the council. The city manager also may transfer to or between offices, departments and agencies, or sell, surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment, subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe. 
    Before the purchase of, or contract for, any supplies, materials or equipment, or the sale of any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, ample opportunity for competitive bidding, under such regulations, and with such exceptions, as the council may prescribe, shall be given; but the council shall not except a particular contract, purchase or sale from the requirement of competitive bidding. 
    The council by ordinance may transfer some or all of the power granted to the city manager by this section to an officer appointed by and subordinate to the city manager. 
Sec. 29. - Public improvements. 
    Public improvements may be made by the city government itself or by contract. The council shall award all contracts for such improvements; provided that the council may authorize the city manager to award such contracts not exceeding an amount to be determined by the council and subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe. Every contract for public improvements exceeding an amount to be determined by the council shall be awarded to the lowest and best responsible bidder after such notice and opportunity for competitive bidding as the council may prescribe. All bids may be rejected, and further notice and opportunity for competitive bidding may be given. 
(Res. No. 92-3, § 3, 5-5-1992) 
Sec. 29.1. - Indebtedness of the city-When voter approval required. 
    Neither the City of Yukon nor the Yukon Municipal Authority shall incur any indebtedness in excess of an amount to be established by the city council by ordinance, unless the indebtedness is approved by a vote of the registered voters of the City of Yukon. Provided, however, that nothing herein shall prevent the City of Yukon or the Yukon Municipal Authority from entering into an obligation or contract to be paid from bond proceeds wherein the issuance of the bonds has been duly approved by the voters of the City of Yukon. 
(Res. No. 92-3, § 4, 5-5-1992; Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 30. - Personal interest. 
    Neither any councilman nor the city manager shall sell or barter anything to the city or to a contractor supplying the city; or make any contract with the city; or purchase anything from the city other than those things which the city offers generally to the public (as for example, utility services), and then only on the same terms as are offered to the public. Any such officer violating this section, upon conviction thereof, shall thereby forfeit his office. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city, shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or the council. 
Sec. 31. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July and shall end on the last day of June of every calendar year. 
Sec. 32. - Independent annual audit. 
    The council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants who shall make an independent audit of the accounts and evidences of financial transactions of the department of finance and of all other departments, offices and agencies keeping separate or subordinate accounts or making financial transactions, as of the end of every fiscal year at least, and who shall report to the council and to the city manager. In lieu of the above, the council may arrange with an appropriate state authority for such an audit when and if permitted by law. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 33. - Municipal court[; judge appointed; minor violations bureau; recordkeeping of court proceedings, cases, and fines/money collected]. 
    There shall be a municipal judge, who shall be an officer of the city appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. Only the council may suspend or remove the municipal judge or acting municipal judge, and by a vote of a majority of all its members. The municipal judge shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases involving offenses against the charter and/ordinances of the city; provided that the council by ordinance may create a minor violations bureau with authority to dispose of cases arising out of designated minor violations, such as minor traffic and parking violations, on request of accused persons who desire to plead guilty, and who are able and willing to pay fines and costs, and who do plead guilty and pay fines and costs. The municipal judge shall keep a record of all proceedings of the municipal court, of the disposition of all cases, and of all fines and other money collected. The municipal judge may issue warrants and subpoenas, administer oaths and affirmations, make and enforce proper orders, rules and judgments, and punish for contempt. 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 34. - Overlapping terms of four years-Elected by ward-Nonpartisan elections. 
    The terms of the first council members from wards one and two under this charter shall expire at 7:30 o'clock p.m. on the first Monday in May, 1961. The terms of the first council members from wards three and four under this charter shall expire at 7:30 p.m. on the first Monday in May, 1960. The term of the first councilman at large under this charter shall expire at 7:30 o'clock the first Monday in May, 1962. 
    Beginning in the year 2006, the terms of office of council members shall be for a period of four years. The terms of the council members elected in 2006 from wards one and two under this charter shall expire at 7:00 o'clock p.m. on the first Tuesday in May, 2010. The term of the councilman elected in 2007 at large under this charter shall expire at 7:00 o'clock p.m. the first Tuesday in May, 2011. The terms of the council members elected in 2008 from wards three and four under this charter shall expire at 7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in May, 2012. The successor or successors of those whose terms are expiring shall be elected for overlapping terms of four years. 
    All council members, other than the councilman at large, must be registered voters of their respective wards, and beginning with the elections of 1993, shall be elected by a majority vote of the registered voters of their respective wards. 
    The candidates for councilman at large shall be registered voters of the City of Yukon, and shall be elected at large, by a majority vote of the registered voters of the city. 
    There shall be a primary election, and if necessary, a general election. 
    The election shall be nonpartisan; and no party designation or emblem shall be placed on the ballots. 
    Any councilman who is elected to office after the effective date of this amendment shall be eligible to serve no more than two consecutive terms for which he was elected on the Yukon City Council. The terms served by any councilman elected or appointed to serve less than a full term to fill a vacancy in office shall not be included in the 2-term limitation set forth herein; but no councilman who has completed two (2) terms in office shall thereafter be eligible to serve a partial term. Any councilman who is serving a term in office or who has been elected or appointed to serve a term of office on the effective date hereof shall be entitled to complete his or her term and shall be eligible to serve an additional two (2) terms thereafter. This term limit shall be effective on the 1st day of the year following its adoption. 
(Res. No. 92-3, § 5, 5-5-1992; Ref. of 1-8-2002; Ref. of 8-27-2002; Ref. of 9-13-2005) 
Sec. 35. - Election-Filing. 
    Any qualified person who is an actual resident of the municipality may become a candidate for councilman by filing a declaration of candidacy with the secretary of the county election board during the filing period set forth in the Resolution calling the primary election to be held in February on a date provided by state law. 
(Res. No. 83-10, § 4, 9-6-1983; Ref. of 8-27-2002; Ref. of 9-13-2005; Res. No. 2015-14 , § 2, 8-18-2015) 
Sec. 36. - Election-Time, who elected, etc. 
A.  Primary Election, Time, Who Nominated, etc. A primary election shall be held in February every year on a date that is provided by state law to nominate candidates for city council to succeed the council members whose terms are expiring. If only one person is a candidate for an office to be filled, he or she shall not only be nominated, but also elected ipso facto, and his or her name shall not appear on the primary or general election ballot. 
    In a primary election, the two candidates receiving the greatest number of votes cast for that office shall be nominated. If one of the candidates for an office receives a majority of all votes cast for all candidates for that office, he or she shall be not only nominated, but also elected ipso facto; and his or her name shall not appear on the ballot for a special election. 
B.  General Election; Time, Who Elected, etc. A general election shall be held on the first Tuesday in April every year to elect a councilman or council members to succeed the council members whose terms are about to expire. Only the names of the two candidates for each office nominated in the primary election shall appear on the general election ballots. The candidate for office receiving the majority of votes cast shall be elected. In case of a tie, the election shall be determined fairly by lot between the candidates tying by the county election board in a public meeting. 
(Res. No. 92-3, § 6, 5-5-1992; Ref. of 8-27-2002; Ref. of 9-13-2005; Res. No. 2015-14 , § 2, 8-18-2015) 
Sec. 37. - Registered voters. 
    Only electors residing in the city who have the qualifications prescribed for electors by the state constitution and law, and who are registered as required by law, may vote in city elections. In any election of a councilman from a ward, only registered voters of that ward shall be eligible to vote. 
(Res. No. 92-3, § 7, 5-5-1992; Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 38. - Political activity of officers and employees. 
    No officer or employee of the city except the council members, may work actively for or against, or attempt to influence, the nomination, election or defeat of any candidate for councilman; provided that this shall not prohibit the ordinary exercise of one's right to express his opinions and to vote. Any person who violates this provision, shall be punished, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not exceeding twenty dollars including costs. Such violation shall constitute cause for removal from office or employment. 
Sec. 39. - State constitution and law to govern. 
    The provisions of the state constitution and law applicable to city elections shall govern such elections in the city insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by this charter or by ordinance. 
    A proclamation of the mayor calling a special election need not (but may) set forth the names of the precinct officers who are to conduct the election, but shall give the locations of polling places. 
ARTICLE VII. - RECALL 

Sec. 40. - Recall authorized. 
    The incumbent of any elective city office may be recalled from office by the electors qualified to vote for the election of a successor to the incumbent, in the manner provided herein. 
Sec. 41. - Recall petition. 
    To initiate recall proceedings, a written statement in duplicate proposing the recall of the incumbent of an elective office, shall be made and sworn to by twenty or more registered voters of the city, and shall be filed with the city clerk after the incumbent has held the office at least four months. The statement shall also contain the reason or reasons for which the recall is sought, in not more than two hundred words. Within five days, the city clerk shall mail a copy of such statement by registered, certified or similar special mail to the officer at his residential address. Within ten days after the statement is mailed to the officers, the officer may make and file with the city clerk a written statement in duplicate justifying his conduct in office, in not more than two hundred words; and the clerk on request shall deliver one copy to one of the persons filing the statement proposing the recall. 
    The petition for recall shall include a demand that a successor to the incumbent sought to be recalled be elected, and shall also include before the space where the signatures are to be written the statement giving the reason or reasons for recall under the heading "STATEMENT FOR RECALL," and if the officer has filed a statement as authorized, the statement justifying his conduct in office under the heading "STATEMENT AGAINST RECALL." The two statements shall be in letters of the same size. A copy of the petition shall be filed with the city clerk within one month after recall proceedings are initiated by the filing of the first statement, and before the petition is circulated. 
    A number of registered voters of the city equal at least to twenty (20) percent of the total number of votes cast for governor in the city at the last general state election at which a governor was elected, must sign the petition. Each signer shall write after his name his address within the city, giving street or avenue and number, if any. Not more than one hundred signatures may appear on a single copy of the petition. One of the signers of each copy of the petition shall sign an affidavit on the copy stating that each signer signed the petition in his presence, that each signature on the petition is genuine, and that he believes each signer to be a registered voter of the city. 
    The circulated petition shall be filed with the city clerk not later than one month after the filing of a copy as provided above. Within one month after date of filing of the circulated petition, the city clerk shall examine it and ascertain whether it has been prepared and circulated as required, and whether the required number of registered voters of the city have signed it. He shall then attach his certificate to the petition. If his certificate states that the petition has not been prepared and circulated as required and/or lacks a sufficient number of signatures, the petition shall have no effect; and recall proceedings may not again be initiated against the same person within six months after date of the certificate. But, if the city clerk's certificate states that the petition has been prepared and circulated as required and has a sufficient number of signature[s], he shall submit the petition and certificate to the council at its next meeting. 
(Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 42. - Recall election; council to order. 
    The council, by resolution or ordinance passed within ten days after receiving the petition and certificate of the city clerk, shall order and fix the date for a recall election, which shall be held not less than forty days, nor more than fifty days, after passage of the resolution or ordinance. The city clerk shall cause the resolution or ordinance ordering the election to be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation within the city within ten days after its passage; and such publication shall be sufficient notice of the election. 
    The registered voters of the city may vote in a recall election on the election of successors to more than one incumbent of an elective office. 
(Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 43. - Recall election; how held. 
    The recall election shall be an election to fill the office held by the incumbent sought to be recalled. Any qualified person, including the incumbent, may file as a candidate for the office; and candidates must file at least fifteen days before the recall election. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in the recall election shall be elected. If a candidate other than the incumbent is elected, the incumbent shall be recalled from office effective as of the time when the result of the election is certified. The said successful candidate must qualify within one month thereafter; and if he fails to do so, the office shall be vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled as other vacancies in the council are filled. A candidate thus elected and qualifying shall serve for the unexpired term. If the incumbent is a candidate and receives the greatest number of votes, he shall continue in office without interruption; and recall proceedings may not again be initiated against him within one year after the election. 
    The provisions of this charter relating to city elections shall also govern recall elections insofar as they are applicable and are not superseded by the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 44. - Person recalled or resigning. 
    No person who has been recalled from an office, or who has resigned from such office while recall proceedings were pending against him, may hold any office or position of employment in the city government within one year after his recall or resignation. 
Sec. 45. - Feminine gender. 
    When the masculine gender is used in this charter, it shall also mean the feminine unless the masculine alone is clearly indicated. 
Sec. 46. - Initiative and referendum. 
    The powers of the initiative and referendum are reserved to the people of the city. In the exercise of these powers, the requirements of the state constitution and law shall be observed. 
Sec. 47. - Merit system. 
    Appointments and promotions in the service of the city shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness; and layoffs, suspensions, demotions and removal shall be made solely for the good of the service. Better to achieve these ends, the council may establish a merit system and provide for its proper organization and functioning and for proper personnel administration. 
Sec. 48. - Qualifications of officers and employees. 
    Officers and employees of the city shall have the qualifications prescribed by this charter and such additional qualifications as the council may prescribe; but the council shall not prescribe additional qualifications for council members. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 49. - Nepotism, holding more than one office or position. 
    Neither the city manager, the council nor any other authority of the city government may appoint or elect any person related to any councilman, to the city manager, or to himself, or, in the case of a plural authority, to one of its members, by affinity or consanguinity within the third degree, to any office or position of profit in the city government; but this shall not prohibit an officer or employee so related from continuing in the service of the city. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by this charter or by ordinance, the same person may hold more than one office or position in the city government. The city manager may hold more than one such office or position, through appointment by himself, by the council or by other city authority having power to fill the particular office or position, subject to any regulations which the council may make by ordinance; but he may not receive compensation for service in such other offices and positions. Also the council by ordinance may provide that the city manager shall hold ex officio designated administrative offices subordinate to the city manager as well as other designated compatible city offices. 
Sec. 50. - Official bonds. 
    The city manager, the city clerk, the city treasurer and such other officers and employees as the council may designate, before entering upon their duties, shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their respective duties, payable to the city, in such form and in such amounts as the council may prescribe, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state. The city shall pay the premiums on such bonds. 
Sec. 51. - Oath or affirmation of office. 
    Every officer of the city, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of office prescribed by the state constitution. The oath or affirmation shall be filed and kept in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 52. - Who may administer oaths and affirmations. 
    All officers authorized by federal or state law, the mayor, the city manager, the city clerk, the heads of all other administrative departments, the municipal judge and such other officers as the council may authorize, may administer oaths and affirmations. 
Sec. 53. - Removal, etc., of officers and employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the power to lay off, suspend, demote and remove accompanies the power to appoint or elect; and the city manager or other appointing or electing authority at any time may lay off, suspend, demote or remove any officer or employee to whom he or the other appointing or electing authority respectively may appoint or elect a successor. 
Sec. 54. - Acting officers and employees. 
    The appointing or electing authority who may appoint or elect the successor of an officer or employee, may appoint or elect a person to act during the temporary absence, disability or suspension of such officer or employee, or, in case of a vacancy, until a successor is appointed or elected and qualifies, unless the council ordains that a particular superior or subordinate of such officer or employee shall act. The council by ordinance may provide for a deputy to act in such cases. 
Sec. 55. - Officers to continue until successors are elected or appointed and qualify. 
    Every officer who is elected or appointed for a term ending at a definite time, shall continue to serve thereafter until his successor is elected or appointed and qualifies unless his services are sooner terminated by resignation, removal, disqualification, abolition of the office or other legal manner. 
Sec. 56. - Publicity of records. 
    All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city government, except records and documents the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish, shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 57. - Separability clause. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold any section or part of a section of this charter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of a section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with that section or part of a section. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction holds a part of this charter invalid, or if a change in the state constitution or law renders a part of this charter invalid or inapplicable, the council, by ordinance, may take such appropriate action as will enable the city government to function properly. 
Sec. 58. - Legal notice or process. 
    Every legal notice or process to be served upon the city shall be served upon the city manager, or, in his absence, upon the acting city manager if any, or, in the absence of both, then upon the mayor. 
ARTICLE IX. - AMENDMENT 

Sec. 59. - Amendment-Proposal, ratification, approval. 
    This charter may be amended by proposals therefor submitted by the council, or by the mayor upon initiative petition of the people as provided by the state constitution, at a general or special election, ratified by a majority of the registered voters voting thereon, and approved by the governor as provided by the state constitution. If more than one amendment are [is] proposed, all of them except those which are so interrelated that they should be ratified or rejected together, shall be submitted in such manner that the electors may vote on them separately. A proposition to amend this charter may be either in the form of a proposed amendment to a part or parts of the charter or of a proposed new charter. 
(Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 60. - Amendment-Board of freeholders. 
    The council by ordinance may provide for the election of a board of freeholders to prepare and propose amendments to this charter. When an amendment proposed by a board of freeholders shall have been submitted by the council at a general or special election, ratified by a majority of the registered voters voting thereon, and approved by the governor as provided by the state constitution, it shall go into effect. 
(Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
ARTICLE X. - SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 61. - Reserved. 
Sec. 62. - Inauguration of government under this charter. 
    If a majority of the registered voters of the town voting on the question vote to ratify this charter, the provisions of this charter relating to the election of council members, shall go into effect for the purpose of electing a councilman from ward four and a councilman at large immediately upon approval of the charter by the governor. 
    On the fourth Tuesday after the governor approves this charter, a special election shall be held to elect a councilman from ward four and a councilman at large. The president of the board of trustees of the town shall issue a proclamation calling the election, but the election shall be held notwithstanding the failure of said president to call it. The provisions of this charter relating to elections shall govern the election of council members for which this section provides insofar as they are applicable. For the purpose of holding this special election, the precincts may continue as they have been prior to the adoption of this charter. 
    This charter shall go into full effect, and the government provided by it shall be inaugurated, at 7:30 o'clock p.m. on the first Monday after the date provided herein for the special election. The terms of the council members elected as provided in this section, shall begin at that time; and the council shall hold its first meeting at that time. 
(Ref. of 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 63. - Officers and employees continued, etc. 
    When this charter goes into full effect, the incumbents of the offices of trustees from wards one, two and three of the town, shall become the first council members from wards one, two and three of the city respectively; and the incumbent of the office of president of the board of trustees of the town shall become first mayor of the city. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter, the council members of the city shall be compensated for their services at the same rate as trustees of the town were compensated at the time this charter goes into full effect, until 7:30 o'clock p.m. on the first Monday in May 1961. 
    When this charter goes into full effect, the incumbents of the offices of town clerk and town treasurer shall become respectively city clerk and city treasurer; and said incumbents may be removed by the city manager only with approval of a four-fifths vote of the council prior to 7:30 o'clock p.m. on the first Monday in May 1961. 
    The incumbents of all appointive offices and positions of the town government, including the town marshal who shall become chief of police, shall continue in the offices and employments which they respectively hold, after this charter goes into full effect; and shall serve until their services are terminated in accordance with the provisions of this charter relating to the creation, change and abolition of offices, and removal of officers and employees. 
Sec. 64. - Ordinances continued. 
    All ordinances, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this charter, shall continue in effect until they are repealed or until they expire by their own limitations. 
Sec. 65. - Pending actions and proceedings. 
    The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes full effect, brought by or against the municipality or any office, department, agency or officer thereof. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table shows the location within the Charter of amendments thereto. 
Legislation Adoption 
Date Section Section 
in Charter Ord. of 8-18-1959 8-18-1959 - 1-65 Res. No. 83-10 9-6-1983 4 35 Res. No. 92-3 5-5-1992 1 4 2 13 3 29 4 29.1 5 34 6, 7 36, 37 Ref. of 1-8-2002 1-8-2002 - 1 - 4 - 13 - 16 - 29.1 - 34 - 37 - 41, 42 - 59, 60 - 62 Ref. of 8-27-2002 8-27-2002 - 34-36 Ref. of 9-13-2005 9-13-2005 - 10 - 34 - 35 - 36 Res. No. 2015-14  8-18-2015 2 35 36.A.  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Yukon, Oklahoma" and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Yukon Code." 
(Code 1975, § 1-1; Code 1995, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codification, 11 O.S. § 14-108; compilation and publication of penal ordinances, 11 O.S. § 14-109 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
(b)  In the interpretation and application of any section of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any section of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general section imposed by the Code, the section imposing the greater restriction shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(c)  All sections, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true purposes, intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. 
(d)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Yukon, as ratified at an election held on August 18, 1959, and any amendments thereto, a copy of which is printed in this volume. 
    City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Yukon, in Canadian County, Oklahoma. 
    City council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the city council of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Yukon, Oklahoma, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall not be counted in the computation. 
    County. The term "county" means Canadian County, Oklahoma. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only extends and is applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number includes the plural and any word importing the plural number includes the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, commissions, etc. Whenever any officer, department or board or commission is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma," unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Whenever used with respect to any penalty, the term "person," as applied to partnerships or associations, means the partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes personal, real and mixed property. 
    Public grounds; public places. The term "public grounds," "public places" or "public buildings" shall be construed to mean any park or open place adjacent thereto; any lake or stream; and any and every public ground, public square, public park, street or sidewalk or another public place within the city. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes land together with all things attached to the land so as to become a part thereof, and all rights thereto and interest therein. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Oklahoma. 
    Statutory references. Reference to the statutes of the State of Oklahoma means the 1991 statutes, as amended. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place, square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tenant; occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representations of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4; Code 1995, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 25 O.S. § 1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; notes; references to Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1995, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing after sections throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
(Code 1995, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Code and/ordinances effective outside city on property owned or controlled by city. 
    All provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city now in effect or adopted in the future are hereby extended to all real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city outside the corporate limits of the city, and shall be in full effect therein, insofar as they are applicable. Any words in any such provision indicating that its effect is limited to the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to mean and include also such outlying real property belonging to, or under the control of, the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Code 1975, § 1-7; Code 1995, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Authority over municipal property, 11 O.S. § 22-116. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance does not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the repealed ordinance took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the repealed ordinance. 
(Code 1995, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty for violations of Code and/ordinances; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine up to $750.00, except that the maximum fine for traffic-related offenses relating to speeding or parking shall not exceed $200.00 unless otherwise allowed by state law. 
(2)  Court cost in each case filed in the municipal court shall be as established by resolution plus fees for mileage of jurors and witnesses, and the costs of incarceration, both before and after conviction (costs of incarceration shall include housing, food, clothing, medical care, dental care and psychiatric services), in addition to state-mandated fees. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense; provided, however, if the violation involved the sale of goods or products, each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(4)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1975, § 1-9; Code 1995, § 1-7; Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1094, § 1, 1-15-2002; Ord. No. 1174, § 1, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 1311, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations generally, 11 O.S. § 14-111; retention of certain fees, 11 O.S. § 14-111.1 et seq.; costs and fees, 11 O.S. § 27-126. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code and/ordinances. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction should hold one or more sections or a part of a section of this Code or of an ordinance passed hereafter invalid, such holding shall not affect the remainder of the Code or ordinance nor the context in which such section, sections or part of a section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section, sections or part of a section so held invalid. 
(Code 1975, § 1-12; Code 1995, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance creating specific sewer and paving districts and other local improvement districts or otherwise relating to specific local improvements and special assessments therefor; 
(4)  Any ordinance calling or otherwise relating to specific elections; 
(5)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or excluding territory as a part of the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(7)  Any ordinance accepting the beneficial interest in any trust created by a trust indenture; 
(8)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument; 
(9)  Any ordinance concerning the location of retail package stores; 
(10)  Any ordinance vacating, opening or dedicating specific streets and alleys; 
(11)  Any ordinance relating to specific street improvements and assessments therefor; 
(12)  Any ordinance relating to the grade or alignment of specific streets; 
(13)  Any ordinance naming or renaming specific streets; 
(14)  Any ordinance granting railroads the right to use specific streets and alleys; 
(15)  Any ordinance creating, establishing or otherwise relating to any system of limited access facilities consisting of streets, avenues, boulevards and ways, or parts thereof; 
(16)  Ordinance number 475, parts 2 and 3, being the zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations set out in appendix A to this Code, and amendments thereto; 
(17)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(Code 1975, §§ 1-5, 22-1; Code 1995, §§ 1-9, 102-1) 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, rights, penalties not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or suffering any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 1-6; Code 1995, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Yukon, Oklahoma, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Yukon, Oklahoma, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10; Code 1995, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1975, § 1-11; Code 1995, § 1-12) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities, O.S. title 11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Seal described. 
    The seal of the city shall be a pictorial quadrant displaying symbols for the City of Yukon, the State of Oklahoma, the Chisholm Trail and the Czech Capital, all of which shall be surrounded by the words "Seal of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma" and the date 1891. Such seal shall be circular and not more than two inches in diameter. 

(Code 1975, § 2-173; Code 1995, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Flag described. 
    The flag of the city shall be rectangular in shape with a blue stripe across the top, a large white field in the center with the outline of the state printed in blue and the name "YUKON" printed in large red letters diagonally across the state with blue numerals "1891" in the panhandle part of the state and the words "Vitame Vas" in blue in the lower right-hand corner of the state, and a red stripe across the bottom of the flag. 

(Code 1975, § 2-175; Code 1995, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-3. - Retention of flag. 
    The flag shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 2-176; Code 1995, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-4. - Membership of city in municipal league. 
    The city is hereby authorized to procure the services of the Oklahoma Municipal League and to have membership therein and to appropriate funds to pay for such services and membership. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6; Code 1995, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-5. - Membership in ACOG. 
    The city is hereby authorized to have membership in the Association of Central Oklahoma Governments (ACOG). 
(Code 1975, § 2-7; Code 1995, § 2-6) 
Secs. 2-6-2-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-29. - Meetings-Place. 
    Every meeting of the city council shall be held in the council chamber unless the mayor or the council members designate another place in the city for the holding of special meetings; provided that any adjourned meeting may be held at any other place within the city designated by the council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1; Code 1995, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-30. - Same-Time of regular meetings. 
    The city council shall hold a regular meeting on the first and third Tuesdays of every month, the time of day of such meetings to be set by the council at least two weeks prior to the meeting date; provided that if such a Tuesday falls on a holiday, the regular meeting shall be held at that time on the next day which is not a holiday. The city council may change the date for any specific regular meeting, by vote, at least two weeks in advance of such regular meeting date. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2; Code 1995, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-31. - Rules of order. 
    Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, 11th Edition, is adopted for use by the city council and all commissions and committees of the city and shall control the procedures of the city council and such commissions and committees. 
(Code 1995, § 1-13; Ord. No. 1068, § 1, 10-17-2000) 
Secs. 2-32-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-51. - Provision of bonds to perform duties. 
(a)  Before entering upon their official duties, the following personnel of the city government shall provide bonds for the faithful performance of their official duties, payable to the city, with a surety company authorized to operate within the state, in the amounts respectively indicated after their titles: 
(1)  City manager: ..... $10,000.00 
(2)  City clerk: .....  25,000.00 
(3)  City treasurer: .....  50,000.00 
(b)  The city council, by motion or resolution, may require other officers and employees in such positions as it may designate to be bonded by individual or blanket bonds. 
(c)  The city shall pay the premiums on bonds provided by this section. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5; Code 1995, § 2-56) 
Secs. 2-52-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLERK 

Sec. 2-76. - General powers and duties. 
    The city clerk shall be an officer of the city. The city clerk shall have the powers, duties and functions as may be prescribed by the Charter, by applicable state law, this Code, or by ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 2-50; Code 1995, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-77. - Destruction of certain city records. 
(a)  General authority to dispose documents, records. The city clerk is hereby authorized each year to destroy or otherwise dispose of the following papers, documents and records after the expiration of the following periods of time: 
(1)  One year. Parking citations after the date of issuance; 
(2)  Two years. Municipal court warrants, water, sewer, garbage and utility receipts and statements, which have been previously audited; inspection records relating to water meters and sewer inspections; miscellaneous petitions and letters addressed to the city council on matters other than pertaining to the items hereinafter set forth; utility billing ledger or register; utility cash receipts ledger or register; utility accounts receivable ledger or register; and fire run contracts; 
(3)  Five years. Successful and unsuccessful bids for the purchase or furnishing of equipment, material and improvements; inspection records except as provided for in subsection (2) of this section; claims that have been denied; license applications; bonds; special, primary and general election payrolls; election tabulations and returns; withholding statements; garnishment records; traffic tickets and receipts; bond receipts and fine receipts; information and complaints; court dockets; paid general obligation and revenue bonds; paid street improvement, sewer and sidewalk district bonds; warrants; claims; checks; vouchers; purchase orders; and payrolls; 
(4)  Ten years. Inventories; appropriation ledgers; sidewalk assessment records, except payment records; cash receipt books or registers for the general fund, the street and alley fund, any bond fund or sinking fund and all other trust funds that have been audited; and 
(5)  Fifteen years. Sewer and street improvement district records, except payment records. 
(b)  Testing laboratory results, inspection records. This section shall not be construed to authorize or allow the destruction of any testing laboratory results or the inspection records of public improvements of the city. 
(c)  Records involving pending litigation retained. None of the records, papers or documents mentioned in subsection (a) of this section and pertaining to pending litigation shall be disposed of until such litigation is finally terminated. 
(Code 1975, § 2-51; Code 1995, § 2-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 22-131; authority to have records photographed or reproduced on film or stored on optical disc, 11 O.S. § 22-132; Records Management Act, 67 O.S. § 201 et seq.; Oklahoma Open Records Act, 51 O.S. § 24A.1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-78-2-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ATTORNEY AND DEPARTMENT OF LAW 

Sec. 2-98. - Department of law established. 
    There is established a department of law. 
(Code 1975, § 2-65; Code 1995, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-99. - Powers and duties. 
    The city attorney shall be the chief legal advisor of the city council and all officers, departments and agencies of the city government in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He shall represent the city in proceedings in the courts. He shall perform all services incident to his position which may be required by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 2-66; Code 1995, § 2-107(a)) 
Secs. 2-100-2-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-127-2-151. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-152. - Police department established;duties. 
(a)  There shall be a police department. All police officers shall be officers of the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the police department to apprehend, arrest and bring to justice all violators of the ordinances of the city; to suppress all riots, affrays, and unlawful assemblies which may come to their knowledge, and generally to keep peace; to serve all warrants, writs, executions, and other processes properly directed and delivered to them; to apprehend and arrest persons violating federal or state law as provided by law, and to turn them over to proper authority; and in all respects to perform all duties pertaining to the offices of police officers. The police department shall have charge of and operate the city jail. 
(Code 1975, § 2-77; Code 1995, § 2-166) 
State Law reference- Collective bargaining for police officers, 11 O.S. § 51-101 et seq. 
Sec. 2-153. - Fire department established; duties. 
(a)  There shall be a fire department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the fire department, among others, to extinguish fires; to rescue persons endangered by fires; to resuscitate, and to administer first aid to, persons injured in or about burning structures, or elsewhere in case of an emergency; to promote fire prevention; and unless otherwise provided, to enforce all ordinances relating to fires, fire prevention, and safety of persons from fire in theaters, stores, and other public buildings. 
(Code 1975, § 2-78; Code 1995, § 2-167) 
Sec. 2-154. - Dispatch telephone service established; additional personnel. 
(a)  There shall be a 24-hour dispatch telephone service for both the fire department and the police department which shall be maintained by the police department personnel, subject to administrative directives from the city manager. 
(b)  The police department and/or the fire department shall have such additional personnel, either paid or voluntary, as the council may authorize. 
(Code 1975, § 2-79; Code 1995, § 2-168) 
Secs. 2-155-2-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-177. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a development services department. 
(Code 1975, § 2-89; Code 1995, § 2-181) 
Sec. 2-178. - Duties. 
    The development services department under the supervision of the director of development services, or his designee, shall: 
(1)  Inspect the construction, alteration or remodeling of buildings and structures, the installation of electrical wiring and of plumbing, and those electrical, gas, air conditioning, refrigeration, heating and plumbing fixtures and facilities installed within the city. 
(2)  Specifically enforce the provisions of chapter 6, chapter 10, chapter 204, chapter 18, chapter 34, chapter 207, chapter 210, chapter 201, chapter 213, section 90-3, chapter 94, chapter 118, and appendixes A and B to this Code. 
(3)  Promulgate and enforce such rules, regulations and procedures for the efficient administration of those duties required by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-90; Code 1995, § 2-182; Ord. No. 1113, § 1, 2-18-2003) 
Sec. 2-179. - Powers of code compliance inspector. 
    Inspectors of the development services department are hereby vested with the power and authority, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Order the stopping of construction of any building or structure, or the alteration, repair or wrecking thereof, if such is being done in a careless or reckless manner, or in violation of the provision of this Code. 
(2)  Call upon the police and fire departments in enforcing violations of this Code for violations committed in the presence of the inspector. 
(3)  Order the disconnection of all gas connections to those residences or businesses which the inspector determines have dangerous gas fittings, and such gas shall remain disconnected until such time as violations on dangerous fittings have been remedied. 
(4)  Order the discontinuance of water service to any building, structure, or premises being built, used or occupied in violation of this Code, and such water service shall remain discontinued until such time as the violations have been remedied to the satisfaction of the inspector. 
(5)  Order the disconnection of electric service where improper or defective wiring exists or where electrical construction or equipment has been installed without a required permit. 
(6)  Enter upon or enter in any building, structure or premises at all reasonable times so as to inspect all electrical wiring, electrical equipment, plumbing, air conditioning systems, heating systems, or refrigeration systems which are now or may hereafter be installed, or to ascertain the sanitary condition, damage or structural soundness of that building, structure or premises. 
(7)  Recommend that the council declare a nuisance or request the removal of any building, wall or other structure, which is upon, adjoining or near any street, avenue, alley or public ground, which has become dangerous or insecure or liable to collapse from inherent structural weakness or decay, or from fire damage, or for any other reason becomes a menace to life or property. 
(8)  Revoke any permit where it is found that there has been a misrepresentation of facts or a violation of this Code. 
(9)  Require any owner or agent who is constructing with reinforced concrete or structural steel, to supply a non-city inspector satisfactory to the department of community development; such inspector is to continually oversee all work during that construction. 
(10)  Order the vacation of any habitation which is unfit for occupancy due to damage, decay, dilapidation, unsanitary or unsafe conditions which create a serious health or safety hazard to the occupants or to the public. 
(11)  Order the closing of any streets and the rerouting of traffic when the city has contracted with any person for the improvement of such street, for that period of time necessary to permit the proper completion of that improvement. 
(12)  Issue citations for violations of zoning ordinances upon direction of the director of community development or his designee, the director of public works, city engineer, development coordinator, or any agent of any of these officials. 
(Code 1995, § 2-183; Ord. No. 1113, § 2, 2-18-2003) 
Sec. 2-180. - Director to serve as zoning administrator. 
    The director of development services shall serve as the zoning administrator, unless the city manager designates someone else to serve in such capacity. 
(Code 1975, § 2-91; Code 1995, § 2-184; Ord. No. 1113, § 3, 2-18-2003) 
Secs. 2-181-2-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-199. - Debt limitations. 
(a)  Neither the city nor the Yukon Municipal Authority shall incur any indebtedness, in any manner, or for any purpose, to an amount exceeding, in any year, the income and revenue provided for such year without the assent of three-fifths of the voters thereof, voting at an election, to be held for that purpose, nor, in cases requiring such assent, shall any indebtedness be allowed to be incurred to an amount, including existing indebtedness, in the aggregate exceeding five percent of the valuation of the taxable property therein, to be ascertained from the last assessment for state and county purposes previous to the incurring of such indebtedness. 
(b)  The following bonds and indebtedness are conclusively determined to be within and not to exceed the limitations of Section 2-137(a), or any debt limitations of the Code of Ordinances or the Charter of the city, and any conflicting provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the city are modified to the extent necessary to fully validate the following: 
(1)  Yukon Municipal Authority Sales Tax and Utility System Revenue and Refunding Bonds, Series 2012 in the aggregate principal amount of $6,500,000.00. 
(2)  Yukon Municipal Authority Sales Tax and Utility System Revenue and Refunding Bonds, Series 2013 in the aggregate principal amount of $8,500,000.00. 
(3)  Yukon Municipal Authority Sales Tax Revenue Note, Series 2015A in the aggregate principal amount of $9,520,000.00. 
(4)  Yukon Municipal Authority Sales Tax Revenue Note, Series 2015B in the aggregate principal amount of $5,805,000.00. 
(5)  Yukon Municipal Authority 2017 Revenue Note in the aggregate principal amount of $380,000.00. 
(6)  Yukon Municipal Authority Sales Tax Revenue Note, Series 2017 in the aggregate principal amount of $10,000,000.00. 
(7)  Yukon Municipal Authority Sales Tax Revenue Note, Series 2017B in the aggregate principal amount of $5,840,000.00. 
(8)  Yukon Municipal Authority 2018 Revenue Note in the aggregate principal amount of $825,000.00. 
(9)  Yukon Municipal Authority Sales Tax Revenue Note, Series 2018 in the aggregate principal amount of $5,675,000.00. 
(10)  Yukon Municipal Authority 2018A Revenue Note in the aggregate principal amount of $800,000.00. 
(Code 1975, § 2-18; Code 1995, § 2-137; Ord. No. 1084, § 1, 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 1092, § 1, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 1101, § 1, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 1104, § 1, 12-17-2002; Ord. No. 1134, § 1, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 1155, § 1, 11-16-2004; Ord. No. 1163, § 1, 1-3-2005; Ord. No. 1186, § 1, 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 1201, § 1, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 1205, § 1, 3-20-2007; Ord. No. 1217, § 1, 1-15-2008; Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 10-6-2008; Ord. No. 1246, § 1, 11-3-2009; Ord. No. 1249, § 1, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 1260, § 1, 11-2-2010; Ord. No. 1261, § 1, 11-24-2010; Ord. No. 1270, § 1, 10-18-2011; Ord. No. 1277, § 1, 6-19-2012; Ord. No. 1281, § 1, 10-16-2012; Ord. No. 1302, § 1, 10-21-2014; Ord. No. 1310, § 1, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 1324, § 1, 9-3-2015; Ord. No. 1327, § 1, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1341, § 1, 10-18-2016; Ord. No. 1343, § 1, 4-18-2017; Ord. No. 1346, § 1, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 1349 , § 1, 10-17-2017; Ord. No. 1360 , § 1, 5-15-2018; Ord. No. 1361 , § 1, 8-7-2018; Ord. No. 1377 , § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 2-200. - Compliance and operation in accordance with Municipal Budget Act. 
(a)  Election. The city elects to comply with and operate in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Municipal Budget Act (11 O.S. § 17-201 et seq.). 
(b)  Authorization to meet requirements. The chief executive officer, as defined by the Act, is hereby authorized to take such actions as are necessary to meet the requirements of the Act. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13; Code 1995, § 2-131) 
Sec. 2-201. - Review of invoices by department heads. 
    All invoices presented to the city for payment shall be reviewed by the appropriate department head. The department head shall examine each invoice and all supporting documentation to determine whether the claims should be paid, and shall make a recommendation to the city manager concerning payment. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13.1; Code 1995, § 2-132) 
Sec. 2-202. - Approval of invoice by city council upon recommendation by city manager. 
    The city manager, or his designee, shall make a recommendation to the city council concerning payment of each claim. The city council may approve a claim without reviewing the invoice and supporting documentation based on the recommendation of the department head and the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1975, § 2-15; Code 1995, § 2-133) 
Sec. 2-203. - Service charge on returned checks; deposit and disbursement of funds. 
(a)  There shall be a $30.00 service charge on all checks returned unpaid to the city. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall deposit daily all funds received for the city in such depositories as are designated by the city council. He shall disburse such funds in the manner provided by applicable law or ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 2-53; Code 1995, § 2-134; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 9-17-2002) 
Sec. 2-204. - Security for deposits. 
    The deposits of the city shall be secured by the Security for Local Public Deposits Act, 62 O.S. § 517.1 et seq., and the provisions of such sections are hereby adopted in this section insofar as they are applicable to the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-54; Code 1995, § 2-135) 
Sec. 2-205. - Authorization to develop internal control structures. 
    The city manager and all department heads shall develop additional internal control structures to provide reasonable assurance against unauthorized or illegal payment of invoices. 
(Code 1975, § 2-16; Code 1995, § 2-136) 
Sec. 2-206. - Fee to defray costs of collecting delinquent fines, fees, court costs, and mandatory state fees. 
    In accordance with 11 O.S. § 22-138, there is hereby imposed an additional fee for an amount as determined by the city for the collection of delinquent fines, fees, court costs, and other mandatory state fees due the City of Yukon that have been referred to a private agency for collection. 
(Ord. No. 1321, § 1, 7-17-2015) 
Secs. 2-207-2-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASES AND SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-236-2-263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES 

Sec. 2-264. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contractual services means services performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city, and may include the use of equipment or the furnishing of commodities in connection with such services under express or implied contract. The term "contractual services" shall include travel; freight; express; parcel post; postage; telephone; telegraph; utilities; rents; printing and binding; repairs, alterations and maintenance of buildings, equipment, streets, bridges and other physical facilities of the city; and other services performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-19; Code 1995, § 2-216) 
Sec. 2-265. - By whom made. 
    All purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for the offices, departments and agencies of the city government shall be made by the city manager or by other city personnel in accordance with purchase authorizations issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 2-20; Code 1995, § 2-217) 
Sec. 2-266. - When council approval required. 
    Every contract for or purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for more than $25,000.00 shall require the prior approval of the city council, and under no circumstances shall such contract or purchase be made without first obtaining the approval of the council, except in the case of a bona fide emergency. 
(Code 1975, § 2-21; Code 1995, § 2-218; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-267. - General procedure. 
(a)  All contractual services and expenditures for other services performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city, the estimated cost of which is $25,000.00 or more, shall be purchased by competitive bidding procedures. 
(b)  All contractual services and expenditures for other services performed for the city by persons not in the employment of the city, the estimated cost of which is less than $25,000.00, shall be made by open market procedures. 
(Code 1975, § 2-22; Code 1995, § 2-219; Ord. No. 949, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-268. - Purchasing program. 
    A purchasing program is established in concert with the desire to provide a cost-effective and efficient government, to ensure that the city purchases without prejudice, and to obtain the maximum value for each dollar of expenditure in accordance with established quality standards. 
(Code 1975, § 2-23; Code 1995, § 2-220) 
Sec. 2-269. - Purchasing agent. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designee, shall be the city's purchasing agent, hereafter referred to as "the agent." 
(b)  The agent is authorized to purchase or contract for all supplies, services and equipment needed by the city in accordance with policies and procedures prescribed by the city council and such rules and regulations as the city manager shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing function. 
(c)  The agent shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Procuring products and contracts of the highest quality and at the least expense. 
(2)  Endeavoring to obtain as full and open competition as possible. 
(3)  Establishing rules and regulations as necessary for the purchasing operation. 
(4)  Making every reasonable and financially sound attempt to solicit bids and quotations, and purchase supplies, services and equipment from vendors located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(5)  Prescribing and maintaining such forms needed to implement this division. 
(6)  Maintaining documentation on all purchasing activities. 
(7)  Exploiting the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full advantage of discounts. 
(8)  Procuring all federal tax exemptions to which the city is entitled. 
(9)  Declaring vendors as ineligible in accordance with the provisions of section 2-273. 
(Code 1975, § 2-24; Code 1995, § 2-221) 
Sec. 2-270. - Purchasing procedures. 
(a)  Except as provided in this division, no city officer or employee shall order the purchase of supplies, services, or equipment or make any contract within the purview of this division other than through the agent. Any purchase order or contract, other than valid emergency purchases made in accordance with this division, that are contrary to the provisions of this purchasing program shall not be approved by the agent, nor shall the city be bound to pay for such purchases or contracts. 
(b)  A purchase requisition must be submitted to the agent prior to the execution of any contract. 
(c)  A purchase requisition must be submitted to the agent prior to any purchase of noncontractual supplies, services and equipment, unless: 
(1)  The purchase of an item is made under an approved blanket purchase order (BPO). 
(2)  The purchase of an item is made with petty cash funds, provided that the purchase does not exceed a total of $25.00 and a blanket purchase order for the desired vendor does not exist. 
(d)  Upon receiving a requisition, the agent shall comply with the following procedures: 
(1)  Reject or amend any purchase requisition that is not consistent with the provisions of this division or in the best interests of the city. 
(2)  If the purchase of supplies or materials is less than $2,000.00, no special action is required. 
(3)  If the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services is $2,001.00 to $24,999.00, apply open market procedures. Three phone quotes are required. 
(4)  If the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services is $25,000.00 or more, apply formal competitive bidding procedures. 
(e)  The agent may issue a BPO to purchase supplies, materials and equipment. There are two types of BPOs: 
(1)  An open BPO that is used to purchase supplies, materials and equipment of nominal value on an "as needed" basis from a vendor that is used frequently by the city. At the agent's discretion, an open order may be issued by the department, remain in effect for up to one year and in an amount determined by the agent. 
(2)  A closed BPO is used for contracts for goods and services that are awarded after a competitive bidding process. The length of the purchase order shall not exceed one year, unless specified by the contract. 
(Code 1975, § 2-25; Code 1995, § 2-222; Ord. No. 949, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-271. - Open market procedures. 
(a)  All open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based upon at least three price quotes. 
(b)  The agent shall solicit price quotes for open market purchases and select the lowest and best quoting vendors subject to those considerations in section 2-272(j)(1)-(7), inclusive, by any of the following three methods: 
(1)  By direct mail request to prospective vendors; 
(2)  By telephone; or 
(3)  By public notice posted on the bulletin board of the city hall. 
(c)  The agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and bids submitted in competition, and such records shall be open to public inspection at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1995, § 2-222.1; Ord. No. 949, 6-4-1996) 
Sec. 2-272. - Bid procedures. 
(a)  Unless noted as an exception below, any supply, service, equipment or contract that is valued at $25,000.00 or more shall be subject to this competitive bidding process: 
(1)  Supplies, materials, equipment or contracts purchased through an officially recognized state purchasing agency bid are exempt. (Items listed in a "state contract" are examples of this exemption.) The agent, however, may initiate a formal bidding process if he believes a cheaper price may be obtained. 
(2)  Emergency purchases may be made if less than $25,000.00, and when the purchase of supplies, materials or equipment are needed because a condition exists which would endanger the safety, health or welfare of the public and/or would cause extreme financial loss to the city. Purchases in excess of $25,000.00 may be authorized by the council at an emergency, special or regular meeting. 
(3)  Contractual services (gas, electricity, telephone, cable television and the like) purchased from a public utility at a price or rate determined by the state corporation commission or other government authority or by an approved franchise agreement with the city. 
(4)  The competitive bidding provisions of this division may not apply to professional services provided by, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, certified public accountants, financial underwriters, insurance agents or carriers for the purchase of insurance or loss control services, planners or other professional services exempted by the council. 
(5)  The competitive bidding provisions of this division shall not apply to the hiring of temporary employees, including contracts with firms, businesses, or other entities to provide temporary employment services for the city; provided that the contract or temporary employment relationship can be terminated at the will of the city, and without advance notice to the supplier of the temporary employee services; and provided that the city shall obtain at least three quotes over the telephone from vendors who have previously provided the city with evidence of state-approved workers' compensation coverage indemnifying the city and the qualifying vendor with the lowest and best proposal. The city manager shall have the authority to enter into a contract on behalf of the city, provided that the provisions of this subsection are met. 
(b)  The agent shall ensure that the appropriate specifications and the request for bid package are prepared. The department requesting the purchase shall provide assistance to the agent necessary in the development of the specifications and bid package. 
(c)  Every bid process shall begin with a public notice which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and posted at city hall. 
(d)  The agent shall make a reasonable attempt to notify potentially interested vendors who are located within the city limits of the bid request. 
(e)  All bids shall be submitted to the agent in a sealed envelope or packet that shall be identified as "SEALED BID" on the outside of the container. When the bid is received, the receiving party shall indicate the time, date and his initials on the bid container. 
(f)  All bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice by the agent, or designee, and a city employee acting as a witness. 
(g)  A tabulation of all bids received may be posted in the city hall for public inspection. 
(h)  The city shall have the authority to reject the bid package or any and all bids and any part or provision of a bid or the bid proposal when it is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. The city also reserves the right to waive any irregularity of the bidding process. Additionally, the city has the authority to direct the readvertisement or resolicitation of any bid. 
(i)  In the case of a tie, either bidder may be selected or the purchase may be divided among those tying, if it is advantageous to the city. 
(j)  It is the responsibility of the agent to review and investigate all bids received and to make a recommendation to the city regarding the award to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the agent shall consider the following: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract to provide the services promptly or within the required time periods without delay or interference. 
(3)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
(4)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and/ordinances of the city. 
(5)  The financial resources and the ability of the bidder to perform or provide the service. 
(6)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or services. 
(7)  Whether a bidder is entitled to receive a local preference in accordance with section 2-274. 
(k)  In the event annual purchases of like goods (meters, asphalt, etc.) are expected to exceed the $2,000.00 or $25,000.00 threshold, the purchase shall be treated as subject to the $2,000.00 open market or $25,000.00 bid procedure requirements. 
(Code 1975, § 2-26; Code 1995, § 2-223; Ord. No. 949, 6-4-1996; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 11-16-1999; Ord. No. 1218, § 1, 2-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-273. - Ineligible vendors. 
(a)  The agent is authorized to declare a vendor as ineligible to receive any business from the city if the agent determines that the vendor: 
(1)  Has previously provided poor service to the city. 
(2)  Has previously provided products of poor quality or undesirable features to the city. 
(3)  Is not financially able to provide the product or service. 
(4)  Charges more than the bid or estimate, plus any change orders or amendments. 
(5)  Cannot provide the product or service that the city's specifications require. 
(6)  Cannot meet or provide the conditions, credentials, or qualifications that the city's specifications require. 
(7)  Has a conflict of interest as stated in section 2-275. 
(b)  Ineligible vendors are banned from providing products, services and contracts to the city in accordance with the following timetable: 
Action Time Period First time declared ineligible 3 months Second time declared ineligible 6 months Third time declared ineligible 1 year Fourth time declared ineligible Permanently Conflict of interest Until 
conflict ends  
(c)  The council may permanently disqualify a vendor from providing products, services or contracts to the city if the council determines that such action would be in the best interest of the community. 
(d)  An ineligible or disqualified vendor may appeal to the council for a change in status. 
(Code 1975, § 2-27; Code 1995, § 2-224) 
Sec. 2-274. - American, Oklahoman, and Yukon preferences. 
(a)  The city shall make a reasonable attempt to ensure that every purchased product or service is manufactured or assembled in the United States of America. 
(b)  The city shall make a reasonable attempt to do business with state firms and purchase state-made products. 
(c)  The city shall make a reasonable and economical attempt to purchase supplies, services, and equipment or make contractual arrangements with firms located within the city. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to grant local preference status to businesses located within the city, and award a bid, authorize a contract or make a purchase with the firm if its bid, estimation or listed price is no more than five percent higher than the bid, estimation or listed price of the lowest vendor. 
(Code 1975, § 2-28; Code 1995, § 2-225) 
Sec. 2-275. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this division in which the agent or any officer or employee of the city is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except the council shall have the authority to waive compliance with this section when it finds such action to be in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  The agent and every council member, officer and employee of the city shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or receive any gift, whether in the form of money, services, loans, promises or any other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence them, or could be reasonably expected to influence them, in the performance of their official duties, or was intended as a reward for any official action on their part. 
(Code 1975, § 2-29; Code 1995, § 2-226) 
Sec. 2-276. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of this section, the purchasing agent may exempt from competitive bidding procedures a requisition for a sole source or sole brand acquisition. 
(1)  In order to make a sole source or sole brand acquisition, when the acquisition exceeds $2,000.00 and unless the acquisition is not otherwise exempted, the purchasing agent shall retain in the acquisition file an affidavit signed by the department director substantially in the following form: 
SOLE SOURCE OR SOLE BRAND 
ACQUISITION AFFIDAVIT 
    Department _____ 
    Supplier Name _____ 
    Supplier Address _____ 
    Supplier Telephone _____ 
    I hereby affirm that the acquisition pursuant to the provisions of the attached requisition or contract is very specialized or requires great expertise and to the best of my knowledge (name of supplier) is the only person or business entity which is singularly and peculiarly qualified to provide the acquisition, and if a product is the only brand/or product which is singularly and peculiarly unique, for the following reasons: 
____________________ 
    The following is a brief description of all efforts which were made to verify that the services or products to be purchased pursuant to the provisions of the attached requisition or contract qualify as a sole source or sole brand acquisition: 
____________________ 
    I understand that the signing of this affidavit knowing such information to be false may subject me to punishment for perjury. 
_____
Department Director  
STATE OF OKLAHOMA )  ) ss COUNTY OF CANADIAN )  
    Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
_____
Notary Public  
My commission expires: 
_____ 
(2)  Any person affirming the affidavit required by this subsection who knows the information to be false shall be deemed guilty of perjury and, upon conviction, punished pursuant to law. Upon conviction or upon entering a plea of nolo contendere pursuant to this subsection, the person shall immediately forfeit his position and shall be ineligible for appointment to or employment in the service of the city. 
(3)  Upon determination by the city manager that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this subsection has occurred, the manager shall send findings to the city attorney that support the determination. The city attorney shall review the findings and determine whether to investigate or prosecute the person. 
(4)  Prior to submitting a requisition for a sole source or sole brand acquisition for payment, the purchasing agent shall document reasons sole source or sole brand purchase is necessary and shall retain a written record for three years following the end of the fiscal year during which the sole source or sole brand acquisition was paid. 
(b)  It is the city's policy not to endorse or permit an employee's name, position or the city's name to be used and/or advertised as supporting or endorsing a product or vendor. 
(c)  The agent shall have the authority to require such bonds in cash or otherwise for such amount that he may deem sufficient to secure the execution and performance of a contract for furnishing goods or services for the best interests of the city. 
(d)  No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this division. 
(e)  It is the intent of the city that all provisions contained in this division shall be in addition to state-mandated procedures, and that nothing in this division shall affect the applicability of those statutes. 
(Code 1975, § 2-30; Code 1995, § 2-227; Ord. No. 1060, § 1, 7-6-2000) 
Secs. 2-277-2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SALES OF SURPLUS SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 2-301. - General authority. 
    The city manager may sell or issue authorizations for the sale of surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment, subject to the provisions of the Charter and this division. 
(Code 1975, § 2-34; Code 1995, § 2-241) 
Sec. 2-302. - When council action required. 
    No surplus or obsolete supplies, materials, or equipment of a value of more than $500.00 may be sold until the council shall have declared them obsolete or surplus. 
(Code 1975, § 2-35; Code 1995, § 2-242) 
Sec. 2-303. - General procedure. 
    Before the city manager sells any surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, except as otherwise provided in section 2-304, he shall advertise them for sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the city or give notice in such other manner as he deems necessary to adequately reach prospective buyers and give them an opportunity to make bids. All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place, except when the sale is by auction. The city manager may repeatedly reject all bids and advertise or give notice again. He shall sell such supplies, materials or equipment to the highest responsible bidder for cash. In case of a tie, he may sell to either of the bidders tying, or may divide the sale among two or more tying bidders, always selling to the highest responsible bidder for cash. 
(Code 1975, § 2-36; Code 1995, § 2-243) 
Sec. 2-304. - When competitive bidding not required. 
    The city manager may sell the following without giving an opportunity for competitive bidding: 
(1)  Surplus or obsolete supplies, materials or equipment, the total value of which does not exceed $1,000.00 in a single transaction. 
(2)  Supplies, materials or equipment, when sold at a price, at least as great as that paid by the city for the same. 
(Code 1975, § 2-37; Code 1995, § 2-244) 
Secs. 2-305-2-326. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-327. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, it shall be mandatory that new appointments by the city council to any commission or board of the city whose membership consists of four or more members which are appointed by the city council, be made so as to allow representation from each ward within the city, unless the nominating council member nominates an individual who does not reside in the same ward as the nominating council member as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  If a member of any board or commission shall be absent from more than one half of all meetings of the board or commission, regular or special, held within any period of six consecutive months, he shall thereupon cease to be a member of the board or commission. The chairperson of the board or commission shall report to the mayor as to this absenteeism. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided, a majority of all the duly appointed members of a board or commission shall constitute a quorum to do business. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided, all commissions and boards shall consist of five members, one from each of the four wards of the city and one member at large. Each member shall be a resident of the city. To be appointed to a board or commission, an individual shall be nominated by the council member from his ward, or the council member at large, and approved by the city council; provided, however, the nominating council member may nominate an individual from another ward, if the nominating member believes that such action would be in the city's best interest. 
(e)  Each appointed member of a board or commission shall hold office for a term of three years, ending at 7:30 p.m. on the third Tuesday in June, or until his successor takes office; except that, in the first instance, the nomination of the Ward I and the nomination of the Ward II council members shall be appointed to serve until 7:30 p.m. on the third Tuesday in June, in 1994; the nomination of the at-large council member shall be appointed to serve until that time in 1995; and the nomination of the Ward III and the nomination of the Ward IV council members shall be appointed to serve until that time in 1996. The term of each member of a board or commission shall correspond with the term of the nominating council member. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of a term shall be filled only for the unexpired term. 
(f)  A change in ward boundaries shall not disqualify a member of a board or commission from completing the term for which he was appointed. Removal of a member from one ward to another after his appointment shall disqualify him from office. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms in the same manner as original appointments. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9; Code 1995, § 2-266) 
Sec. 2-328. - Required vote for binding action. 
    Unless otherwise provided, a majority vote of all the duly appointed or elected members of a board, committee or commission shall be required to pass or approve an item that is before it. 
(Code 1995, § 2-267; Ord. No. 952, 7-2-1996) 
Secs. 2-329-2-359. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ACCESSIBILITY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-360. - Created. 
    There is created the city accessibility commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-221; Code 1995, § 2-276) 
Sec. 2-361. - Composition, appointment, term of members. 
    Each appointed member of the accessibility commission shall be nominated, confirmed and serve a term of office as provided in section 2-327. 
(Code 1975, § 2-222; Code 1995, § 2-277; Ord. No. 932, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 2-362. - Vacancies. 
    If a vacancy shall occur in the membership of the city accessibility commission, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in like manner as original appointments. 
(Code 1975, § 2-223; Code 1995, § 2-278) 
Sec. 2-363. - Removal of members. 
    The mayor, by and with the consent of the city council, may remove any member of the city accessibility commission at any time. 
(Code 1975, § 2-224; Code 1995, § 2-279) 
Sec. 2-364. - Compensation of members. 
    The members of the city accessibility commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while carrying out the duties of the commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-225; Code 1995, § 2-280) 
Sec. 2-365. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the city accessibility commission shall be public. The commission's regular meetings shall be held each month, at a time and date to be set by the commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-226; Code 1995, § 2-281) 
Sec. 2-366. - Organization. 
    There shall be a chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary of the city accessibility commission elected by the commission, and at its pleasure, removed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-227; Code 1995, § 2-282) 
Sec. 2-367. - Record of proceedings. 
    The city accessibility commission shall keep and preserve a true record of all its proceedings and official acts, and such record of proceedings shall be attested by the secretary. 
(Code 1975, § 2-229; Code 1995, § 2-283) 
Sec. 2-368. - Functions. 
    The city accessibility commission shall serve as an advisory commission to the city and the city council, and shall make recommendations concerning: 
(1)  Making city municipal facilities accessible to all those with physical disabilities; 
(2)  Encouraging and assisting the private sector to become accessible; 
(3)  The new development and implementation of a disability awareness campaign that projects a positive impression of individuals in the community who are disabled; and 
(4)  Act as an advisor on new commercial, office and industrial construction projects. 
(Code 1975, § 2-230; Code 1995, § 2-284) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND LOW-POINT BEER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37 O.S. § 502 et seq.; low-point beer, 37 O.S. § 163.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Permitting intoxicated persons in restaurants, places of recreation, etc. 
    No person operating a café, restaurant, club or any place of recreation shall permit any person to be drunk or intoxicated in such place of business. 
(Code 1975, § 3-19; Code 1995, § 6-17; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
Secs. 6-2-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, 37 O.S. § 502 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-21. - Definitions. 
    All words, phrases and terms used in this article shall be interpreted and construed in conformity with the definitions of the same set forth in the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, O.S. § 37A-1-103, with the same force and effect as if set out at length herein, and such definitions are made a part of this section by reference. 
(Code 1975, § 3-1; Code 1995, § 6-1; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-22. - Unlawful manufacture, sale, possession, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, barter, sell, give away or otherwise furnish to another, or to receive or use any alcoholic beverage of any kind, except as permitted by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or under his control, or to transport or in any manner convey from place to place within the city, any alcoholic beverage, except as permitted by law. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or aid or abet in keeping or maintaining a place where any alcoholic beverage is manufactured, sold, bartered, given away or otherwise furnished in violation of state law or the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 3-2; Code 1995, § 6-2; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-23. - Purchase only from licensed dealers. 
    No person shall buy any alcoholic beverages, either at retail or wholesale, from any person other than a licensed dealer under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1975, § 3-4; Code 1995, § 6-4; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-24. - Application for certificate; investigations; issuance of certificate of zoning and certificate of compliance; definitions. 
(a)  Every applicant for a certificate of compliance with the zoning, fire, health and safety codes of the city required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (O.S. § 37A-1-101 et seq.) shall apply at the office of the city clerk by: 
(1)  Filing a written application on forms prescribed by that office; and 
(2)  Paying a verification and certification fee in the amount established by resolution at the time of filing. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of compliance, the city clerk shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the premises proposed for licensed operations complies with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and any health, fire, building and other safety codes applicable to it. 
(c)  The city clerk shall act on all such applications within 20 days of receipt thereof. 
(d)  Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable zoning ordinances, a certificate of zoning shall be issued to the alcoholic beverage laws enforcement (ABLE) commission. 
(e)  Upon finding that the premises of an applicant for a certificate is in compliance with all applicable fire, safety, and health codes, a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the ABLE commission. 
(f)  The above certificates of compliance shall be signed by the mayor. 
(Code 1975, § 3-33; Code 1995, § 6-45; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 523(B). 
Secs. 6-25-6-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PACKAGE STORES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1387 , adopted Feb. 19, 2019, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 6-52-6-55, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1975, §§ 3-8-3-11; Code 1995, §§ 6-6-6-9. 

Sec. 6-52. - Sale of alcoholic beverages packaged with nonalcoholic promotional items. 
    A retailer may offer for sale and sell alcoholic beverages which are packaged or are to be packaged with nonalcoholic promotional items, if such packaging and all nonalcoholic promotional items are provided by the manufacturer or agent of the manufacturer at the expense of the manufacturer or agent of the manufacturer, regardless of where such packages are assembled. 
(Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 534(C). 
Sec. 6-53. - Operation of package stores prohibited during certain hours and on certain days. 
    No person holding a state package store license shall sell or keep the package store premises open for the purpose of selling any alcoholic beverages at any hour other than between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday; provided that no such sales shall be made, or package store premises be allowed to remain open for the purpose of making such sales on New Year's Day, Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. Package store licensees shall be permitted to sell, or keep package store premises open for the purpose of selling, alcoholic beverages on the day of any general, primary, runoff primary or special election whether on a national, state, county or city election, provided that the election day does not occur on any day on which such sales are otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537(C)(3). 
Sec. 6-54. - Containers not to be opened or beverages consumed in package store. 
(a)  No person holding a state package store license shall suffer or permit any retail container to be opened or any alcoholic beverage to be consumed on his licensed premises. 
(b)  No person shall open a retail container or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a retail package store. 
(Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537(A)(3), (C)(3). 
Secs. 6-55-6-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 6-84. - Persons under 21; misrepresentation of age to induce persons to sell or serve alcoholic beverages; entering or attempting to enter package store or bar area; penalties; substance abuse prevention program. 
(a)  No person holding a state package store license shall permit any person under 21 years of age to enter into, remain within or loiter about his licensed premises. 
(b)  No person under 21 years of age shall enter into, remain within or loiter about a retail package store. 
(Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1387 , adopted Feb. 19, 2019, repealed the former § 6-84 and enacted a new § 6-84 as set out herein. The former § 6-84 pertained to minors not permitted in package stores and derived from Code 1975, § 3-12 and Code 1995, § 6-10. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. §§ 537(C)(7), 538(E). 
Sec. 6-85. - Minors not to be employed in selling or handling. 
    No licensee of the ABLE Commission shall employ any person under the age of 21 in the selling or handling of alcoholic beverages. Provided that a mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event or bottle club licensee may employ servers who are at least 18 years of age, except persons under 21 years of age, may not serve in designated bar or lounge areas, and a mixed beverage, beer and wine, caterer, public event, special event or bottle club licensee may employ or hire musical bands who have musicians who are under 21 years of age if each such musician is either accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or has on their person, to be made available for inspection upon demand by any ABLE commission officer or law enforcement officer, a written, notarized affidavit from the parent or legal guardian giving the underage musician permission to perform in designated bar or lounge areas. 
(Code 1975, § 3-13; Code 1995, § 6-11; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537(B)(2). 
Sec. 6-86. - Sale or delivery to minors. 
    No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages to any person under 21 years of age. 
(Code 1975, § 3-14; Code 1995, § 6-12; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537(A)(1). 
Sec. 6-87. - Misrepresentation of age for purpose of buying. 
    No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his age, in writing or by presenting false documentation of age, for the purpose of inducing any person to sell him alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1975, § 3-15; Code 1995, § 6-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 538(E). 
Sec. 6-88. - Possession by minors in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in possession of any alcoholic beverage as defined by O.S. § 37A-1-103 while such person is upon any public street, alley, road or highway or in any public building or place. 
(Code 1975, § 3-16; Code 1995, § 6-14; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 10A O.S. § 2-8-222. 
Sec. 6-89. - Sale or delivery to intoxicated, insane or mentally deficient persons. 
    No person shall knowingly sell, deliver or furnish alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated person or to any person who has been adjudged insane or mentally deficient. 
(Code 1975, § 3-17; Code 1995, § 6-15; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 537(A)(2). 
Secs. 6-90-6-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OCCUPATION TAX ON RETAILERS AND WHOLESALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to levy an occupation tax generally, 37 O.S. § 554.1; maximum fee, 37 O.S. § 518. 

Sec. 6-107. - Levied; amount. 
    There is hereby levied and assessed an annual occupation tax on every business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages as specifically enumerated herein and in the amount established by resolution. 
(1)  Brewer. 
(2)  Distiller. 
(3)  Winemaker. 
(4)  Oklahoma winemaker. 
(5)  Rectifier. 
(6)  Wholesaler. 
(7)  Class B wholesaler. 
(8)  Retail package store. 
(9)  Mixed beverage. 
a.  Initial. 
b.  Renewal. 
(10)  Caterer. 
a.  Initial. 
b.  Renewal. 
(11)  Special event, per day. 
(12)  Beer and wine license. 
a.  Initial. 
b.  Renewal. 
    The annual occupational tax for the privilege of operating a business or occupation relating to alcoholic beverages as specifically enumerated above, within the city, shall not exceed the state license fee for such licenses. 
(Code 1975, § 3-30(a); Code 1995, § 6-41; Ord. No. 913, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-1995; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-108. - Fee for mixed beverage, bottle club. 
    The annual license fee for a mixed beverage or bottle club license for those service organizations or fraternal beneficiary societies which are exempt under Section 501(c)(19), (8) and (10) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be as established by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 3-30(b); Code 1995, § 6-42) 
Sec. 6-109. - Payment required; penalty. 
(a)  Any state licensee originally entering upon any occupation herein listed shall pay the tax therefor at the office of the development services on or before the date upon which he enters such occupation. Such licensee shall provide a copy of his current state license before payment of an occupation tax will be accepted. Thereafter, the licensee shall pay the tax annually on or before April 1. 
(b)  The occupation tax subject to this division shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the year in which an occupation begins operations, but shall be nonrefundable. 
(c)  Upon payment of such occupation tax, the development services department shall issue a receipt to such state licensee, which such licensee shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises wherein he carries on his occupation. 
(d)  Any person who engages in any of the occupations taxed by this division without paying the occupation tax imposed therefor in advance of such operation is guilty of an offense against the city, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 3-31; Code 1995, § 6-43; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-110. - Annual report. 
    The development services department shall make an annual report to the ABLE commission, covering the fiscal year, showing the number and class of licensees subject to the occupation tax and the amount of money collected from said tax. 
(Code 1975, § 3-32; Code 1995, § 6-44; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Annual report if an occupational tax levy required, 37 O.S. § 554.1. 
Sec. 6-111. - Failure to pay. 
    Any person who shall fail to pay the occupation tax levied by this division, when the same shall become due, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with Section 1-7. Each day's failure to pay such tax shall be deemed and considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 3-34; Code 1995, § 6-46; Ord. No. 1387 , 2-19-2019) 
Secs. 6-112-6-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOW-POINT BEVERAGES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Low-point beer, 37 O.S. § 163.1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-136. - Adoption by reference. 
    The definitions concerning intoxicating liquors contained in 37 O.S. § 163.2 are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 1975, § 3-95; Code 1995, § 6-66) 
Sec. 6-137. - Sale prohibited during certain hours on Sunday. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense or serve for consumption on the premises beverages containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and not more than 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 12:00 noon on Sunday. 
(Code 1975, § 3-96; Code 1995, § 6-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of city to prohibit Sunday sales, 37 O.S. § 213. 
Sec. 6-138. - Sale of low-point beer for off-premises consumption prohibited during certain hours. 
    The sale of low-point beer, as defined in 37 O.S. § 163.2, for off-premises consumption is hereby prohibited between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the same day. 
(Code 1995, § 6-67.1; Ord. No. 921, § 1, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 6-139. - Sale to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give any low-point beer to any person under 21 years of age. 
(Code 1975, § 3-97; Code 1995, § 6-68; Ord. No. 922, § 1, 11-21-1995) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 241. 
Sec. 6-140. - Possession by minors in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor to be in possession of any low-point beer while such minor is upon any public street, alley, road or highway or in any public building or place. 
(Code 1975, § 3-98; Code 1995, § 6-69; Ord. No. 923, § 1, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 6-141. - Permitting minors to loiter in sales premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining a place of business where low-point beer is sold for consumption on the premises to permit any minor to loiter in such place of business. 
(Code 1975, § 3-99; Code 1995, § 6-70; Ord. No. 924, § 1, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 6-142. - Permitting intoxicated persons to enter or loiter around sales premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining a place of business where low-point beer is sold for consumption on the premises to permit any intoxicated person to loaf or loiter or be in or about such place of business. 
(Code 1975, § 3-100; Code 1995, § 6-71; Ord. No. 925, § 1, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 6-143. - Sale on public easement, right-of-way, street, etc., prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any low-point beer from or on any public easement, right-of-way, street, road or highway within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 3-101; Code 1995, § 6-72; Ord. No. 926, § 1, 11-21-1995) 
Secs. 6-144-6-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAILER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 6-170. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any retail dealer to sell, distribute or dispense any low-point beer within the city without having first obtained a license issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1975, § 3-106; Code 1995, § 6-86; Ord. No. 927, § 1, 11-21-1995) 
Sec. 6-171. - Application. 
    Application for a license required by this division shall be filed with the city clerk on forms provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 3-107; Code 1995, § 6-87) 
Sec. 6-172. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a license required by this division shall be as established by resolution. Such fee shall be paid to the city clerk at the time of issuance of the license. 
(Code 1975, § 3-108; Code 1995, § 6-88; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to impose above license fee, 37 O.S. § 163.10. 
Sec. 6-173. - Issuance. 
    The city clerk shall issue a license applied for under this division upon payment of the required fee and a satisfactory showing that the applicant has obtained all state and county permits required by law and has, in all other respects, complied with the laws of the state and/ordinances of the city relating to the sale and distribution of low-point beer. 
(Code 1975, § 3-109; Code 1995, § 6-89) 
Sec. 6-174. - Not transferable. 
    No license issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1975, § 3-110; Code 1995, § 6-90) 
Sec. 6-175. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued under this division shall expire on April 30 next following the date of issuance. 
(Code 1975, § 3-111; Code 1995, § 6-91) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOL HALLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Pool and billiards halls generally, 21 O.S. § 1102 et seq. 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pool hall means a room, hall, place or building within the city in which any billiard or pool, or combination billiard and pool, tables are or may be kept or operated for hire. 
(Code 1975, § 4-11; Code 1995, § 10-26) 
Sec. 10-20. - License. 
    No person shall maintain or operate a pool hall within the city without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and paying therefor the sum established by resolution. The license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewed upon paying the fees herein required from year to year. The license shall not be transferable and it may be revoked for violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 4-12; Code 1995, § 10-27) 
State Law reference- Public pool or billiard halls to be licensed by district court clerk, 21 O.S. § 1102; authority of city to levy license tax on such halls, 21 O.S. § 1104. 
Sec. 10-21. - Closure on Sunday, between 11:00 p.m. and daylight. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any pool hall to be open on Sunday or between 11:00 p.m. and daylight on any other day. 
(Code 1975, § 4-13; Code 1995, § 10-28) 
Sec. 10-22. - Prohibited conduct and conditions generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, maintain or permit in a pool hall any conduct or condition which annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15; Code 1995, § 10-29) 
Sec. 10-23. - Disorderly conduct; contests of strength or agility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disorderly conduct or practice in a pool hall, or to engage or participate in any fight, boxing contest, wrestling match or other contest of physical strength or agility in a pool hall. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create any loud noise that would disturb a reasonable person. 
(Code 1975, §§ 4-16, 4-17; Code 1995, §§ 10-30, 10-31) 
Sec. 10-24. - Immoral or indecent shows or exhibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or engage in any show or exhibition in a pool hall that is obscene under law. 
(Code 1975, § 4-18; Code 1995, § 10-32) 
Sec. 10-25. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble in any manner or to participate in any game of chance or lottery in a pool hall. 
(Code 1975, § 4-19; Code 1995, § 10-33) 
Sec. 10-26. - Selling, furnishing or drinking intoxicating liquor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any intoxicating liquor in a pool hall. 
(Code 1975, § 4-20; Code 1995, § 10-34) 
Sec. 10-27. - Person in charge not to permit violations of article. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or other person in charge or control of any pool hall to knowingly permit any violations of this article in such hall. 
(Code 1975, § 4-21; Code 1995, § 10-35) 
Sec. 10-28. - Operation in violation of article a nuisance. 
    Any pool hall operated in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1975, § 4-22; Code 1995, § 10-36) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals generally, 4 O.S. § 30.1 et seq.; injuries to animals, 21 O.S. § 1680 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian, or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food, water, ventilation or shelter for a period in excess of 24 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
    Animal means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, including, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. 
    Animal control officer means any person employed or appointed by the city or county who is authorized to investigate and enforce violations relating to animal control or cruelty under the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Animal control office means the Yukon Animal Control Office. 
(2)  Animal control officer means any police officer or animal control officer in the Yukon Police Department. 
    Animal services means the organization or authority designated by the city to enforce animal control ordinances, provide temporary care for stray and surrendered animals and carry out other relevant animal-related governmental laws and programs. 
    Animal shelter means any facility designated or operated by the city, or its authorized agents, for the purpose of housing, impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
    Animals ferae naturae means animals which are of a dangerous nature to mankind that are normally found in the wild, and shall not include domesticated animals. 
    At large means any animal, other than a dog, that is off the premises of the owner, while not under the supervision and control of the owner, or, in the case of dogs, any dog that is not at all times, whether on or off the premises of the owner, under the direct control of the owner. 
    Attack means the act by any animal of approaching a domestic animal or a person in such a manner that hostile contact with the other animal or person occurs, or if the act required a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when such person is conducting himself peacefully and lawfully. Conduct of an animal, such as charging, growling, or chasing in a menacing fashion is considered an attack if a reasonable person believes such conduct threatens the safety and welfare of any person. 
    Auction means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This definition does not apply to individual sale of animals by owners. 
    Baiting means to attack with violence, to provoke, or to harass an animal with one or more animals for the purpose of training an animal for, or to cause an animal to engage in fights with or among other animals. 
    Bite means that the skin has been penetrated by an animal's teeth or beak. 
    Citation means a written notice issued to a person by an officer stating that the officer has probable cause to believe that the person has committed an act or omission in violation of this chapter, and that the city court will hear the charge. 
    Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus or performing animal exhibition. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of Yukon Animal Control, or any law enforcement agency: 
(1)  Has aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered, or has inflicted severe injury on a human being or damaged property. 
(2)  Has more than once severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property. 
(3)  Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or is a dog trained for dogfighting; or 
(4)  Has, when unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by any of the above-referenced authorities. 
This definition shall not apply to dogs utilized by law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. 
    Direct control means effective, immediate, continuous physical control of a dog at all times such as by means of a leash, lead, kennel, secure fence, or chain of such strength to restrain the dog and controlled by a responsible person capable of restraining the dog, or safe and secure restraint within a building or vehicle. If the controlling person is at all times fully and clearly within unobstructed sight and hearing of the dog, voice control shall be considered direct control when the dog is actually participating in certified training or in an official showing, obedience, or field event. Direct control shall not be required of dogs actually participating in a legal sport in an authorized area or of government police dogs. 
    Domestic animal means any animal whose natural habitat is with humans and is kept for pleasure or for utility, that has adapted to life in association with and to the use of human beings. 
    Ear tipping means straight-line cutting of the tip of the left or right ear of a cat while the cat is anesthetized and has been sterilized and given a rabies shot. A cat with a tipped ear is considered to be sterile and vaccinated against rabies. 
    Feral animal means any wild animal, whether it was born in the wild or reverted to a wild state due to abandonment or lack of domestication. 
    Fowl means poultry of any kind, including, but not limited to, chickens, pheasants, guineas, turkeys, peacocks, ducks and geese. 
    Humane officer means any person designated by the city or a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of the state. 
    Impoundment means impoundment at a shelter or the taking or picking up and confining of an animal by an officer under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Kennel means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats; or any premises where more than three dogs or three cats over the age of six months are kept. 
    Legal responsibility means the owner as hereinafter defined shall be considered legally responsible for the actions of an animal and the care of an animal. In the absence of written proof of ownership, all adult members of the household shall be considered legally responsible. 
    Licensing authority means the City of Yukon. 
    Litter means the offspring produced at one birth by a mammal that normally bears several young during a delivery. 
    Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine, ratite, or swine class. This includes goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle, ostriches, and other grazing animals. 
    Owner means any person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity owning, keeping, or harboring one or more animals, or in the case of a person under the age of 18 years of age, that person's parent or legal guardian. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. The term "owner" may also mean a person legally competent to enter into a contract acquiring a dog or cat from a releasing agency. This definition shall not apply to any veterinary clinic or boarding kennel. 
    Performing animal exhibition means any display, spectacle, act or event, other than circuses, in which performing animals are used. 
    Pet means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
    Pet grooming means a commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed. 
    Pet shop means any person, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, except for a licensed kennel, that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal. 
    Proper shelter for an outdoor animal shall include, but is not limited to, a permanent structure with four sides, a top and a bottom. The structure shall have a waterproof roof, be structurally sound, and shall be sufficiently insulated to protect the animal from the elements, with space to stand up, sit down, turn around and lie down in a normal posture. The structure and surrounding area needs to be free from trash or waste so as not to threaten the physical well-being of the animal. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal drums, cardboard boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
    Public nuisance means any animal which causes any harm and: 
(1)  Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Unprovoked, attacks persons, other animals or fowl; 
(3)  Trespasses on school grounds; 
(4)  Is repeatedly at large; 
(5)  Damages or destroys private or public property; 
(6)  Barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, or emits any loud or offensive noise which offends adjoining residents; or 
(7)  Conduct by stray or feral cats that disturbs the peace by habitually and significantly destroying, desecrating or soiling property against the wishes of the owner of the property. 
    Releasing agency means any pound, shelter, or humane society organization, whether public or private. 
    Restraint means any animal secured by a leash or lead when off the owner's property. 
    Riding school or stable means any place which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instructions, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro. 
    Scratch means that the skin has been penetrated by an animal's claws, horn, or other appendage. 
    Spay means to remove the ovaries of a female dog or cat in order to render such animal unable to reproduce. 
    Spay or neuter means rendering permanently a dog or cat incapable of reproduction by a licensed veterinarian. 
    Sterilization means to spay or neuter a cat or dog. 
    Stray animal means an animal that is regularly off the property of the owner, is not under the physical control and restraint of the owner, and is not regularly provided with food by its owners. 
    TNR means trap, neuter, and return. 
    Unprovoked means any situation where the victim has been acting peacefully and lawfully. 
    Veterinarian means a person trained and authorized to treat animals medically who is duly licensed and registered by the state. 
    Vicious animal means any animal that attacks, bites, or attempts to bite without provocation. 
    Wild animal means and includes any animal, reptile, or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition, and must be kept in confinement to be brought within the control of the owner. 
    Zoological park means any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of undomesticated animals operated by a person, partnership, corporation or government agency. 
(Code 1995, § 14-1; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit animals running at large generally, 11 O.S. § 22-115. 
Sec. 14-2. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 14-75; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-3. - Disposition of fees and penalties. 
    It shall be the duty of anyone collecting any fees or penalties under this chapter to pay all such monies to the City of Yukon. Monies collected from penalties from fines shall be utilized for the purpose of sterilization of animals, animal control activities, the city shelter, and support of feral animal community care. 
(Code 1995, § 14-76; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-4. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by municipal authority. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with a humane officer in the performance of his duties. 
(b)  Issuance of a citation; impoundment of animal. An animal control officer or other law enforcement officer, upon observing a violation of this chapter, or having probable cause to believe a violation of this chapter has occurred, may do the following: 
(1)  Issue a verbal or written warning to the owner or keeper of the animal indicating the nature of any complaint or violation and actions required to become compliant. 
(2)  Issue a citation to the owner or keeper of the animal. For any violation of section 14-73, the citation may also be issued to the driver or registered owner of the vehicle. 
(3)  Impound the animal that is the subject of the violation. 
(Code 1995, § 14-74; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-5. - Interference with enforcement; breaking of property. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Interfere with, hinder, or molest any police officer, animal control officer or other person in the performance of any duty required by this chapter. 
(2)  Refuse to surrender an animal upon lawful demand by any police officer, animal control officer, or other authorized person in the performance of any duty required by this chapter. 
(3)  Harbor, hide, or conceal any animal that any police officer or animal control officer has deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(4)  Break open or assist in the breaking open of any of the fences, gates, fastenings or enclosures of facilities and vehicles maintained by city animal services; and no unauthorized person shall remove or release any animal from animal services property, vehicles, live traps or other sites designated for official animal care functions. 
(Code 1995, § 14-49; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-6. - Animal care. 
(a)  No owner or caretaker shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and clean water for the animal in a sufficient quantity to maintain the animal in a healthy condition. Water shall be provided at all times in a stable container that is sized appropriately for the animal's species and breed, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment. 
(b)  No person shall cause or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(c)  Any person wishing to dispose of an animal may bring such animal to the city shelter for the purpose of euthanasia or adoption and shall pay a fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council and shall sign a release authorizing the immediate humane euthanasia of the animal. 
(d)  No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(e)  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes any animal, shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible or shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. If the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society. 
(f)  No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal, except as provided by state law; provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. 
(g)  Owners and caretakers of animals shall provide all health-related grooming, cleaning and parasite control required to ensure that the animals are maintained in a humane state and able to carry out normal activities. 
(h)  No person, except a licensed veterinarian, shall crop or cut an animal's ears and/or tail or otherwise disfigure any animal. 
(i)  No person shall dye or artificially color any animal. 
(j)  Chickens, ducklings, other fowl younger than four weeks of age, or rabbits younger than two months of age, may not be sold in quantities of less than 25 to a single purchaser. 
(k)  No person shall display, give away, or offer for sale any live animal on private property without consent of the owner, or public land, rights-of-way, or easements, except in areas that have been authorized and permitted by the city for such use. 
(l)  Natural disasters. It shall be the responsibility of each pet owner and caretaker to provide adequate water, food, shelter, and health care for their animal during tornadoes and other natural disasters and to responsibly evacuate them when necessary. 
(m)  Tethering. No person shall under any circumstances tether or otherwise confine any animal in a manner that is injurious to the animal's health, safety, and well-being. Tethering of an animal is prohibited during severe weather occurrences and natural disasters, including extreme heat, extreme cold, flood, hail, fire, tornado, hurricane, or blizzard. Proper and humane tethering includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The tether shall be attached to a properly fitted collar or harness. The use of a choke chain or prong collar is prohibited. 
(2)  The tether shall not extend over an object or edge in such a manner that could result in strangulation of or injury to the animal. The length of the tether must be a minimum of six feet and allow ingress and egress from proper shelter, access to drinking water, and freedom to move about and avoid areas of animal waste. 
(3)  The weight and gauge of any tether or chain shall not be more than necessary to establish direct control. Logging chains and vehicle tow chains are expressly prohibited. No person shall add any weight to an animal collar, harness, chain, or tether. 
(4)  No animal shall be tethered on a vacant or abandoned property. 
(Code 1995, § 14-2(a), (b), (d)-(n); Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
State Law reference- Prohibited acts with regard to animals, 21 O.S. § 1680 et seq. 
Sec. 14-7. - Restraint. 
(a)  No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. 
(b)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(c)  Every animal which has bitten or molested a person on at least one occasion shall be confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner. 
(Code 1995, § 14-38; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-8. - Keeping of wild animals. 
(a)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses. 
(b)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet. However, if the owner can establish to the police department's satisfaction that an animal ordinarily considered "wild" is not dangerous to people or other animals and that the animal is healthy, safe and tame as a pet, the licensing authority may issue a certificate of exemption to the owner which shall be valid indefinitely. The cost for a certificate of exemption shall be an amount determined by resolution of the city council. In such case, the owner agrees to accept full responsibility for the actions and behavior of each animal. The establishment of whether such animal is healthy, safe and tame as a pet shall be the responsibility of the owner of the animal. Evidence tending to establish the animal's health, safety and tameness shall be in writing, submitted by the owner of such animal to the police department within five days of the owner's notice that he is suspected of keeping a wild animal. The police department shall either agree with, or disagree with, the evidence submitted within five days of receiving such evidence from the owner of the suspected wild animal. If it disagrees, it shall state its reasons in writing. The licensing authority shall refuse to grant a certificate of exemption to the owner of the suspected wild animal if the police department fails to agree with the animal's owner. The owner of the animal may appeal such decision to the city manager within five days. The failure to appeal such ruling shall make the determination of the police department and the licensing authority conclusive such that the city may take all further necessary steps to see that its ordinances are enforced. 
(Code 1995, § 14-3; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
State Law reference- General prohibition on possession of wildlife, 29 O.S. § 7-502. 
Sec. 14-9. - Beehives on residential lots, number restricted. 
    As a matter of public policy, it is declared unlawful to keep more than two hives of bees on a platted residential lot within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 14-4; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-10. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted that is not sanctioned by a recognized state or national organization in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering. 
(b)  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, promote, or engage in any combat between animals or between animals and humans which by its nature causes pain, suffering, and discomfort. 
(Code 1995, § 14-5; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-11. - Keeping of swine. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or feed swine within the city, except as specifically provided for in section 14-14 or as provided in this section. 
(b)  The keeping of not more than one potbellied pig or similar small swine per lot or premises shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
(1)  Each potbellied pig shall be a pet that is to be kept for personal enjoyment and not kept or raised for human consumption. 
(2)  Each potbellied pig shall be licensed with the city under such conditions as the animal control division deems appropriate. 
(3)  A potbellied pig shall not exceed 125 pounds in weight, and 26 inches in height. 
(4)  There shall not be more than one potbellied pig more than three months of age per lot or residence. 
(5)  The keeping of potbellied pigs for commercial breeding purposes is prohibited in the city. 
(6)  The premises where potbellied pigs are kept shall be cleaned regularly and shall be maintained so that noxious odors are controlled. 
(7)  Any person who keeps, maintains or harbors a potbellied pig shall keep it confined on the premises. The confinement shall be accomplished by the following means: 
a.  A fence or similar enclosure to prevent escape; 
b.  Keeping it inside a house or other building; or 
c.  Keeping it on a leash to prevent escape. 
For the purposes of this section, the term "potbellied pig" shall mean Asian potbellied pigs, Shar-pei pigs, Vietnamese, Chinese or Asian pigs, or similar swine meeting the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 14-6; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-12. - Noisy animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city any animal which, by emitting any irritating and/or offensive noise, disturbs the peace and quiet of any reasonable person. 
(Code 1995, § 14-7; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-13. - Nuisance animals. 
(a)  No owner of an animal within the city shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent it from becoming a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to own, keep, possess, or maintain an animal in such a manner so as to constitute a public nuisance, regardless of the knowledge, intent, or culpability of the owner. For purposes of this section, an animal shall constitute a public nuisance if it: 
(1)  Unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of other animals or persons, or damages or substantially interferes with the use and enjoyment of property rights of citizens; 
(2)  Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(3)  Is kept or harbored in a manner that causes unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises, such as odor related to animals or cleaning agents or the attraction of flies, insects, or vermin; 
(4)  Habitually barks, whines, howls, crows or cackles in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion or makes other noise in such a manner so as to result in a serious annoyance or interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises; 
(5)  Damages the property of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage containers or damaging vehicles, gardens, flowers or other plant material, or depositing fecal material; 
(6)  Is at large in any of the streets, public ways, public places, parks, or upon private premises of any other person than the owner of the animal; 
(7)  Attacks other animals or fowl; 
(8)  Is repeatedly at large. 
(c)  Any animal which is unrestrained or causing a public nuisance may be impounded as provided for in this chapter. 
(d)  The keeping, harboring or owning of any unrestrained animal shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  A citizen's complaint for violation of this section may be issued only upon receipt of the complaint signed by two or more residents of the city, each residing at different addresses in the vicinity of the animal or incident. The complaint shall set forth the nature and the time and date of the act, the owner of the animal, the address of the owner and a description of the animal doing such act. 
(f)  In addition to other remedies, a nuisance may be abated in the following manner: 
(1)  Upon the first occurrence of a violation, the owner or caretaker may, at the discretion of the investigating animal control officer or law enforcement officer, be given written notification that the animal's behavior constitutes a public nuisance, that the owner or caretaker is required to make reasonable efforts to abate the nuisance, and that subsequent violations may result in the issuance of a citation to the owner for allowing his animal to become a public nuisance. 
(2)  If there are two or more citations given for violations within a 12-month period on the same premises, the city attorney is authorized to seek an injunction in the name of the city from the appropriate court to abate the nuisance. 
(3)  Adjudication of guilt, withholding of adjudication, or plea of no contest (including, but not limited to, payment of fine) in a 12-month period for two violations on the same premises, plus a third such citation within the 12-month period, shall be presumptive evidence of a public nuisance. However, the judge may find a public nuisance without such presumptive evidence based on other evidence presented. 
(4)  The judge may fashion an injunction that will abate the particular nuisance being found, up to and including removal of one or more animals from the premises. 
(Code 1995, § 14-40; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-14. - Storage and disposition of manure; site requirements. 
(a)  Storage. No horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, goat, sheep or other similar animal shall be kept within less than 200 feet of any tenement or apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, retail food store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes, or residence other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such animal is kept. The owner of any of the above-listed animals shall provide a watertight and flytight receptacle on the premises for manure, of such size as to hold all accumulations of manure. Such receptacle shall be emptied sufficiently often and in such manner as to prevent it from being or becoming a nuisance, and shall be kept covered at all times, except when open during the deposit or removal of manure or refuse. No manure shall be allowed to accumulate on such premises, except in such receptacle. 
(b)  Disposal. Manure shall be hauled outside the city in a manner which does not jeopardize the public health, or shall be spread evenly upon the ground and turned under at once or as soon as the weather permits. 
(c)  Site requirement. Any property on which is kept a horse, mule, donkey, pony, cow, goat, sheep, swine or similar animal shall be not less than one-half acre in size. There shall be an additional 10,000 square feet of lot area required for each additional animal where two or more are kept. 
(Code 1995, § 14-8; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-15. - Location of premises where kept. 
    No stable, dog kennel, rabbit warren, lot, yard or other establishment wherein animals are kept shall be maintained closer than 40 feet to any tenement or apartment house, hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, retail food store, building used for educational, religious or hospital purposes, or residence, other than that occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such animals are kept. 
(Code 1995, § 14-9; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-16. - Maintenance of premises where kept. 
    Every stable, structure, pen, lot or place wherein any animal is kept or permitted to be kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, devoid of rodents and vermin and free from objectionable odors, excepting agricultural-zoned property of at least five acres. 
(Code 1995, § 14-10; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-17. - Vicious or dangerous animals. 
(a)  Keeping prohibited. It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the city limits any vicious animal. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "vicious animal" is defined to mean: 
(1)  Any animal having poisonous bites; 
(2)  Any animal that has been bitten by an animal or known to have been infected with rabies; 
(3)  Any warm-blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous wild or exotic animal, dangerous or undomesticated animal which is not of a species customarily used as an ordinary household pet, but one which would ordinarily be confined in a zoo, or one which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country, or one which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or property damage (including, but not limited to, nonhuman primates, snakes, raccoons, skunks, foxes and wild and exotic cats; but excluding fowl, ferrets and small rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes); 
(4)  Any animal with a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or other domestic animals; 
(5)  Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten a human being or other domestic animal other than the type of circumstances that would be justifiable; or 
(6)  Any animal which has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the animal is possessed of tendencies to attack or bite human beings or other domestic animals other than under the type of circumstances that would be justifiable. 
(b)  Seizure and impoundment. Any animal found to be subject of the violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment and held at the city animal shelter awaiting the findings of the municipal court. 
(c)  Fines for violation. Any person who violates the provisions of this section may be fined as provided for in section 14-2. 
(d)  Destruction by court order. If the court finds that such seized and impounded animal shall have inflicted major injury to a human being or other domestic animal, or that has previously bitten or attacked a human being or other domestic animal without provocation, then after a period of observation, it shall be destroyed by court order. A fine may also be levied as provided in section 14-2. 
(e)  Surrender and return. If the court fails to find that such seized and impounded animal is a vicious animal, the court shall order and it shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause the surrender and return of the animal to the owner thereof. 
(f)  Authority to kill. Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, if any animal is of such vicious nature that it cannot be safely seized and impounded, it may be killed by the officer seeking to apprehend it. 
(Code 1995, § 14-11; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Secs. 14-18-14-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate and tax dog owners, 11 O.S. § 22-115; dogs generally, 4 O.S. § 41 et seq. 

Sec. 14-38. - Adoption of animals from shelter. 
(a)  Spaying or neutering as condition for release. No animal may be released for adoption from the animal shelter unless such animal has been surgically spayed or neutered; or unless the adopting party signs an agreement to have the animal sterilized, and deposits funds with the animal shelter to ensure that the adopted animal will be spayed or neutered. The deposit shall be an amount determined by resolution of the city council. The city manager or his designee may waive the deposit requirement for any bona fide animal club, organization or humane society. Any bona fide animal club or organization may register with the animal shelter and may request notification of the pending destruction of any animal of a particular breed or type. Once the animal club or organization's application has been approved, the animal shelter shall attempt to notify the organization not less than 24 hours before the animal is scheduled to be destroyed. The animal club or organization shall be permitted to adopt the animal at no charge, and without depositing funds as required by this section. Nothing in this section shall be considered to create or give the animal club a property interest in the animal until such time as the animal is adopted, and the city shall not be liable for any failure to notify the animal club. 
(b)  Refund of deposit upon proof of spaying or neutering. Of the funds deposited with the animal shelter, an amount determined by resolution of the city council shall be refunded to the veterinarian or adopting party upon the adopting party's presentation of a written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that the adopted animal has been spayed or neutered. However, no refunds shall be made unless such animal was spayed or neutered within 60 days of adoption in the case of adult animals, or, in case of infant animals, within 30 days of the date a female animal attained the age of six months, or a male animal attained the age of eight months. 
(c)  Rules; sterilization agreement. The adopting party shall execute a sterilization agreement provided by the animal shelter which has been approved by the city council. 
(d)  Extension of time to spay or neuter. Upon presentation of a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of an adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery, the animal shelter shall grant a 30-day extension of the period within which the spay or neuter surgery would otherwise be required. Further extensions may be granted upon additional veterinary reports stating their necessity. 
(e)  Death of adopted animal; refund of deposited funds. If requested to do so, the animal shelter shall refund deposited funds to the adopting party upon reasonable proof being presented to the animal shelter by the adopting party that the adopted animal died before the expiration of the period during which the spaying or neutering was required to be completed. 
(f)  Disposition of forfeited funds; record of accounts. Funds which have been forfeited by adopting parties shall be placed in a separate account, which shall be an interest-bearing account whenever feasible, and the funds shall be allocated to programs which directly promote, subsidize or otherwise reduce the cost of spaying or neutering animals of the animal shelter. The city shall maintain accurate records of accounts which fund spay/neuter programs. 
(g)  Compliance with Dog and Cat Sterilization Act. All provisions of the Dog and Cat Sterilization Act (4 O.S. § 499 et seq.) shall be complied with by the city animal shelter. 
(Code 1995, § 14-39; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-39. - Person operating kennels to secure license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to run or operate a kennel within the city without first procuring from the city clerk an annual license to operate such kennel. 
(b)  The costs of the annual kennel license shall be an amount determined by resolution of the city council and shall not be prorated or reduced for any reason. All licenses shall be annual licenses and shall expire on April 30 following the date of their issuance. 
(Code 1995, § 14-41; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-40. - Kennels to be maintained properly. 
    All kennels operated pursuant to this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall not emit noxious odors. In addition to other remedies, any owner or operator of a kennel that fails to properly maintain the kennel premises shall have his kennel license revoked. Additionally, no kennel shall be located in any residential district. 
(Code 1995, § 14-42; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-41. - Off-leash dog parks. 
    The city, humane society, or similar group may be authorized to operate and maintain designated areas or parks, within the city limits where responsible owners can allow their dogs to exercise and socialize off-leash. All users of city off-leash dog parks must adhere to the rules and regulations posted at the entrance to the dog park area. Violators of posted rules are subject to ejection and forfeiture of off-leash dog park privileges. It shall be assumed that there is an inherent risk in allowing dogs to interact without direct control, so all participants that choose to use off-leash dog parks do so at their own risk of injury to other persons, themselves and dogs. Persons making use of off-leash dog parks shall be responsible for injuries caused by their dogs to other persons and dogs. Persons responsible for any such injuries or property damage shall hold the operating group harmless for same. 
(Code 1995, § 14-43; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Secs. 14-42-14-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-71. - Prohibition on the feeding of feral animals. 
(a)  Prohibition. The indiscriminate feeding of feral animals is prohibited as they constitute health and environmental risks to domesticated animals, wildlife, and persons. It is a violation of this section for any person to feed or harbor feral animals on a regular, intentional basis. The prohibition on feeding includes on all property in the city, both public and private, without the permission of the city or the property owner. 
(b)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 14-44; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-72. - Animals at large. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of an animal shall prevent such animal from running or remaining at large on any public street, road, alley, park or other public space. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any animal to run or remain at large upon any private property, whether under direct control or not, without the consent of that property administrator, owner, or legal tenant. 
(c)  No person shall tether an animal on public or private property, or in such manner that the animal has access to public or private property, without the consent of that property administrator, owner, or legal tenant. 
(d)  The owner or keeper of any animal found at large shall be responsible for violation of this article. Any animal found at large may be impounded by the city. 
(e)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any animal that is specifically trained to assist or provide personal services for a disabled person, as defined under the Americans with Disabilities Act and is in the course of performing those services. 
(2)  Law enforcement dogs conducting official business. 
(3)  Authorized rescue and emergency dogs conducting official business. 
(4)  Dogs at city-designated off-leash areas when under the immediate supervision of the owner and fully complying with all posted rules. 
(Code 1995, § 14-45; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-73. - Animals in motor vehicles. 
(a)  Any animal being transported or kept in the open bed of a vehicle shall be restrained by one or more tethers fixed to the vehicle and attached to the collar or harness being worn by the animal in a manner that will prevent the animal from falling, being thrown, or jumping from the vehicle. The animal may also be safely enclosed within the cab of the vehicle or within a container or cage. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, place, or confine an animal or allow it to be placed or confined in the enclosed trunk of a vehicle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle owner or operator to place or confine an animal or allow it to be placed or confined or to remain in a vehicle without sufficient ventilation or under conditions for such a period of time as may reasonably be expected to endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to heat, lack of water, or such other circumstances as may reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death of the animal. 
(d)  Officers finding an animal under the conditions referenced above may rescue such animal from the vehicle following the policy established by animal services. 
(Code 1995, § 14-46; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-74. - Removal of animal waste. 
(a)  The owner of any animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animal on public walks, recreation areas, public streets, or private property other than the premises of the owner of the animal. 
(b)  The owner of any animal shall remove animal waste from his property if it poses a threat to the health, safety, or well-being of any animal or person. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to disabled persons accompanied by a service animal for assistance in accordance with the law. 
(Code 1995, § 14-47; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-75. - Cruelty. 
(a)  No person shall abandon any animal. 
(b)  Any person who commits any of the following acts shall be in violation of this section: 
(1)  Baiting, breeding, training, transporting, selling, owning, possessing, or using any wild or domestic animal for the purpose of animal fighting or baiting; 
(2)  Betting or wagering any money or other valuable consideration on the fighting or baiting of animals; 
(3)  Attending the fighting or baiting of animals; 
(4)  Providing or allowing property for use in the housing, training, transport, fighting or baiting of animals. 
(Code 1995, § 14-48(b), (c); Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
State Law reference- Prohibited acts with regard to animals, 21 O.S. § 1680 et seq. 
Secs. 14-76-14-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impound and sell animals running at large, 11 O.S. § 22-115. 

Sec. 14-94. - Authorized impoundment and violation notice. 
    Unrestrained and nuisance animals shall be taken by the police, animal control officers, or humane officers and impounded in an animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner. The keeping, harboring, or owning of unrestrained animals shall be an offense punishable pursuant to section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 14-66; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-95. - Minimum retention period. 
    Animals impounded under this article shall be kept for not less than five working days, except for animals ferae naturae which shall be impounded, if at all, for a period of time deemed necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Code 1995, § 14-67; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-96. - Immediate notice to known owner. 
    If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately upon impoundment notify the owner by telephone or mail. 
(Code 1995, § 14-68; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-97. - Fees. 
    Fees for reclaiming any animal shall be an amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 14-69; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-98. - Assumption of ownership by city, disposition. 
    Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within five working days shall become the property of the city, or humane society, and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. 
(Code 1995, § 14-70; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-99. - Notice of violation. 
    In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer, humane officer, or police officer may issue to the known owner of such animal a notice of ordinance violation. Such notice of violation shall have the same force and effect as the issuance of a ticket. 
(Code 1995, § 14-71; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-100. - Alternative enforcement. 
(a)  The owner of an impounded animal may also be proceeded against for any violation of this chapter. Such suit may be either criminal, civil or equitable in nature. 
(b)  All licenses issued to animal owners against whom three or more ordinance violations have been assessed in a 12-month period shall not be renewed. 
(Code 1995, § 14-72; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 14-101. - Impoundment and disposition of rabies-suspected animals. 
    Every rabies-suspected animal found within the city shall be immediately seized by the chief of police or other persons designated by him, and securely and separately confined for observation for a period of ten days. If within such period the animal becomes rabid or shows symptoms or indications of rabies, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or persons designated by him to destroy the animal. If such animal is not rabid and is duly vaccinated and licensed and is not a vicious animal, it shall be surrendered to the owner on demand after the expiration of such ten-day period, and upon payment of the impounding fee prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 14-73; Ord. No. 1287, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
State Law reference- Rabies generally, 63 O.S. § 1-508. 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Powers and duties of police officers and other city representatives under chapter. 
    Any police officer or other designated representative of the city shall have the power to enter any place requiring a license under this chapter, during business hours, to ascertain whether this chapter and other ordinances of the city are being complied with. It shall be the special duty of all such officers to see that all license fees required by this chapter are paid when due. 
(Code 1975, § 11-9; Code 1995, § 22-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Evidence of liability in actions brought under chapter. 
    In the trial of any action brought under the provisions of this chapter, the fact that any party to such action represented himself as engaged in any business or occupation for the transaction of the thing for which a license is required, or that such party exhibited a sign indicating such business or calling, or such proprietorship or management, shall be evidence of the liability of such party to obtain the license and pay the prescribed fee or tax. 
(Code 1975, § 11-10; Code 1995, § 22-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Adult novelty shops and sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult novelty shop means a commercial establishment that displays, sells or offers for sale instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs or for use in connection with sadomasochistic practices. 
    Sadomasochistic practice means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
    Sexual conduct means: 
(1)  The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or developed female breasts; 
(2)  Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation and sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation; and 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) if this definition. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are defined as follows: 
    Adult amusement or entertainment means amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, including, but not limited to, topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment. 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a significant portion of its stock in trade books, film, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult mini-motion pictures theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
    Massage parlor means any place for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration or fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified anatomical areas. 
    Model studio means any place other than university or college art classes where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specific anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity. 
    Sexual encounter center means any building or structure which contains, or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or allow personal contact by employees, devices or equipment or by personnel provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron, to include, but not to be limited to, bath houses, massage parlors, and related or similar activities. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(b)  The location of an adult novelty shop or sexually oriented businesses shall be in compliance with applicable commercial zoning regulations of the city and may not be located within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  Any building primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities; 
(2)  Any public or private school; 
(3)  Any public park or playground; 
(4)  Any public library; or 
(5)  Any land zoned or used for residential purposes. 
If any such building used for worship and religious activity, any public or private school, any public park or playground, any public library or any land zoned or used for residential purposes shall be established within 1,000 feet of any such premises after the premises have been established, this shall not be a bar to the continuation of the business so long as it remains in continuous operation. The distance indicated in this subsection shall be measured from the nearest property line of such church or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of the adult novelty shop along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street from such church or school shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with such church or school. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction, shall be punished subject to the provisions of section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 10-1; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 7-21-1998) 
Secs. 18-4-18-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority of city to levy and collect license fee or tax on businesses and occupations, 11 O.S. § 22-106. 

Sec. 18-25. - Required. 
    No person, either as principal or agent, shall, in the city, conduct, pursue, carry on or operate any calling, trade, profession or occupation unless he has a current license so to do issued in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1975, § 11-1; Code 1995, § 22-31) 
Sec. 18-26. - Separate license for each place of business. 
    A separate license must be obtained for each branch or separate place of business in which the trade, calling, profession or occupation is carried on, and each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue or conduct only that trade, calling, profession or occupation described in such license, except as may be otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1975, § 11-2; Code 1995, § 22-32) 
Sec. 18-27. - Free licenses and rebates prohibited. 
    No free licenses shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, for any cause, nor any sum accepted less than the amount specified in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 11-5; Code 1995, § 22-33) 
Sec. 18-28. - Issuance and signing. 
    The city clerk shall issue any license required by this article, upon payment of the required fee or tax and compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code. Licenses so issued shall be signed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 11-6; Code 1995, § 22-34) 
Sec. 18-29. - Not returnable or transferable. 
    No license issued under this article shall, in any case, be returned or transferred. 
(Code 1975, § 11-7; Code 1995, § 22-35) 
Sec. 18-30. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All licenses for which an annual fee is paid in accordance with this article shall expire on April 30 after the same are issued. A license for which less than an annual fee is paid, where permitted by this article, shall expire at the expiration of the term for which the fee is paid. 
(b)  An annual license issued under this article may be renewed by paying the prescribed fee on or before May 1, and shall be considered delinquent if not renewed within 15 days thereafter. For every month or fraction of a month a license shall remain delinquent after the 15 days allowed as aforesaid, there shall be added to the amount of the license fee a penalty of two percent, which shall be collected in the same manner as the license fee. The addition of such penalty to a license fee shall not exempt the person from whom the fee is collectible from prosecution for conducting or engaging in the business, trade, occupation or calling without a current license, in violation of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 11-8; Code 1995, § 22-36) 
Sec. 18-31. - Fee schedule. 
    All such fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 11-3; Code 1995, § 22-37; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 998, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 18-32. - Fee for businesses combined under one ownership. 
    All such fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 11-4; Code 1995, § 22-38; Ord. No. 968, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Secs. 18-33-18-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE SECURITY COMPANIES, GUARDS AND INVESTIGATORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Security Guard and Private Investigator Act, 59 O.S. § 1750.1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-53. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CLEET means the Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training. 
    Client means any person or legal entity having a contract with a person or entity licensed pursuant to the Oklahoma Security Guard and Private Investigator Act, 59 O.S. § 1750.1 et seq., which contract authorizes services to be performed in return for financial or other considerations. 
    Investigative agency means a self-employed private investigator, a firm, a corporation, or other private legal entity in the business of soliciting the business of private investigation and/or providing private investigations and investigators. 
    License means authorization issued by CLEET pursuant to Oklahoma Security Guard and Private Investigator Act, 59 O.S. § 1750.1 et seq., permitting the holder to perform the functions of a security guard, armed security guard, private investigator, investigative agency, or security agency. 
    Private investigator means a person who is self-employed, or contracts with, or is employed by an investigative agency for the purpose of conducting a private investigation and reporting the results to the employer or client of the employer relating to: 
(1)  Potential or pending litigation, civil or criminal; 
(2)  Divorce or other domestic investigations; 
(3)  Missing persons or missing property; or 
(4)  Other lawful investigations, but shall not include: 
a.  A person authorized or employed by the United States government, any state government, or any agency, department, or political subdivision thereof while engaged in the performance of official duties; 
b.  A person or employee of a firm, corporation or other legal entity engaged exclusively in a profession licensed by any board, commission, department or court of the state; or 
c.  A bona fide, salaried, full-time employee of a firm, corporation, or other legal entity not in the primary business of soliciting and providing private investigations, who conducts investigations that are exclusive to and incidental to the primary business of such firm, corporation or entity, and when the costs of such investigations are not charged directly back to the particular client or customer who directly benefits from the investigation. 
    Security agency means a person in the business of furnishing another person as a security guard or armed security guard for hire. 
    Security guard means an individual contracting with or employed by a security agency, private business or person to prevent trespass, theft, misappropriation, wrongful concealment of merchandise, goods, money or other tangible items, or engaged as a bodyguard or as a private watchman to protect persons or property, but shall not include: 
(1)  For individuals operating unarmed, any person employed as a private watchman or security guard by one employer only in connection with affairs of such employer where there exists an employer-employee relationship; 
(2)  A full-time certified peace officer of the United States, the state, or any political subdivision of either, while such peace officer: 
a.  Is engaged in the performance of his official duties within the course and scope of his employment with the United States, the state, or any political subdivision of either; 
b.  Is engaged in the performance of his duties as a railroad police officer; 
c.  Receives compensation for private employment on an individual or an individual contractual basis as a patrolman, guard, or watchman if such person is employed in an employer-employee relationship or is employed on an individual contractual basis; or 
d.  Receives compensation from an employer-employee relationship or an individual independent contractor basis with any licensed security agency or any private business or person to perform security or investigative services. 
(3)  Any person whose terms of employment as a security guard are governed by a collective bargaining agreement on May 9, 1989; and 
(4)  Any person who is employed as a full-time security guard by a financial institution on May 9, 1989. 
    Security guard, armed, means a security guard authorized to carry a firearm. 
    Special event means a public activity in the form of an athletic contest, charity event, exposition, or similar event that occurs only on an annual or noncontinuing basis. 
    Special event license means a temporary license issued pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1750.1 et seq. which restricts the license holder to employment as a security guard only for the duration of a particular event. 
(Code 1995, § 22-76; Ord. No. 902, § 3, 10-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-54. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall fail to comply with an order properly made in connection with the enforcement of this article, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 22-80; Ord. No. 902, § 7, 10-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-55. - Nonliability of city. 
    Any commissioned private security company, guard, or investigator, while in the performance of his duties as a private security company, guard, or investigator, shall not be deemed to be an agent, servant, or employee of the city and the city shall not be liable for his actions to third parties or for any injury or damage he might suffer. 
(Code 1995, § 22-79; Ord. No. 902, § 6, 10-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-56. - License. 
    All private security companies, guards, and private investigators shall be licensed in accordance with 59 O.S. § 1750.5 to operate within the city limits. 
(Code 1995, § 22-77; Ord. No. 902, § 4, 10-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-57. - Registration. 
(a)  All persons that contract with or employ a security guard licensed by the CLEET shall be required to register with the city police department. The person, by telephone or in person, shall contact the chief of police or his designee, or the city clerk, and shall provide such party with the following information: 
(1)  The hours of security guard coverage; 
(2)  Whether working a fixed post or roving patrol; 
(3)  If working a fixed post, the location of the post; 
(4)  Whether working unarmed or armed; and 
(5)  Whether working in uniform or plain clothes. 
The person shall be required to notify the city within 72 hours of any changes in the above information. 
(b)  The person or guard shall not be required to pay any fee to register or re-register with the city. 
(c)  The police department is required to maintain a registry of the locations where such security service is being conducted, which will be open for inspection by officers of the CLEET. The police department shall notify CLEET of any person who fails to comply with these provisions. 
(d)  This registration requirement is the sole responsibility of the employing agency and all information is proprietary. 
(Code 1995, § 22-78; Ord. No. 902, § 5, 10-4-1994) 
Secs. 18-58-18-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GARAGE SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-88. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Residential sale means any sale of what is held out to be or is commonly known as a garage, porch, room, yard, backyard, or patio sale or other type of general sale conducted from or on any premises not located in a zoning district which permits such sales, where goods or articles of any type are held out for sale to the public. This definition shall not include a situation where specific items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically names the items to be sold. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(a); Code 1995, § 22-101) 
Sec. 18-89. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auctions. 
(3)  Charitable organizations or persons, when all gross sales from the sale are used directly for charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(e); Code 1995, § 22-103) 
Sec. 18-90. - Interval between sales. 
    No person shall hold, conduct, engage in or participate in any manner or allow a residential sale to be held or conducted on premises under his control or ownership more than one time in any six-month period, subject, however, to the exceptions allowed in section 18-89. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(b); Code 1995, § 22-107) 
Sec. 18-91. - Signs. 
    Only signs issued by the city shall be permitted. These signs may be installed 24 hours prior to sale date. Signs shall be removed within 24 hours after expiration of the permit. No sign shall be posted on any curb, sidewalk, utility post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, fence, or other surface located on public property, or any public right-of-way. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(c); Code 1995, § 22-108) 
Sec. 18-92. - Display of goods restricted. 
    The sale area of any residential sale shall be confined to the premises for which the permit has been issued. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(d); Code 1995, § 22-109) 
Secs. 18-93-18-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-113. - Permit required; frequency. 
    No person shall hold, conduct, engage in or participate in any manner in a residential sale without a permit for same. A separate permit shall be required for each location at which a residential sale is to be held, and no location shall be eligible for more than one permit in any six-month period. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(f); Code 1995, § 22-102) 
Sec. 18-114. - Permit application. 
    An applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall furnish the city clerk with the following information: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location at which the proposed residential sale is to be held. 
(3)  The date or dates upon which the sale shall be held. 
(4)  An affidavit from all participants to the effect that all goods to be sold at the residential sale are owned by the participants and have not been obtained for the purpose of reselling them at the sale. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(h); Code 1995, § 22-104) 
Sec. 18-115. - Permit fee. 
    All such fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(g); Code 1995, § 22-105; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 18-116. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The city clerk is hereby authorized to grant a permit for a residential sale for a period not to exceed three consecutive days to any person applying who otherwise complies with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  If a residential sale is not held on the dates for which the permit is issued or is terminated during the first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions, and an affidavit by the permittee to this effect is submitted, the city clerk may issue another permit to the applicant for a residential sale to be conducted at the same location within 30 days from the date when the first sale was to be held. 
(c)  Before issuing a permit the city clerk may conduct such investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this section. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(i); Code 1995, § 22-106) 
Sec. 18-117. - Revocation; refusal. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or any application for issuance of a license may be refused by the city clerk if the application submitted by the applicant or license holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement. 
(b)  If any person is convicted of an offense under this article, the person may have his existing residential sale permit cancelled and not be issued another residential sale permit for a period of two years from the date of conviction. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30(j); Code 1995, § 22-110) 
Secs. 18-118-18-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SELLING FOOD ITEMS FROM VEHICLES 

Sec. 18-148. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 9-23; Code 1995, § 58-26) 
Sec. 18-149. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell ice cream, candy bars, sandwiches, chewing gum or other related food items from vehicles moving from place to place of sales or on the streets of the city without first obtaining a license to do so from the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 9-16; Code 1995, § 58-27) 
Sec. 18-150. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for vehicles coming under this article to operate between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. It shall be further unlawful to park or otherwise remain in one location for the purpose of selling for a time span of over 15 minutes. 
(Code 1975, § 9-17; Code 1995, § 58-28) 
Sec. 18-151. - Signaling when stopped. 
(a)  Any vehicle falling under this article shall be equipped with a mechanical and electrical signaling yellow light which, while the vehicle is stopped to make sales, will display flashing signals plainly visible from the front and rear during the day or night. 
(b)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, such signaling device shall be approved by the chief of the police department prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 9-18; Code 1995, § 58-29) 
Sec. 18-152. - Noise. 
    Bells, music boxes, etc., may be used, providing the volume of sound thereof does not create a public nuisance, or otherwise disturb the peace of reasonable people in the community. 
(Code 1975, § 9-19; Code 1995, § 58-30) 
Sec. 18-153. - Insurance. 
    The owner of the enterprise selling ice cream, candy bars, sandwiches, chewing gum or other related food items shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance reflecting at least the minimum amounts of coverage as required by state law to operate a vehicle on its streets and highways. The filing of such certificate shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1975, § 9-20; Code 1995, § 58-31) 
Sec. 18-154. - Health certificate. 
    The owner of the enterprise selling ice cream, candy bars, sandwiches, chewing gum or other related food items shall not operate or engage in such business within the city unless he has a current state health certificate. Such certificate shall be presented to the city clerk prior to the issuance of any license hereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 9-21; Code 1995, § 58-32) 
Chapter 22 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license CATV, 11 O.S. § 22-107.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basic cable rates means the monthly charges for a subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment. 
    Basic service tier means a separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and all domestic television signals other than superstations. 
    Benchmark means a per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has determined is reasonable. 
    Cable Act of 1992 means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. 
    Cable operator means any person or group of persons who: 
(1)  Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or 
(2)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Channel means a unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation. 
    Cost of service showing means a filing in which the cable operator attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to attract capital. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Initial basic cable rates means the rates that the cable operator is charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates. 
    Must-carry signal means the signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service tier. 
    PEG channel means the channel capacity designated for public, educational, or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
    Price cap means the ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and changes in overall inflation. 
    Reasonable rate standard means a per channel rate that is at, or below, the benchmark or price cap level. 
    Superstation means any nonlocal broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by satellite. 
(Code 1975, § 18-21; Code 1995, § 26-26) 
Secs. 22-20-22-41. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-42. - Initial review of basic cable rates. 
(a)  Notice. Upon the adoption of this division and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall immediately notify all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992. 
(b)  Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the city, a cable operator shall file with the city its current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning the reasonableness of its rates. 
(c)  Expedited determination and public hearing. If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable benchmark, the city council shall: 
(1)  Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and 
(2)  Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city. 
If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city, the proposed rates will continue in effect. 
(d)  Extended review period. If the city council is unable to determine whether the rates in issue are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city and, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination: 
(1)  90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or 
(2)  150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark. 
If the city council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are paid. 
(e)  Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. 
(f)  Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed initial basic rate may request the city clerk to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing any time before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city clerk with the objector's name and address. 
(g)  Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the initial basic cable rates shall be established as follows: 
(1)  If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates shall become the initial basic cable rates and the cable operator's rates will be capped at that level. 
(2)  If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall be the greater of the cable operator's per channel rate on September 30, 1992, reduced by ten percent, or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring between September 30, 1992, and the initial date of regulation. 
(3)  If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable operator's per channel rate was below the benchmark on September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for inflation. 
(h)  Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify an initial basic cable rate above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city council will review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30, 1992, rates minus ten percent, will prescribe the cable operator's new rates. 
(i)  Decision by formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable operator's proposed rates, the city council shall adopt its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the following: 
(1)  If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or is justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the city council shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator; or 
(2)  If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates, the city council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service analysis. 
(j)  Rollbacks and refunds. If the city council determines that the initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, the city council may order the rates reduced in accordance with subsection (g) or (h) of this section, as applicable. In addition, the city council may order the cable operator to pay to subscribers, refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to September 1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution. 
(k)  Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If rates proposed by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the city council must give public notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in the official newspaper of the city. 
(l)  Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 18-22; Code 1995, § 26-36) 
Sec. 22-43. - Review of request for increase in basic cable rates. 
(a)  Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with the city and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the cable operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of the initial basic cable rates. 
(b)  Expedited determination and public hearing. If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the city council shall: 
(1)  Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their views; and 
(2)  Act to approve the rate increase within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city. 
If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into effect. 
(c)  Extended review period. 
(1)  If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination: 
a.  90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and 
b.  150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap. 
(2)  The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review period. 
(3)  If the city council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-day period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are paid. 
(d)  Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking action on the requested rate increase, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record objections. 
(e)  Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to the proposed rate increase may request the city secretary to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing any time before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city clerk with the objector's name and address. 
(f)  Delayed determination. If the city council is unable to make a final determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to subsequent refund if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any portion of the increase. 
(g)  Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the city council shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as follows: 
(1)  If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable rates. 
(2)  If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap established by the FCC, the city council shall disapprove the proposed rate increase and/order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap. 
(h)  Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap, the city council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for cost-of-service review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the cable operator's then-current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new rate. 
(i)  Decision. The city council's decision concerning the requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public hearing by a person requesting the city clerk to record the objection, or may be submitted in writing at any time before the decision resolution is adopted. 
(j)  Refunds. The city council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments with interest if: 
(1)  The city council was unable to make a decision within the extended time period as described in subsection (c) of this section; 
(2)  The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the extended review period; and 
(3)  The city council determines that the rate increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city council disapproves any portion of the rate increase. 
The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision resolution. 
(k)  Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with applicable federal regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 18-23; Code 1995, § 26-37) 
Sec. 22-44. - Cable operator information. 
(a)  Required. In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the FCC's reasonable rate standard, the city council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to make a rate determination. 
(1)  In these cases, a cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in accordance with this section. 
(2)  In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the city council may request additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the standard. 
(b)  Request for confidentiality. A cable operator submitting information to the city council may request in writing that the information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it applies. 
(1)  If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any information to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request applies shall be identified. 
(2)  Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based. 
(3)  Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not be considered. 
(c)  City council action. Requests which comply with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section will be acted upon by the city council. The city council will grant the request if the cable operator presents by a preponderance of the evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city council denies the request, the city council shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any direction from the city, the cable operator may request that the city return the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires will the information be made available for public inspection. 
(2)  If the information was required to be submitted by the city council, the information will be made available for public inspection. 
(d)  Appeal. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality, the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five working days of the city council's decision, and the release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(Code 1975, § 18-24; Code 1995, § 26-38) 
Sec. 22-45. - Automatic rate adjustments. 
(a)  Annual inflation adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the cable operator may adjust its capped base per channel rate for the basic service tier annually by the final gross national product-price index (GNP-PI). 
(b)  Other external costs. The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external cost factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the GNP-PI. 
(1)  These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs, state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service, and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without regard to its relation to the GNP-PI. 
(2)  For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent and franchise fees, the starting date for measuring changes in external costs for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the date on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation or February 29, 1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per channel charge may not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees incurred before October 6, 1994. 
(c)  Notification and review. The cable operator shall notify the city at least 30 days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within 30 days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect. 
(Code 1975, § 18-25; Code 1995, § 26-39) 
Sec. 22-46. - Enforcement; penalty for noncompliance. 
(a)  Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following circumstances: 
(1)  A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or 
(2)  The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city. 
(b)  Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of $500.00 for each day the cable operator fails to comply. 
(Code 1975, § 18-26; Code 1995, § 26-40) 
Secs. 22-47-22-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DELINQUENT CHARGES 

Sec. 22-66. - Late fees and charges. 
    A person who is authorized to provide cable services within the city pursuant to a valid and current franchise may assess a late fee to subscribers who are delinquent in the payment for cable services received. 
(1)  The billing statement for cable services must show a specific payment due date, which may not be earlier than the end of the billing period, and no late payment fee or other penalty may be imposed on a subscriber earlier than the last day of the service period shown on the billing statement. Any balance not received by the last day of the service period may be assessed a late fee consistent with applicable consumer protection and usury laws of the state. Any late fee assessed must appear on the following month's billing statement. 
(2)  The subscriber shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by the cable service provider, its employees or contractors, to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or fail to properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made. 
(3)  In the event of a billing dispute, the cable operator shall waive a late fee during the period until a final resolution of the dispute is agreed upon with the subscriber. 
(Code 1995, § 26-56; Ord. No. 961, §§ I, II, 11-19-1996; Ord. No. 1065, § 1, 10-3-2000) 
CHAPTER 24 - COMMUNICATION TOWERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1364 , adopted Aug. 21, 2018, added a new Ch. 60 to the Code; however, said provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 24, §§ 24-1-24-19, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of maintaining Code format. 

Sec. 24-1. - Intent. 
    Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas may be installed, erected, modified and maintained pursuant to provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is: 
(1)  To ensure the provision of personal wireless service within the corporate boundaries of and for the benefit of the residents of the City of Yukon, 
(2)  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community, public environment property and community aesthetics, 
(3)  To minimize the visual impact of towers, antennas and associated buildings through design and sighting standards, 
(4)  To maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate multiple antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community, and 
(5)  To avoid danger or damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements or failure through neglect. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-3. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter of the City of Yukon, the terms defined in this chapter have the meanings given them. 
    Accessory equipment structure means a building or cabinet-like structure located adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of a wireless telecommunications tower or antenna to house equipment customarily incidental to the receiving or transmitting of wireless broadcast, cellular telephone calls, voice messaging and paging services. 
    Antenna means equipment used for transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals which is attached to a tower, building or other structure usually consisting of a series of directional panels, microwave or satellite dishes or Omni directional "quip" antennas. 
    Antenna support structure means any building, pole, telescoping mass, tower, tripod or other structure which supports an antenna. 
    Base receiver station means equipment that provides the link between wireless telecommunications and land-based public telephone switching networks, including radio-frequency receivers, backup power amplifiers and signal processing hardware typically contained in a small building or cabinet. 
    Co-location means the location of wireless telecommunications equipment for more than one provide on a common tower, building or structure. 
    Commercial receiving and/or transmitting antenna means any antenna erected to transfer information for commercial use. 
    Guyed tower means a tower which requires the use of flexible guying cables or wires as the principal means of resisting the designed tower loads. 
    Lattice tower means a self-supporting three or four sided, open steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment. 
    Mast means the portion of the outside antenna system to which the antenna is attached and the support or extension required to elevate the antenna to a height deemed necessary for adequate operation. 
    Monopole tower means a communications tower consisting of a single pole with no guy wire support or exposed anchors, tapering from base to top, more than 35 feet in height and designed to support communications equipment. 
    Personal wireless service means licensed commercial wireless communications services including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (EMR), paging and similar services. 
    Public property means land, roads, buildings or other structure owned or operated by the City of Yukon. 
    Tower means any pole, spire, structure or combination thereof to which an antenna could be attached or which is designed for an antenna to be attached and all supporting lines, cables, wires and braces, if permitted. 
    Uniform Building Code (UBC) means published by the International Conference of Building Officials and referenced by the State of Oklahoma to provide jurisdictions with building related standards and regulations. 
    Upgrade means raise to a higher standard or improve equipment or machinery by adding or replacing components. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-4. - Existing towers or antennas. 
    Existing towers at the time of the adoption of this chapter including those subject to conditional use permits will be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. However, the tower must be registered with the City of Yukon and a sign must be posted at the tower location indicating a contact person and a telephone number where they can be reached. If there is ever another antenna or transmitter installed or if the tower facilities are upgraded from the original application and approved by the city planning commission and city council, the tower must then meet all of the specifications of this chapter including permits, bonds, inspections, testing, landscaping, screening, fencing and driveway access requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-5. - Interpretation and applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall be consistent with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1934 and amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and any future amendments hereafter occurring. 
(b)  This chapter shall apply to all persons, partnerships, limited liability companies, limited liability partnerships, corporations and other entities seeking to locate, sight, place, modify or construct wireless telecommunications facilities within the corporate boundaries of the City of Yukon. 
(c)  The City of Yukon reserves all authority contained in state and existing municipal ordinances regulating land use preempted by the federal government pursuant to the Telecommunications Act as to the placement, construction and modification of personal wireless service facilities. 
(d)  This chapter does not apply to the use or location of private residential, citizen-band radio towers, amateur radio towers, television antennas or public safety communication facilities owned or operated by the City of Yukon, public school system or other municipalities. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-6. - Setback and height requirements; lighting, advertising and sign restrictions. 
(a)  Setback requirements. The setback requirements for towers will be based on the height of the tower in order to reduce the conflicts with abutting property, limit the adverse visual effects on the community and the environment, address the public concern for safety and minimize the potential damage to abutting property owners. In no event shall any tower exceed 180 feet including the antenna located on a tower. Towers must be of monopole design and must be able to accommodate at least four antennas and co-location of antennas must be permitted. The use of guyed or lattice towers is prohibited. 
(b)  Tower height of 80 feet or less. Towers having a height of 80 feet or less, including antenna, the tower buildings and power equipment including the perimeter fence, must be located a minimum of 300 feet from any abutting property line and no closer than 300 feet to a residence or occupied structure on the same lot. 
(c)  Tower height of 81 feet to 130 feet. Towers ranging in height from 81 feet up to 130 feet, including antenna, the tower, buildings and power equipment, including perimeter fence must be located a minimum of 400 feet from any abutting property line and no closer than 300 feet to a residence or occupied structure on the same lot. 
(d)  Tower height 131 feet to 180 feet. Towers ranging in height from 131 feet up to 180 feet, including antenna, the tower, buildings and power equipment, including the perimeter fence, must be located a minimum of 500 feet from any abutting property line and no closer than 300 feet to a residence or occupied structure on the same lot. 
(e)  Lighting restrictions. No signals or warning lights shall be permitted on any tower unless required by a municipal, state or federal agency. 
(f)  Advertising and sign restrictions. No commercial advertising or signage shall be allowed on any tower. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-7. - Location requirements. 
(a)  To be eligible for a conditional use permit for construction of a communications tower, the site must be located only on property that is zoned as General Agriculture (A) or Industrial (I-1 and I-2) and can be placed on a lot size as determined by the tower height and set back requirements. However, in no case can a tower be permitted on a lot size less than ten acres. Towers will be prohibited in all other areas currently zoned other than stated above and in all areas that currently have no zoning classification assigned. Towers are also prohibited in all residential areas regardless of zoning classification, platted or not that are currently subdivided by ownership into lots of two or more of various sizes and used primarily for residential purposes. 
(b)  No cellular telephone antenna, support structure, amplifiers, transmitters or any other wireless telecommunication equipment can be installed or placed on a commercial, private or public building or any other structure other than an actual tower approved by the City of Yukon, provided that antenna and related equipment may be installed on or near water towers upon approval by the city council. 
(c)  A site for a new telecommunications tower shall be located a minimum distance of one-half mile from all other existing telecommunications towers, regardless of the height of the tower. This provision includes towers located inside or outside the corporate limits of the City of Yukon. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-8. - Conditional use permit required. 
    No service provider, person, corporation or firm shall construct, modify, upgrade, enhance or add to any communications tower or antenna facility within the city limits unless they have received a conditional use permit from the City of Yukon. They shall apply for said permit on a form provided by the development services department. 
(a)  The conditional use permit, if issued by the city, shall be subject to conditional use permit regulations and standards contained within the permit for zoning districts which permit the construction of such towers. 
(b)  The conditional use permit shall not be transferred, signed or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior written approval of the City of Yukon city council. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-9. - Application requirements. 
    In addition to any information required for applications for Conditional Use Permits pursuant to Appendix A, Article 8, Administration, Section 803. Conditional use permit applicants shall submit the following information: 
(a)  A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, master plan classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation distances adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, site elevations, parking and other information deemed by the development services department to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel. 
(c)  The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential structure, platted residentially zoned properties and un-platted residentially zoned properties. 
(d)  The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known. 
(e)  A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials. 
(f)  Method of fencing and finished color and if applicable the method of camouflage and illumination. 
(g)  A description of compliance with all sections of the code of ordinances and all applicable federal, state or local laws. 
(h)  A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future use. 
(i)  Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in the city limits of Yukon. 
(j)  A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the service through the use of the proposed new tower. 
(k)  A description of the future plans for towers or antennas within the city limits of Yukon based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-10. - Appeal to board. 
(a)  Failure of the development services director to act on an application which is determined to be complete under this section within 45 days, unless extended by agreement, may be considered by applicant to be a denial of a permit which is subject to appeal to the zoning board of adjustments. 
(b)  Applicant may appeal to the board for a variance from general zoning district regulations and setback requirements in this section, but not from any other conditions in this section. Towers exceeding height limitations may be permitted only by special exception pursuant to Section 24-6. 
(c)  Applicant may apply directly to the board for a permit for any tower as a special exception pursuant to Section 24-6. 
    The zoning board of adjustments must find and conclude: 
(a)  All application requirements and conditions imposed by Section 24-7 of this chapter for conditional uses are met except height limitations and setbacks. 
(b)  If additional tower height is requested, total tower height will not exceed 150 percent of the maximum height permitted in the district as a conditional use. 
(c)  Applicant has demonstrated that additional height above that permitted by conditional use regulations is necessary for the service area within the city limits of Yukon. 
(d)  Setback requirements and such additional conditions are established by the board as it deems necessary to remove danger to health and safety, and to protect adjacent property. 
(e)  The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires that a denial of a permit be supported by substantial evidence. 
(f)  The board may not grant a variance from the standards imposed for a communications tower or antenna in connection with granting a special exception, except as permitted by Section 24-10. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-11. - Removal of abandoned tower requirements and bond requirements. 
(a)  Removal of abandoned tower requirements. Any tower that is not operated or used for a continuous period of 12 consecutive months, shall be considered abandoned and the owner of said tower shall be required, at the owner's expense, to remove the tower and all associated buildings, power supply, fence and other items associated with and permitted with the tower. If the tower is not removed within 90 days, the bond secured by the tower owner shall be used to remove the tower and any accessory equipment and structures. If the tower has a preexisting tower approval before implementation of these ordinances and the tower owner has not yet obtained the bond to remove the tower, the tower owner shall be required to remove the tower at their expense. If the tower is not removed within 90 days, the tower owner shall be subject to a fine for each day the tower remains in place and shall be subject to a mandatory injunction for the removal and the owner shall be responsible for all costs, including attorney's fees, for securing the removal. 
(b)  Bond requirement. When an application is filed to construct a tower, the applicant must obtain an estimate of the cost to remove the tower from a company that is approved by the City of Yukon and experienced in contracting for removal of towers and provide that estimate to the City of Yukon along with the application for approval of a conditional use permit to install said tower. Upon receiving approval by the planning commission and the city council, the tower owner will be notified that a permit to construct the tower will be issued when the applicant has met all of the requirements of this code and has secured and filed with the City of Yukon a bond for a length of a no less than three years in an amount equal to or exceeding the estimate of the cost of removal and all associated structures, fencing, power supply and other appurtenances connected with the tower. The bond must be provided within 30 days of the date of the approval, but prior to construction beginning. Replacement bonds must be provided 90 days prior to the expiration of any previous bond. The permit holder shall provide an updated estimate and bond in the appropriate amount. Failure to keep the bonds in effect is cause for removal of the tower at owner's expense. A separate bond will be required for each tower, regardless of the number of owners or the location. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-12. - Screening, landscaping, fencing and access requirements; installing overhead or underground electrical power lines, fiber optics or other utilities. 
(a)  Screening. Tower facilities shall be visually buffered by a hedge of low-maintenance evergreen plant material or other approved opaque screening material, which effectively screens the view of the tower, building, fencing and accessory facilities. The tower owner shall be responsible for all costs of equipment, labor and materials associated with the screening of the tower facilities. 
(b)  Landscaping. The tower owner will be responsible for all costs associated with the landscaping requirements. A landscaping plan shall be included with the application permit to construct the tower. The plan shall include provisions for all materials to be used for the landscaping and screening. Existing trees and the natural landscape elevation surrounding the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent reasonably possible. Shrub planting materials that are used for screening shall be at minimum five-gallon evergreens capable of reaching a full height of ten feet at full growth. Any trees that are planted shall be at least two inches in caliper. Upon completion of the tower construction, screening and landscaping, all maintenance of the landscaping and screening shall become the responsibility of the property owner. Plants that die or do not effectively buffer the tower, screening or building power equipment shall be replaced within three months at the landowner's expense. Failure to maintain the plants shall constitute a code violation subject to a fine to the landowner. 
(c)  Fencing. The tower owner shall be responsible for all costs, equipment, labor and materials associated with installing and maintaining all privacy fencing around the tower. The fencing shall consist of a chain-link fence in type and be a minimum height of eight feet. The fence must be installed around the tower site with a locking gate. A sign must also be posted containing the tower owner's name and contact information. Tower owner shall be responsible for maintaining the fence in good condition. 
(d)  Access to tower. All tower sites will be required to have a paved, dust-free, asphalt or concrete driveway approach and gravel access road to the tower site. A temporary approach for the tower construction site is required to have a 50-foot gravel entrance off the roadway. Deposits of dirt, gravel or other similar materials on the public streets must be properly removed at the tower owner's expense. If not removed and cleaned in a timely manner, a fine will be assessed against the tower owner or abatement will occur in accordance with the general ordinances dealing with nuisance abatements. All towers approved for construction must obtain a curb cut/driveway permit from the development services department and the governmental agency having jurisdiction over the city streets or state highway used to access tower. 
(e)  Installing overhead or underground electrical power line, fiber optics or other utilities. The owner of the tower approved for construction in Yukon city limits must obtain the proper permits from the appropriate governmental agencies that have jurisdiction over the placement of all lines, underground or overhead, within the public right-of-way of all streets, county roads or state highways. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-13. - Permit requirements. 
    The owners of all towers will be required to obtain a yearly special permit from the City of Yukon to operate a tower within the city limits at a cost of $900.00 for the first year. This permit must be renewed every year thereafter at a cost of $250.00 so long as the tower is operational. The permit must be renewed at least three months prior to expiration of the previous permit. Failure to keep the permit current will constitute grounds for removal of the tower at the owner's expense. A 30 day notice shall be given to the permit holders prior to an order for removal. A separate permit will be required for each tower regardless of owner or location. The tower owner must also provide continued proof of liability insurance every year in connection with the permit renewal process. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-14. - Inspection and testing. 
(a)  Inspection. The City of Yukon may at any time inspect any telecommunications tower, antenna or other facility to ensure its structural integrity. The tower owners must inspect the tower every three years for structural integrity and file with the City of Yukon by June 30 a certified report from a qualified structural engineer that is licensed to practice in the State of Oklahoma. The City of Yukon may at any time request the tower owner to perform additional inspection if damaging winds, earthquakes, other natural phenomenon or unexpected damages occur that may cause structural failure of the tower or facilities. If, upon inspection, the tower owner determines that the facility fails to comply with such applicable codes and that such failure constitutes a danger to persons or property, then the owner of the facility shall immediately notify the City of Yukon. The owner shall have 30 days to bring the facility into compliance with the applicable codes and standards. Failure to bring the facility into compliance within the said 30 days shall constitute cause for the removal of the facility at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Testing. When construction of the tower is first completed and all initial antenna(s) are installed on the tower and supplied with power, the tower owner shall be required, at their expense, to measure the non-ionizing radiation levels within 30 days to determine if the emissions are within the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) guidelines for safety regarding uncontrolled exposure to the general public. In order to effectively measure the radiation levels of both directional and omni-directional antenna at tower locations, the following measurements are required: 
(1)  For towers with only omni-directional antennas, the owners are required to take a minimum of three measurements. The measurements must be taken in a circular pattern at the base of the tower spaced at approximately on 120 degree increments. 
(2)  For tower locations having directional antennas or a combination of omni-directional and directional antennas, a minimum of six measurements must be taken in a circular pattern at the base of the tower spaced at approximately 60 degree increments with the first measurement taken directly below one of the directional antenna. 
(c)  Notice. The City of Yukon development services department must be notified when the non-ionizing radiation levels are being measured so that an official of the city can be present. Upon completion of the measurements, the tower owner shall provide the development services department with a certified report indicating the actual measurements taken and prove that they comply with the Federal Communications Commission guidelines. The tower owner shall also be required to provide proof that the meter used to measure the radiation levels has been calibrated at the normal intervals required by the manufacturer to maintain accuracy of the test equipment. Testing non-ionizing radiation levels will also be required again at any time additional antennae are installed, the number of channels (transmitters) are increased or any other changes are made to the tower that would increase the power output at the specific location. It is required that the city be notified when these additional tests are made so that a city official can be present and a certified report again provided as indicated above. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-15. - Non-interference. 
    All new or existing telecommunications services shall comply with all relevant Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) standards and shall not interfere with public safety and other city and private communication operations. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-16. - Insurance and hold harmless provisions. 
(a)  A permit will not be issued until applicant files satisfactory evidence with the development services department showing minimum general liability coverage of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence $500,000.00 aggregate limits which protects the city in the event an action is brought claiming liability as a result of the construction, operation or maintenance of the tower. 
(b)  The property owner must hold harmless the City of Yukon from any action, including attorney's fees, that may arise from the installation or operation of tower. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-17. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-18. - Enforcement. 
    In addition to fines provided above, this tower chapter may be enforced by injunctive relief sought in the Canadian County District Court. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-19. - Repealer. 
    All former Ordinances or parts of this chapter conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1364 , 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 24-20-24-22. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 26-1. - Absentee ballots in city elections. 
    Absentee ballots shall be provided for in any city election conducted by the county election board. Absentee ballots shall be prescribed and utilized as established by the state constitution and statutory law. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12; Code 1995, § 38-1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Ward boundaries. 
(a)  Established. In order to divide the wards as nearly equal in population as practicable, the boundaries of the wards of the city are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Ward one. Ward one shall be bounded on the west side by Cornwell Drive from Main Street to Spruce Drive; thence easterly and continuing southerly along Spruce Drive which turns into Beech Avenue; then along Beech Avenue to Willow Place; thence southwest along Willow Place to Fay Avenue; then east along Fay Avenue to Cherrywood Lane; thence south along Cherrywood Lane to Vandament Avenue; thence east along Vandament Avenue to the east city limits; thence north along the east city limits to SH 66/Main Street; thence westerly along SH 66/Main Street to Cornwell Drive. 
(2)  Ward two. Ward two shall be bounded on the east by Yukon Parkway from N.W. 10th Street to Vandament Avenue; thence west on Vandament Avenue to Cherrywood Lane; thence north on Cherrywood Lane to Fay Avenue; then west on Fay Avenue to Willow Place; then northeasterly along Willow Place to Beech Avenue; then easterly along Beech Avenue which turns into Spruce Drive; then north and continuing westerly along Spruce Drive to Cornwell Avenue; thence south along Cornwell Drive to Vandament Avenue; thence west along Vandament Avenue to Holly Avenue; then south on Holly Avenue and continuing south to a point due south of the intersection of Holly Avenue and Vandament Avenue on N.W. 10th Street; thence east on N.W. 10th Street to Yukon Parkway. 
(3)  Ward three. Ward three shall be bounded on the north by SH 66/Main Street from Cornwell Drive to Frisco Ridge Road; then south along Frisco Ridge Road to Branch Line Road; then east and continuing southerly along Branch Line Road and continuing along the line to Kingsgate Road; thence southerly on Kingsgate Road to Westport Avenue; thence south on Westport Avenue to Vandament Avenue; thence west on Vandament Avenue to Frisco Road; thence south on Frisco Road to the city limit; then east along the city limit approximately one-half mile; then south along the city limit approximately one-half mile to N.W. 10th Street; thence east along N.W. 10th Street to a point due south of the intersection of Holly Avenue and Vandament Avenue; thence north to Vandament Avenue; thence east along Vandament Avenue to Cornwell Drive; thence north along Cornwell Drive to SH 66/Main Street. 
(4)  Ward four. Ward four shall be bounded on the north by Wilshire Road from Cimarron Road to Sara Road; then south along Sara Road approximately two and one-half miles; then west along the city limit approximately one-half mile; then south along the city limit to SH 66/Main Street; then west along SH 66/Main Street to Frisco Ridge Road; then south along Frisco Ridge Road to Branch Line Road; then east and continuing southerly along Branch Line Road and continuing along the line to Kingsgate Road; thence southeasterly along Kingsgate Road to Westport Avenue; thence south on Westport Avenue to Vandament Avenue; thence west on Vandament Avenue to Frisco Road; thence north along Frisco Road to Main Street; thence west on Highway 66, also known as Main Street, to Gregory Road; thence south on Gregory Road to N.W. 23rd Street; thence west along N.W. 23rd Street to the west city limit; thence north along the west city limit to Main Street; thence east along Main Street to Gregory Road; thence north along Gregory Road to Foreman Road; thence east along Foreman Road to Cimarron Road; thence north along Cimarron Road to Wilshire Road, less and except a part of the southwest quarter (SW/4) of section 13, in township 12, north of range six, west of the Indian Meridian, bounded and described as follows; beginning at a point 887 feet west of the southeast corner of said southwest quarter (SW/4) of section 13, township and range aforesaid; thence north 340 feet; thence west 200 feet; thence south 340 feet; thence east 200 feet to the place of beginning. 
(b)  Streets, avenues, cetc., delineate centerlines. References in subsection (a) of this section to streets, avenues, drives and railroad rights-of-way shall mean the centerline of the streets, avenues, drives and railroad rights-of-way. 
(Code 1975, § 2-8; Code 1995, § 38-2; Ord. No. 905, § 1, 1-17-1995; Ord. No. 1274, § 1, 4-3-2012) 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, 63 O.S. § 680 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, 63 O.S. § 680 et seq.; local civil defense organizations, 63 O.S. § 683.11; immunities of city and emergency management workers, 63 O.S. 683.14. 

Sec. 30-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency means any occasion or instance for which, in the determination of the President of the United States or the governor of the state, federal or state assistance is needed to supplement state and local efforts and capabilities to save lives and to protect property and public health and safety, or to lessen or avert threat of a catastrophe in any part of the state. 
    Emergency management means the preparation for and the coordination of all emergency functions by organized and trained persons, who will extend existent governmental functions and provide other necessary nongovernmental functions, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from natural or manmade disasters developing to such an extent to cause an extreme emergency situation to arise which, by declaration of the governor, jeopardizes the welfare of the citizens of the state. These emergency functions include, but are not limited to, firefighting, law enforcement, medical and health, search and rescue, public works, warnings, communications, hazardous materials and other special response functions, evacuations of persons from affected areas, emergency assistance services, emergency transportation, and other functions related to preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation. 
    Emergency operations plan means that plan which sets forth the organization, administration and functions for emergency management by the city government. 
    Hazard mitigation means any cost-effective measure which will reduce or eliminate the effects of a natural or man-made disaster. 
    Manmade disaster means a disaster caused by acts of man including, but not limited to, an act of war, terrorism, chemical spill or release, or power shortages that require assistance from outside the city. 
    Natural disaster means any natural catastrophe, including, but not limited to, a tornado, severe storm, high water, flood waters, wind-driven water, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, or drought which causes damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant hazard mitigation or the use of resources of the federal government, or the state and political subdivisions thereof, to alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering caused thereby. 
    Significant events means all hazardous material releases of any size and type, earthquakes, fires involving large buildings or facilities and large grass or wild fires, explosions, bomb threats, terrorist/civil disturbances, aircraft crashes, natural disasters, utility disruptions, dam breaches, technological/man-made incidents, search and rescues, structural collapses, and any other incidents that pose significant consequences to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 30-1; Ord. No. 75, § 7-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 683.3. 
Sec. 30-20. - Establishment and composition of office of emergency management. 
(a)  There is established, within the executive branch of the city government, the office of emergency management. This office shall consist of: 
(1)  The emergency management advisory committee provided for in this article. 
(2)  The director of emergency management appointed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  Such other volunteer emergency management advisory committees as may be created by the director of emergency management for the evaluation of technical, professional or other phases of the work of the office of emergency management, and which may provide advisory assistance on any matters pertaining to the city's emergency management. 
(b)  Appropriate office space, furniture, equipment and supplies, as required, shall be provided for the office of emergency management. Expenditures for these purposes, within the appropriations therefor, shall be made only on the authority of the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 7-2; Code 1995, § 30-2) 
Sec. 30-21. - Emergency management advisory committee. 
    There is hereby created an emergency management advisory committee consisting of the mayor, as chairperson, and of five other members including the city manager, police chief, fire chief, emergency management director and one person appointed by the mayor and serving at his pleasure. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the committee shall function in an advisory capacity on all matters pertaining to emergency management. It shall hold regular meetings at least four times a year, and shall meet at other times on the call of the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 7-3; Code 1995, § 30-3) 
Sec. 30-22. - Director of emergency management-Office created; appointment. 
    The office of director of emergency management is hereby created. Such director shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at his pleasure. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4; Code 1995, § 30-3) 
Sec. 30-23. - Same-General powers and duties. 
(a)  The director of emergency management shall be the executive head of the office of emergency management, and shall be responsible to the city manager for carrying out the emergency management program of the city. He shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency management within the city, and shall maintain liaison with and cooperate with emergency management agencies and/organizations of other governmental units both within and without the state, and of the federal government, and shall have such additional authority, duties and responsibilities as may be authorized under this article. 
(b)  The director of emergency management shall have general direction and control of the office of emergency management, and shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this article. In so carrying out the provisions of this article, the director is expressly authorized to cooperate, insofar as permitted by other appropriate legislation, with the federal government, the governments of the state, and its subdivisions, with other states and their subdivisions, and with private agencies, in all matters pertaining to emergency management in the city. 
(c)  Prior to an emergency, the director of emergency management shall have the power to: 
(1)  Make, amend and rescind the necessary orders, rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this article within the limits of the authority conferred upon him herein, with due consideration to be given to the plans and powers of the federal government, the government of the state, and other public and private agencies and/organizations empowered to act in either enemy-caused emergencies or natural emergencies, or both. 
(2)  Prepare comprehensive plans for the emergency management of the city in both enemy-caused and natural emergencies, such plans and programs to be integrated and coordinated with the plans and programs of the federal government, of the government of the state, and of other public and private agencies and/organizations empowered to act in either enemy-caused or natural emergencies or both. 
(3)  Establish, within the limits of funds available, a public warning system, composed of sirens, horns or other acceptable warning devices. 
(4)  Establish and carry out recruitment and training programs as may be necessary to develop an adequate, qualified emergency management volunteer corps. 
(5)  Conduct drills, exercises and similar programs as may be necessary to develop a well-trained, alert, fully prepared emergency management organization. 
(6)  Make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities of the city as he deems necessary to ascertain its capabilities for emergency management, and plan for the most efficient emergency use therefor. 
(7)  Enter, on behalf of the city, into mutual aid arrangements with surrounding communities and states bordering the state, subject to the approval of the council. 
(8)  Delegate any administrative authority vested in him under this article and provide for the subdelegation of any such authority. 
(9)  Take any other action proper and lawful under his authority to prepare for either an enemy-caused or a natural emergency. 
(Code 1975, § 7-5; Code 1995, § 30-5) 
Sec. 30-24. - Same-Powers during enemy-caused emergency. 
    Upon any actual enemy-caused emergency as proclaimed by the mayor, the director of emergency management with the approval of the mayor may exercise, during such emergency, the power to enforce all rules and regulations relating to emergency management, and acting under the authority of statutes, when enacted, or under the authority of the mayor and city manager as an agent of the governor, may take control of all means of transportation and communications, all stocks of fuel, food, clothing, medicine and supplies, and all facilities, including buildings and plants, and exercise all powers necessary to secure the safety and protection of the civilian population. In exercising such powers he shall be guided by regulations and/orders issued by the federal government and the governor relating to emergency management and shall take no action contrary to orders which may be issued by the governor under similar emergency powers. 
(Code 1975, § 7-6; Code 1995, § 30-6) 
Sec. 30-25. - Same-Powers during natural emergency. 
    Upon any natural emergency as proclaimed by the mayor, the director of emergency management, with the approval of the city manager and acting under his instructions, shall coordinate in every way proper the activities of the emergency management organization. He is specifically charged in such emergency with the collection, evaluation and dissemination of information to all agencies, both public and private, participating in the city's emergency management organization or cooperating in any such emergency. He shall, as director, have the power to recommend to the mayor the allocation of any funds received from the federal or state governments or from any other source to alleviate distress and aid in restoring normal conditions. 
(Code 1975, § 7-7; Code 1995, § 30-7) 
Sec. 30-26. - Establishment of emergency control centers. 
    The director of emergency management shall, within the appropriations therefor, establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers, as he deems necessary, to serve during an enemy-caused or a natural emergency. 
(Code 1975, § 7-8; Code 1995, § 30-8) 
Sec. 30-27. - Acceptance of gifts, grants and loans for emergency management purposes. 
    Whenever the federal government, the state or any person shall offer to the city any services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds, by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of emergency management, the mayor may accept such offer, and may authorize the director of emergency management to receive same subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. 
(Code 1975, § 7-9; Code 1995, § 30-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 683.17(B). 
Secs. 30-28-30-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate EMS generally, 63 O.S. § 1-2515; Oklahoma Emergency Response Systems Development Act, 63 O.S. § 1-2501 et seq. 

Sec. 30-58. - EMS committee. 
    There is established an emergency medical service (EMS) oversight committee consisting of five citizen members appointed and serving as provided in section 2-327. 
(Code 1995, § 42-26) 
Sec. 30-59. - Application for license. 
    The owner/operator of any emergency medical service desiring to operate within the corporate limits of the city shall submit an application to the city, including any verification requested by the city, showing: 
(1)  A current copy of his state license with additional licenses submitted to the city as received by such applicant. 
(2)  That said applicant is in full compliance with the Oklahoma Emergency Response Systems Development Act (63 O.S. § 1-2501 et seq.). 
(3)  That the applicant has in full force and effect public liability insurance insuring his business operations from liability of not less than $100,000.00 for one person; $300,000.00 for more than one person; and $100,000.00 for property damage. 
(4)  Each ambulance shall be equipped with radios capable of two-way communication with the police department and with local hospitals. 
(5)  The number of ambulances available to the applicant in operating condition which are to be situated in the city and on call for 24-hour service. A minimum of one ambulance shall be located within the city limits and on call for 24-hour service. 
(6)  The qualifications of persons operating the ambulances. All attendants shall hold current certification of an (emergency medical technician) EMT/paramedic and drivers shall hold a current EMT/basic certification from the National Registry of Emergency Medical Technicians. 
(Code 1975, § 25-46; Code 1995, § 42-27) 
Sec. 30-60. - Issuance of license; annual fee. 
    If the applicant complies with the requirements of this article, the city shall issue the applicant an annual license to operate an emergency medical service (EMS) upon the payment of an annual license fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 25-47; Code 1995, § 42-28) 
Sec. 30-61. - Provisions of article considered minimum requirements. 
    The provisions of this article shall be considered minimum requirements and shall not relieve any person, company or other business entity from any duty imposed by law to use reasonable care and take reasonable precautions for the safeguarding of people and the protection of and noninterference with property rights. 
(Code 1975, § 25-48; Code 1995, § 42-29) 
Sec. 30-62. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 25-49; Code 1995, § 42-30) 
Sec. 30-63. - Reserved. 
Sec. 30-64. - [Definitions.] 
    [For the purpose of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively as ascribed to them by this section.] 
    Landlord shall mean any person, company, corporation or other entity that owns or manages single family and/or multi-family residential living units and leases them to tenants and is responsible for the payment of utility bills for the living units. 
    Living units shall mean a residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for a family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. This shall include all levels of nursing home care, including senior services, assisted living and nursing home services. 
    Medical services program shall mean the services, products, expertise, equipment and costs associated with Samaritan Ambulance Services, billed monthly on the utility customer's bill, and shall be known as the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program or CareNet Program. 
    Multi-family residential utility customer shall mean the Yukon utility customer with two or more living units served by one city utility drainage bill and water bill; provided multifamily residential living units will not include hotels or motels. 
    Program year shall be from May 1st of one year through April 30th of the following year. Each program year shall be designated by the calendar year in which the program year begins and the year in which the program year expires (e.g., May 1, 2018 through April 30, 2019, shall be designated as program year 2018/2019). 
    Single-family residential utility customer shall mean a Yukon utility customer with one living unit receiving one city utility water bill. 
    Tenant shall mean a person or persons who signed the lease for a living unit at a specific location within the City of Yukon, which living unit receives Yukon utility services. 
    Tenant's household shall include all individuals permanently residing together in the leased living unit with the tenant. 
    Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program shall mean the program, as it currently exists or may hereinafter be amended, which is sponsored by Samaritan Ambulance Service. 
    Utility customer shall mean the person or persons that established a utility account with the City of Yukon for utility services for a single-family residential or a multi-family residential living unit. 
    Utility customer's household shall include all individuals permanently living together in a living unit at a specific location within the City of Yukon, which living unit receives Yukon utility services. 
(Ord. No. 1355 , § 1, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 30-65. - Medical service program and fees. 
(a)  Each single-family residential utility customer and multi-family utility customer within the corporate limits of the City of Yukon shall be included in the Samaritan CareNet Program, unless the utility customer affirmatively declines participation in said program in the manner set forth in section 30-66 of this chapter. 
(b)  Single-family residential utility customers participating in the program shall have included within their utility bills a charge of $3.65 per month. 
(c)  Multi-family residential utility customer participating in the program shall be billed at $3.65 per month per occupied living unit. There is a rebuttable presumption that 75 percent of the total number of living units served by a single Yukon utility bill are occupied. The number of presumed living units shall be rounded down, but to no less than one. 
(d)  The total number of living units attributable to multi-family residential utility customers and landlords shall be based upon the living units of records with the Yukon utilities department. It is the responsibility of all multi-family residential utility customers and landlords to annually confirm with the utility department whether the number of living units is in fact accurate. The number of living units on record with the utility department will be based upon information provided by the sworn affidavit of the multi-family residential utility customer or landlord and confirmed by the city. Said affidavit must be received by the city no later than May 1st of each year. Multi-family residential utility customers and landlords shall make staff available to meet at the subject residences with the city utility department personnel to confirm the number of living units as provided for by the utility customer in the sworn affidavit mentioned herein. 
(Ord. No. 1355 , § 1, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 30-66. - Nonparticipation election. 
(a)  Any utility customer who desires not to participate in the CareNet Program for the next program year shall either provide a signed and filed declaration of nonparticipation, on forms prescribed and provided by the city, prior to May 15th of 2018, or upon opening a utility service account with a Yukon residential address. The utility customer's election to either participate or not participate in the program shall remain unchanged for the following program year unless affirmatively changed by the utility customer prior to May 15th of the program year at issue. 
(b)  If a multi-family residential utility customer or landlord or his or her authorized representative elects for a property not to participate in the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program, the multi-family residential utility customer or landlord or his/her authorized representative shall obtain from each tenant a written and signed acknowledgement stating that the tenant: (1) understands that the tenant and the tenant's household are not included in the Samaritan CareNet Program; (2) understands that the tenant may affirmatively elect to personally participate in the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program by contacting Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program and enrolling in the program at the same price as offered to participating single family residential utility customers; (3) understands failure to participate in the program will subject the tenant and tenant's household to full costs associated with the Samaritan Ambulance Service; (4) has been informed of the estimated per trip cost of an emergency ambulance transport run. The written and signed acknowledgement described herein shall be maintained in the multi-family residential utility customer's or landlord or his/her authorized representative's records and shall be provided to the city no later than May 15th each year. The acknowledgement must be obtained for all tenants existing at the beginning of the program year and all new tenants moving into the landlord's or multi-family residential utility customer's property at any time during the program year. 
(c)  Failure to obtain and maintain on file the written acknowledgement from each tenant shall be a separate violation of this section. In addition, every 30 day period from the beginning of a lease until written acknowledgment is received or the multi-family residential utility customer or landlord or his/her authorized representative elects for a property to participate in the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program shall constitute a separate offense for each tenant affected. 
(Ord. No. 1355 , § 1, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 30-67. - Collection of service charges. 
(a)  The service charges herein established for the Samaritan CareNet Program shall be billed to each utility customer monthly, along with the bill for other city utility services and shall carry the same due date as now or may hereafter be established for utility service bills. 
(b)  Disbursement of funds by the city to Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program shall be upon the basis agreed to and approved through the annual budget or by subsequent budget amendments approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1355 , § 1, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 30-68. - Accountability for funds received. 
    The city is not responsible for either the provisions of services by Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Service or the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program. 
(Ord. No. 1355 , § 1, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 30-69. - Adjustment of charges. 
(a)  Appeal. Any utility customer who considers the Samaritan CareNet Membership Program charges applicable to his living unit to be erroneous because said utility customer timely opted out of the program, may request review of the charges by the city's utilities department. Additionally, any landlord or multi-family residential utility customer who encounters special circumstances that would justify modifying the number of occupied living units determined in accordance with the provisions of section 30-65 (such as fire, Acts of God, or renovations), may request review thereof by the city's utilities department. Any other problems experienced by the utility customer with regard to his/her Samaritan CareNet Membership Program shall be referred to the executive director of the Samaritan Ambulance Service. 
(Ord. No. 1355 , § 1, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 30-70. - Disconnection of service for non-payment. 
    Any customer whose account has been disconnected for service of non-payment status per section 114-67, following the utilities department current and administrative policies and procedures, shall be automatically removed from the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program and said customer and the customer's household shall not receive the benefits of the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program. The utility bill will be deemed to be notice to the customer and the customer's household of any delinquency or failure to pay the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program. Should any customer be removed from the Samaritan CareNet Ambulance Membership Program for failure to pay or late payment then neither said customer, nor any member of customer's household shall be permitted to re-enroll in the customer's address until the utility bill of such address is no longer considered delinquent. Service may be restored as set out in section 114-68. 
(Ord. No. 1355 , § 1, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 30-71. - Penalty. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this article, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of said violation, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, excluding the cost and fees. 
(Ord. No. 1355 , § 1, 3-20-2018) 
Secs. 30-72-30-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Alarm Industry Act, 59 O.S. § 1200.1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-83. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm administrator means the department head, or his designee, of the department designated by the city manager to perform the administrative functions of this article. 
    Alarm business means the business by any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring any alarm system or causing to be sold or monitored any alarm system in or on any building, structure, or facility, but not excluding any person who installs his own alarm on his own property to protect his own personal property. 
    Alarm system means one or more devices designed to detect and signal unauthorized intrusion, entry, robbery, fire, or other emergency condition, which signals are responded to by public law enforcement officers, fire department personnel, private security guards or security officers: 
(1)  And includes: 
a.  Interconnecting systems which are connected, either directly or through a mechanical device, to a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone lines to transmit a message upon activation of the alarm system; 
b.  Automatic dialing devices; and 
c.  Audible systems not interconnected to telephone lines which, when activated, sound a bell, siren, or other device that make an audible or visual signal at the location protected by the alarm system; 
(2)  Provided that: 
a.  Alarm systems installed within vehicles shall be excluded. 
b.  Battery operated alarm systems shall be excluded. 
    Alarm user means any person, corporation, company, or organization in control of any building, structure, or facility located within the city wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
    Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for police, fire or medical response. This device shall be listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or approved by the Factory Mutual Engineer's Association. 
    False alarm means the activation of a burglary, robbery, fire or other alarm for the purpose of summoning emergency assistance or which causes the police or fire department to be summoned, at a time when no emergency exists, and includes those caused by: 
(1)  Error, mistake or any action by any person owning or operating any dwelling, building, or place which results in the activation of any alarm system when no emergency exists; 
(2)  Malfunction or any activation of any alarm system caused by a flaw in the normal operation, design, installation, maintenance of the system, faulty equipment, change in environment, atmospheric conditions, or premises upon or within which the alarm system is operating; and 
(3)  Intentional misuse or any intentional activation of an alarm system when no burglary, robbery, vandalism, fire, or other emergency is in progress, but excluding testing during installation or while a burglary, robbery, vandalism, fire, or other emergency is in progress, but excluding testing during installation or regular maintenance when the alarm user notifies the police service in advance and receives permission for the test; 
provided that an alarm will not be considered a false alarm if it is determined by the police or fire service that the alarm was the result of vandalism, attempted entry, or severe weather, which causes visible, physical, or other evidence of damage to the premises. 
    In-station alarm means an alarm system which is connected to the police station communications area or the fire department by telephone or other means which summons emergency assistance. 
(Code 1975, § 21/2-2; Code 1995, § 22-47) 
Sec. 30-84. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7, plus costs. 
(Code 1975, § 21/2-7; Code 1995, § 22-52) 
Sec. 30-85. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to enhance and protect the emergency services of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 21/2-1; Code 1995, § 22-46) 
Sec. 30-86. - Alarm permits required; fee assessed. 
(a)  No alarm system shall be installed, maintained or operated until the alarm user shall have first obtained a permit from the alarm administrator for each alarm system on the premises. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain or operate an alarm system without obtaining a permit. 
(b)  The application for permit shall include information as to the number of and type of alarms installed, the alarm business providing the service, monitoring agent, and numbers to be called in the event an emergency should occur. An approved application and permit shall bear the signature of the alarm administrator. The administrator shall assess an initial permit fee as established by resolution for such permit which shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and an annual renewal permit fee as established by resolution thereafter, in addition to any other fees required in this section. 
(c)  An initial permit fee as established by resolution is hereby levied on each in-station alarm system within the city. Such fee shall be paid by the alarm user. No free permits shall be granted, nor rebates allowed, for any cause, nor any sum accepted less than the amount specified herein. No fee shall be levied on governmental agencies maintaining an in-station alarm, provided that this exception shall not exempt such agencies from the requirement to obtain a permit. 
(Code 1975, § 21/2-3; Code 1995, § 22-48; Ord. No. 1232, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
Sec. 30-87. - Alarm businesses; registration required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the alarm industry business, as defined in 59 O.S. § 1800.1 et seq., unless licensed pursuant to the Oklahoma Alarm Industry Act. 
(b)  Every alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing any alarm system within the city shall furnish the alarm user with instructions that provide adequate information to enable the alarm user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the alarm system. 
(c)  Every alarm business doing business with alarm users shall be required to register with the alarm administrator each calendar year. Registration shall include copies of the state license of the company or individual providing services to the alarm user and such other information as the alarm administrator deems appropriate. This alarm business shall be UL-approved. 
(Code 1975, § 21/2-4; Code 1995, § 22-49) 
Sec. 30-88. - Certain interconnections prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to any telephone line which, when activated, dials the digits 9-1-1. It is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to dial the digits 9-1-1. 
(Code 1975, § 21/2-5; Code 1995, § 22-50) 
Sec. 30-89. - False alarms; charges; permit revocation. 
(a)  When records of the police or fire department indicate two false alarms within one calendar year, the alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user by regular mail of the number of false alarms on record. The alarm user will also be notified that for the remainder of the calendar year, responses to false alarms as defined will result in the alarm user being assessed a fee as established by resolution per response for any subsequent false alarm. If the assessment billed the alarm user is not paid within 30 days of the statement date, the alarm administrator may revoke the alarm user's permit. The fees set forth herein shall not be charged if the false alarm occurs as a result of inclement weather or disruption in communication devices. 
(b)  If the alarm user's permit has been revoked, the alarm user will be required to make application for a new permit, pay any false alarm assessments owing, and pay the appropriate fees. It shall be a violation of this article to operate an alarm system when the permit for that system has been revoked by the alarm administrator. 
(c)  If the alarm user's permit is revoked, the alarm user may appeal the revocation to the city manager, provided the appeal is made in writing to the city manager within ten calendar days from the date of revocation. 
(d)  Any person or company working on an alarm system shall report an accidental or false alarm to the police department. Any person or company who fails to report an accidental or false alarm under this subsection shall be assessed a fee established by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 21/2-6; Code 1995, § 22-51; Ord. No. 1232, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OIL AND GAS WELLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas generally, 17 O.S. § 51 et seq.; contesting amount of drilling fee, 11 O.S. § 22-133. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned well means any oil, gas, disposal, injection or other service well, or any seismic, core or other exploratory hole, whether cased or uncased. The owner and operator shall be jointly and severally liable and responsible for the plugging thereof in accordance with these rules. Each well in which production casing has been run, but which has not been in operation for one year, shall be properly plugged immediately. For new wells in which surface casing has been properly set and cemented to protect the fresh water, the well shall be plugged within 30 days after cessation of drilling or testing. In the case of other newly drilled wells, without surface casing and in which drilling and testing operations have ceased, immediate plugging is required before abandonment. For the purposes of this rule, a shut-in gas well shall be considered a producing well and in operation, and, therefore, exempt from the plugging requirements herein. 
    Artificial production means the raising to the surface of the earth by means other than natural flow of petroleum or natural gas. 
    Booster pump means a centrifugal or piston pump used to increase the volume or pressure on a gathering line. 
    Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portions thereof." 
    Compressor station means a single or series of compressor pumps for the artificial production or flow (volume and pressure) of more than one producing oil or gas well. 
    Compressor unit means a single compressor pump used to serve a single producing oil or gas well for the artificial production or flow (volume and pressure). 
    Corporation commission means the state corporation commission. 
    Deleterious substance means any chemical, salt water, oilfield brine, waste oil, waste emulsified oil, basic sediment or mud of injurious substances produced or used in the drilling, development, producing, transportation, refining and processing of oil, gas or condensate. 
    Enhanced recovery means an operation by which fluid or energy is introduced into a source of supply for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom. 
    Highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Location means one well bore and one tank battery, unless the tank battery services more than one well bore or is more than 100 feet from the well bore it services, in which case, the tank battery shall be considered a separate location. 
    Motor vehicle means any automobile, truck, truck tractor, trailer or semi-trailer or any motor bus or any self-propelled vehicle not operated or driven upon fixed rails or tracks. 
    Natural production means the raising to the surface of the earth, by natural flow, petroleum or natural gas. 
    Oil and gas inspector means that person qualified and employed by the city to enforce the provisions of this article or his authorized representatives. 
    Operator means any person or entity who owns or has ever owned any right to search for or produce substances from a well, whether such right is derived from ownership of leasehold interests or by any other species of agreement conferring such right, who has ever owned any working interest in any well bore located within the corporate limits of the city and any person who has ever operated any well on a contractual basis for any working interest owner. 
    Permittee means the person to whom is issued a permit in accordance with the terms of this article. 
    Person means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, trust, cooperative or other type of organization. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any surface, natural waters, or environment of the city, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous or solid substance into any water and environment of the city as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such surface, waters or environment harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare; to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other beneficial uses; or to livestock, animals or aquatic life. 
    Pressure maintenance means an operation by which gas, water or other fluids are injected into a supply of oil to maintain pressure or retard pressure decline therein for the purpose of facilitating recovery therefrom, and which has been approved by the corporation commission after notice and hearing. 
    Public building means all buildings used or designed and intended to be used for gathering 50 or more persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, health care or awaiting transportation. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Theaters. 
(2)  Motion picture theaters. 
(3)  Assembly halls. 
(4)  Auditoriums. 
(5)  Exhibition halls. 
(6)  Museums. 
(7)  Libraries. 
(8)  Skating rinks. 
(9)  Gymnasiums. 
(10)  Bowling lanes. 
(11)  Pool rooms. 
(12)  Armories. 
(13)  Mortuary chapels. 
(14)  Dancehalls. 
(15)  Club rooms. 
(16)  Recreation piers. 
(17)  Courtrooms. 
(18)  Conference rooms. 
(19)  Drinking establishments. 
(20)  Hospitals. 
(21)  Restaurants. 
    Pump means the pump jack, horsehead pump, walking beam pump, cable pump or any other device to bring up oil or other liquids from the well bore. 
    Salt water means any water containing more than 500 milligrams per liter (mg/l) of chlorides. 
    Spacing means surface acreage allowed per well. (Determined by the corporation commission and state law). 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portion thereof." 
    Tank battery means the tanks used for the accumulation and storage of liquid products produced from oil and gas wells either at the well site or a separate location. 
    Treatable water means surface and subsurface water in its natural state which may or may not require treatment to be useful for human consumption, and contains less than 10,000 parts per million (ppm) of total dissolved solids and/or 5,000 parts per million (ppm) of chlorides. 
    Water, waters of the city or city water means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the city or any portion thereof. 
    Well means, unless specifically qualified, any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any depth for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas or liquefied petroleum matter or deleterious substances, or for the injection or disposal of any of the foregoing. 
(b)  All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined herein shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. 
(Code 1975, § 27-10; Code 1995, § 70-26; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-20. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or causing or permitting the same to be done shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 27-19; Code 1995, § 70-65) 
Sec. 34-21. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the health, peace, safety and welfare of the city and its residents, this article is promulgated to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and controls for the drilling, operation and production, storing, transportation, and pipeline transmission of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances within the corporate limits of the city and provide that this land use may be conducted in harmony with other uses within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 27-11; Code 1995, § 70-27) 
Sec. 34-22. - Applicability of article to gathering and transmission pipelines. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary (including without limitation, references to pipelines in this article), none of the provisions of this article except this section and sections 34-54 and 34-142 shall be applicable to gathering and transmission pipelines (including without limitation, above-ground appurtenances and equipment used in connection therewith) for the gathering or transmission of gas, natural gas liquids or oil. Such gathering and transmission pipelines shall be required to mark the location of any aboveground appurtenances and related equipment with accurate signage reflecting the ownership of the equipment and a contact phone number. 
(Code 1975, § 27-53; Code 1995, § 70-98; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-23. - ICC International Fire Code adopted by reference; provisions considered minimum requirements. 
    The ICC International Fire Code as it may from time to time be amended is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. In the event there is a conflict between any provision of this chapter and a provision of the ICC International Fire Code, the most restrictive provision shall apply. The provisions set forth in this chapter shall be considered as a minimum requirement and shall not relieve any person, company or other business entity from any duty imposed by law, city, state, or federal regulation, to use reasonable care and take reasonable precautions for the safeguarding of people and the production and noninterference with property rights. 
(Code 1975, § 27-12; Code 1995, § 70-28; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1366 , § 1, adopted Sept. 27, 2018, repealed § 34-24, which pertained to establishment of zones; boundaries and derived from Code 1975, § 27-13 and Code 1995, § 70-29. 
Secs. 34-25-34-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 34-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall employ an inspector, and assistants, if necessary, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  The inspector shall have authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. Failure of any person to permit access to the inspector shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(d)  The inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records, logs, reports and the like relating to the status or condition of any well or project or the appurtenances thereof within the city. The permittee shall provide the requested records, logs, reports or other document within seven days of the request or such shorter period of time deemed necessary by the inspector and set forth in the request. This material shall remain confidential unless necessary as evidence of the violation of any of the provisions of this article. Failure of any person to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 27-23; Code 1995, § 70-41; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-53. - Operator to notify city manager of blowout. 
    If any well blows out or is out of control, the operator shall immediately notify the city manager, or the oil and gas inspector and the fire department by telephone or personal contact, and the operator shall protect the area from pollution and other damages. Such phone numbers are to be on the conditional use permit and posted with a copy of the permit at the well site. 
(Code 1975, § 27-25; Code 1995, § 70-42) 
Sec. 34-54. - Emergency shut down of locations. 
    The city manager or his designee may shut down the drilling or production of any oil and gas location which is an immediate threat to the public safety and may also shut down such location for violations of this article which are not corrected in a 24-hour period after verbal notice to the operator of a violation. A written log of such communications will be on file. It shall be a violation of this article for any operator to resume operations unless: 
(1)  The violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee; 
(2)  A proper order is issued by the district court having jurisdiction; or 
(3)  Authorized by the city council after notice and hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 27-24; Code 1995, § 70-43; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-55. - Enforcement of city regulations. 
    The city manager or his designee may enforce only these regulations and will not inspect for or enforce any state or federal statutes, rules or regulations which apply to the drilling, operation and production, storing, transportation, and pipeline gathering or transmission of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 27-61; Code 1995, § 70-44; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Secs. 34-56-34-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 34-84. - Conditional use permit required for drilling or reentering oil and gas wells, or construction of tank batteries, booster pumps or compressor stations. 
(a)  Any person desiring to drill an oil or gas well or to reenter an abandoned well, or to construct tank batteries, booster pumps or compressor stations (when they are on a separate location from the well site) within the areas designated as Zone X and Zone Y must apply to the city and receive a conditional use permit authorizing said drilling in accordance with the zoning provisions. A copy of the approved drilling permit from the corporation commission and a copy of the staking plot shall be filed with the city prior to issuance of the conditional use permit. A statement as to water usage and source for the drilling operations shall be included in the application. The application shall show the location of all equipment and, in the case of booster pumps or compressor stations, must show the maximum configuration of such equipment. 
(b)  For an oil or gas well, the permit will only cover production and all equipment for one well. Any addition of a compressor unit or any change in production equipment on an existing well shall require approval of the city manager or his designee and such approval shall be attached to the conditional use permit. 
(Code 1975, § 27-15; Code 1995, § 70-56) 
Sec. 34-85. - Permit for construction of tank batteries, booster pumps, compressor stations and pipelines. 
(a)  A conditional use permit shall be obtained from the city for the construction of tank batteries, booster pumps, compressor stations, and pipelines within the city limits if they are located separately from a well and if they are used in the operation of more than one producing well. Each request for permit must be accompanied by a diagram or layout showing location, arrangement, and size. It shall also describe the construction method and materials of the tanks and the product or substance to be stored therein. 
(b)  No person shall construct, erect, lay or otherwise install any tank battery, booster pump or compressor station on a location other than a well site or which services more than one well without first having applied for and received a conditional use permit in accordance with the zoning provisions. Each application shall be on a form prescribed by the city manager and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Diagram to scale showing each location with existing and proposed improvements; 
(2)  Arrangement for size of existing and proposed improvements; and 
(3)  Type of construction and materials of all improvements. 
(Code 1975, § 27-47; Code 1995, § 70-57; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-86. - Permit requests for injection wells and secondary recovery programs. 
    Any permit request for an injection well or secondary recovery program shall meet the requirement of the corporation commission, in addition to any requirement to protect both surface and underground fresh water supplies as can be set by the planning commission and city council. Any additional requirement in regards to traffic, safety and surface soil and property pollution may be required for approval of a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1975, § 27-62; Code 1995, § 70-58) 
Sec. 34-87. - Applicant for permit to post certificate of insurance. 
    Any application for a conditional use permit for the drilling of any oil and gas well shall post a certificate of insurance with and running to the city which has been executed by a company authorized to do business in the state, showing that such company will pay and discharge any liability imposed by law for damages to public or private property and bodily injury, including death, in the following amounts and conditions and shall maintain a current certificate during the term of any production: 
Annual aggregate property damage $2,500,000.00 Bodily injury per person $5,000,000.00 Property damage per occurrence, including, but not limited to, underground damage, explosion, collapse, blowout, contamination, pollution and cratering $2,500,000.00  
(Code 1975, § 27-16; Code 1995, § 70-59) 
Sec. 34-88. - Certificate of insurance required for applicant for a permit for or operator of compressor station or site engaged in pumping petroleum products. 
    Any applicant for a permit for or operator of a compressor station or a site engaged in the pumping or compressing of natural gas or other petroleum products within the corporate limits of the city shall post a certificate of insurance with and running to the city which has been executed by a company authorized to do business in the state, showing that such company will pay and discharge any liability imposed by law for damages to public or private property and bodily injury, including death, in the following amounts and conditions and shall maintain a current certificate during the term of any said compressor station or location: 
Annual aggregate property damage $2,500,000.00 Bodily injury per person $5,000,000.00 Property damage per occurrence, including, but not limited to, underground damage, explosion, collapse, blowout, contamination, pollution and cratering $2,500,000.00  
(Code 1975, § 27-14; Code 1995, § 70-60) 
Sec. 34-89. - Factors affecting consideration of permit. 
(a)  In considering an application for a conditional use permit, the planning commission and the city council shall consider the dangers of fire, explosion, leaking gas, noise, pollution, street damage and the traffic generated by such activity for the purpose of assessing the impact of this use upon the environment of the area and its affect upon the inhabitants of the new area and the whole city. 
(b)  All ingress and egress to oil and gas drilling sites, tank batteries, booster pumps, compressor stations, and pipelines shall be from section line roads, except upon approval of city council after recommendation of the planning commission. Special provisions to prevent wind and/or water erosion of roadways by application of dust-control agents shall be required. 
(Code 1975, § 27-17; Code 1995, § 70-61; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-90. - City council authorized to revoke or suspend permit; notice. 
    The city council shall have the authority to suspend or revoke the conditional use permit of any person, company or other business association to drill or operate any location where the provisions of this article are violated and before suspending or revoking said permit, the city council shall cause written notice to be served upon the permit holder, advising him of the time and date of the hearing to consider his suspension or revocation. A minimum of 15 days' notice of said hearing shall be given prior to any action being taken by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 27-18; Code 1995, § 70-62) 
Sec. 34-91. - Annual inspection fee for permit holders. 
    There is hereby levied an annual inspection fee as established by resolution for the purpose of reimbursing the city for annual expenses in conducting the location inspections that are herein set forth and incident thereto. Such fee shall be a condition precedent for the annual renewal of the conditional use permit. The fee shall be payable on July 1 of each year. 
(Code 1975, § 27-22; Code 1995, § 70-63; Ord. No. 979, 4-15-1997; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-92. - Specific acts constituting violation of conditional use permit. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of the conditional use permit for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, place, throw, divert, or in any manner dispose of or cause or permit to be deposited, placed, thrown, diverted or disposed of within the corporate limits of the city, any crude petroleum oil or oily by-product thereof, or any tar or any product containing tar or any liquid with petroleum content or any substance thereof upon the waters of any lagoon, creek or tributary thereof, or upon the banks thereof or upon any land adjacent thereto which by reason of this location may cause such petroleum, oil or liquid with petroleum content to be deposited or diverted or may run or be transferred or carried into any lagoon or creek or the banks or tributaries thereof, except that the city council may permit the depositing, placing or discharging of mud or slush in such places as they may approve or into pipelines properly approved by the city council. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of the conditional use permit for any person to deposit, drain or divert into or upon any public highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon, any oil or liquid with petroleum content or any oily substance or any mud, rotary mud, sand, water or salt water, or in any manner to permit by seepage, overflow or otherwise, any of such substances to escape from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person and to flow or be carried into or upon such public highway, street, or alley, drainage ditch, storm ditch, sewer, gutter, paving, creek, river, lake or lagoon within the corporate limits of the city, except in such cases where mud or slush is carried in a pipeline as provided in subsection (a) of this section, or in such instances where oil by-products are used for maintenance of private lease roads. 
(Code 1975, § 27-28; Code 1995, § 70-64) 
Sec. 34-93. - Annual submission of information to inspector required. 
    Effective July 1, 2001, and each year thereafter on July 1, every owner or operator of a well or wells within the city shall provide the inspector with the following information: 
(1)  A list of personnel to be contacted in case of an emergency at the well site. This list shall contain all information reasonably requested by the inspector, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The name of such person or persons; 
b.  The job description of such person or persons; and 
c.  The residence, office and mobile telephone numbers of such person. 
(2)  A list of all wells owned or operated within the city by that owner or operator. This list shall include all wells, except wells which have been plugged and abandoned in compliance with the law. The list shall contain all information reasonably requested by the inspector, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The lease name and well number of each well; 
b.  The legal description (1/4 Section, T.R.) of each well; and 
c.  The status and use of each well. 
(Code 1995, § 70-66; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Secs. 34-94-34-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-115. - Drilling operations, equipment. 
    All drilling, reentry and operations at any well performed under this article shall be conducted in accordance with the best practices of the reasonably prudent operator. All casing, valves, and blowout preventers, drilling fluid, tubing, bradenhead, Christmas tree and well-head connections shall be of the type and quality consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent operator. Setting and cementing casing and running drill stem tests shall be performed in a manner and at a time consistent with the best practices of such reasonably prudent operator. Any permittee under this article shall observe and follow the recommendations or regulations of the American Petroleum Institute and the corporate commission, except in those instances that are specifically addressed by this article. A copy of all logs associated with the surface casing shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1975, § 27-60; Code 1995, § 70-76) 
Sec. 34-116. - Location of oil and gas wells, compressor stations, booster pumps, etc. 
(a)  Construction of booster pumps, compressor stations, and drilling of oil and gas wells shall not be nearer than 1,000 feet from a property line, unless the location of the well is approved and written permission is granted by all adjoining property owners whose property is within 1,000 feet of the well. 
(b)  Oil and gas wells drilled, construction of booster pumps, tank batteries, compressor stations, and aboveground appurtenances of pipelines shall not be nearer than 1,000 feet from a property line unless approved and written permission is granted by all adjoining property owners whose property is within 1,000 feet thereof. This 1,000 foot requirement is not to be construed as 1,000 feet from the spacing unit, but from the well bore or abovementioned appurtenances. 
(c)  No oil and gas wells, construction of tank batteries, booster pumps, compressor stations, or pipelines shall be permitted in any city park unless an approved location is in existence on the effective day of the [ordinance from which this section derives], nor any property which has been platted or property for which there is a current preliminary plat. No disposal wells shall be allowed in the city limits. 
(d)  No wells shall be drilled within 1,000 feet of the banks of the North Canadian River. 
(Code 1975, § 27-26; Code 1995, § 70-77; Ord. No. 1290, § 1, 7-2-2013; Ord. No. 1366 , § 2, 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 34-117. - Locations to be kept clean, free of weeds. 
    All land located within 50 feet of any oil or gas well, tank battery, booster pump, compressor station or other appurtenances to any such location shall be kept free and clear of weeds, grass, rubbish, debris, paper and/or other combustible material at all times. Sufficient quantities of shale and rock shall be in place to keep down weeds and provide a driving surface which will allow no dirt, mud, shale or rock to be left on public streets. 
(Code 1975, § 27-27; Code 1995, § 70-78; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-118. - Requirements for drilling or producing wells. 
    Any drilling of oil and gas wells or production of wells, and construction and operation of any tank batteries, booster pumps, compressor stations, or pipelines shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  During drilling operations, the engine shall be muffled the maximum amount recommended by the manufacture of the engine. 
(2)  During production, trucks may drain or otherwise service tank batteries only between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except with the agreement with the city during completion and testing operations. 
(3)  The noise level of the pumping unit is not to exceed 45 dBa at a distance of 500 feet. 
(4)  An electrical centrifugal mud pump must be provided at each producing location for the purpose of pumping mud to the mud service trucks, thereby reducing ambient noise levels from vacuum pumps of mud trucks. 
(5)  Metal tanks shall be used for the holding of all drilling waste and fiberglass tanks may be used for the holding of saltwater. 
(6)  Work over operations shall be performed only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except under emergencies as agreed on with the operator and the city. 
(7)  After construction completion, during operations, all pumps shall be electrical. 
(8)  During normal operations, vibrations from any equipment, measured with all equipment in operation, must be at an acceptable level. 
(Code 1975, § 27-29; Code 1995, § 70-79; Ord. No. 1366 , § 3, 9-27-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1366 , § 3, adopted Sept. 27, 2018, amended the title of § 34-118 to read as herein set out. The former § 34-118 title pertained to requirements for drilling or production in Zone X. 
Sec. 34-119. - Electrical wiring to conform to city standards. 
    All electrical wiring on or about any tank batteries, booster pumps, compressor stations, pipelines, derricks, buildings, structures or tracts of land upon which any well is drilled or put down shall be run in accordance with the ordinances of the city governing electrical wiring installation. All electrical fixtures for lighting or power purposes used shall be of vapor proof design. 
(Code 1975, § 27-30; Code 1995, § 70-80; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-120. - Artificial light near tanks or wells. 
    No artificial light, except as approved by the United States Bureau of Mines for use in an explosive atmosphere, shall be used within 40 feet of the tank, or of any well after such well is completed as a producer of oil or gas. 
(Code 1975, § 27-31; Code 1995, § 70-81; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-121. - Accumulations of gas or gasoline vapors. 
    No gas or gasoline vapor in sufficient quantity to constitute a fire hazard shall be allowed to accumulate within a radius of 100 feet from any oil and gas well, tank battery, booster pump, compressor station, or aboveground pipeline appurtenance and the determination of such gas or vapor being in sufficient quantity to constitute a fire hazard shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 27-33; Code 1995, § 70-82) 
Sec. 34-122. - Pipe fittings. 
    Each string of casing or pipe within any well (except the outside surface casing) shall have the fitting thereon securely anchored to the casing immediately enclosing it. The provisions of this section in regard to requiring two master gates and the stems and valves used in connection with the master gates shall not apply to wells which are on artificial lift or on pump. 
(Code 1975, § 27-35; Code 1995, § 70-83; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-123. - Drilling below 3,000 feet. 
    Drilling below 3,000 feet shall be done with mud weighing at least 8.8 pounds per gallon. The hole should be kept full at the designated weight at all times until the producing sand is reached. The mud shall be weighed at such intervals as may be determined by the inspector. When withdrawing the drill pipe, the pipe shall be filled with mud after each 11 stands have been withdrawn. Drilling the producing oil sand, however, may be done with oil in lieu of mud; provided, however, that if the oil is in circulation, such oil shall not be over 30-B gravity with a flash point of not less than 350 degrees Fahrenheit and, after being so used, shall be by the operator turned into a circulating tank instead of into the pits. If, at any time, the weight of such mud shall be less than specified herein, any inspector or officer of the city shall have the right to suspend drilling and all operations in or about such well until the weight of such mud shall comply herewith, or the conditions of the oil shall be made to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 27-36; Code 1995, § 70-84) 
Sec. 34-124. - Conductor casings. 
    Conductor casing shall be set a minimum of 50 feet or to any greater depth required to penetrate the overlying alluvium, and 30 feet into the red beds. The conductor hole shall be drilled with air or fresh water and native mud. No chemicals or foreign substances are to be added to the drilling fluid, and cement shall be circulated to the surface. 
(Code 1975, § 27-37; Code 1995, § 70-85) 
Sec. 34-125. - Surface casing holes. 
    The surface casing holes shall be drilled with air or fresh water using native mud or near location mud. Chemically inert substances such as bentonite, barite, or lost-circulation material may be added to the fluid system as long as testing of the fresh water filtrate from a solution of the added material remains inert and of a nonpolluting nature. 
(Code 1975, § 27-38; Code 1995, § 70-86) 
Sec. 34-126. - Placement of centralizers. 
    Centralizers shall be placed near the base of the shoe joint, and at least every 60 feet above that depth to the surface, in order to ensure a good cement sheath. Cement shall be circulated to the surface and allowed to set at least 24 hours before reentering the well bore. 
(Code 1975, § 27-39; Code 1995, § 70-87) 
Sec. 34-127. - Blowout preventers. 
    Dual hydraulically operated blowout preventers shall be installed on the surface casing prior to drilling below the casing shoe. Both preventers shall be tested to ensure they are in good working order, and drilling or working over the well shall cease if either of the preventers is inoperative. 
(Code 1975, § 27-40; Code 1995, § 70-88) 
Sec. 34-128. - Use of separators. 
    Separators shall be used at each well to adequately care for the output of the well, for both oil and gas without spraying oil through the separator vent lines. No gas shall be produced, wasted or allowed to escape through a separator vent line at any time when the noise caused by such wasting, producing or escaping of gas shall be audible for a distance of 300 feet or more from the well. When it shall appear that an explosive mixture of gas may be accumulating near the ground, the inspector may require that the well be shut down until the gas is dissipated. All separators shall be vented either separately or through a manifold into a vent. Such vent shall not be less than two feet in diameter. It shall not be closer than 65 feet to the well hole, center line of the street or the lease boundary. No separator shall be used which has less than 125 pounds of working pressure; provided, that all separators on which a pressure of greater than 125 pounds per square inch shall be carried shall be tested by the hydrostatic method to at least 11/2 times the working pressure to be carried on such separator. 
(Code 1975, § 27-41; Code 1995, § 70-89) 
Sec. 34-129. - Securing vent lines. 
    All vent lines shall be fastened with at least three steel guy lines to each vent, such guy lines to be securely anchored to "deadmen" buried not less than two feet underground and not less than 20 feet from such vent. 
(Code 1975, § 27-42; Code 1995, § 70-90) 
Sec. 34-130. - Improvement of site after drilling completed. 
    Upon completion of the well or completion of construction of any location, all contaminated soil shall be physically removed from the area and the area restored to its normal condition insofar as possible. On all locations, all lines, including flow lines, gas lines, water lines and electric lines, shall be buried and maintained at a minimum depth of 24 inches. All lines carrying corrosive materials shall be plastic-coated internally and shall be coated externally if required by soil conditions. The material shall be of sufficient quality to serve the property for the life of the well, tank batteries, booster pumps, compressor stations, or pipelines. 
(Code 1975, § 27-43; Code 1995, § 70-91) 
Sec. 34-131. - Operator to certify setting of well. 
    The operator shall certify by written affidavit that the well has been set according to good engineering practices. Such affidavit shall stipulate the number of sacks of cement, the class of cement, blended materials, weight of cement in pounds per gallon, cement displacement pressure, and final pumping pressure. Certification shall also stipulate whether check valves (float shoes, float collar) held the pressure. Beginning and ending times of the operation shall be stipulated. The form shall be completed by a cementing service company, signed by both the operator and the cementing service operator. 
(Code 1975, § 27-44; Code 1995, § 70-92) 
Sec. 34-132. - Earthen pits and dikes. 
(a)  Oil and gas wells drilled in Zone Y may use slush pits constructed to prevent pollution of the surrounding land surfaces. Within six months after any oil and gas well within the limits of the city shall have been completed for production of oil and/or gas, or within six months after the same shall have been completed in cases where the same is abandoned for the reason that a dry hole is found, the slush pit shall be filled with dirt and leveled off. 
(b)  All earthen pits shall be above the 100-year floodplain or properly diked above the 100-year floodplain with a dike which is sufficient to repel floodwater. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operation, an artificial barrier shall be constructed completely around the well site no closer than 50 feet from the well bore. The top of the artificial portion of the barrier to be constructed down drainage from the well shall be level at all points at a height of no less than two feet above the ground level at the well bore in order that any deleterious matter from the well would be trapped and stored before such matter can enter the drainage to the North Canadian River or its tributaries. An adequate diversion ditch or dike shall be constructed across and around the uphill edge of the well site so that no surface drainage water can enter the area of the well location. 
(c)  Any valve in the barrier shall be kept closed at all times. Any fluid trapped within the well site shall be pumped into steel tanks for storage and removal. The gate in the barrier may be temporarily opened under supervised conditions for rainwater drainage, and then only if it can be demonstrated that such rainwater has not been contaminated with oil, chemicals, salt or any other deleterious substances. 
(d)  Reserve pits shall be constructed within the barrier of Zone Y. As an alternative, drilling mud operations may be conducted in steel tanks and the barrier which shall be removed from the property immediately upon completion of the well. 
(Code 1975, § 27-46; Code 1995, § 70-93) 
Sec. 34-133. - Standards for tanks. 
(a)  The storage of crude oil shall be outside buildings in aboveground tanks. The well bore or tanks must be set no nearer than 50 feet from non-fireproof buildings or from outside property lines; provided, however, that an application in writing may be made to the city manager and, when approved by him and the city council, setting the tanks at a nearer distance may be allowed. Such distance may be increased at the discretion of the city council after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings or adjoining property, and height and character of construction of such buildings, capacity and construction of proposed tanks, and degree of public fire protection in the vicinity. 
(b)  All crude oil tanks shall be painted within 90 days after well completion and kept in proper painted condition after installation and have conspicuously upon their sides in red letters at least six inches high the wording "Flammable: Keep Away" and "No Smoking." 
(c)  Metal or fiberglass tanks shall be so constructed as to have a factor of safety of at least 2.5. 
(d)  All tanks shall have roofs or tops and the openings of tanks shall be fully protected. They shall be firmly and securely jointed to the tanks and all joints in both sides and top shall be gastight and free from leakage as nearly as possible and lockable. 
(e)  Tanks which are more than one foot above ground shall have foundations and supports of noncombustible material and shall not be permitted under or within ten feet of any aboveground outside storage tanks. 
(f)  At each well location in Zone X, a total capacity of an aboveground battery of crude oil storage tanks shall be limited to 1,050 barrels utilizing low-profile tanks, and each tank shall have the capacity not to exceed 210 barrels. A conditional use permit is required for a location for tank batteries separate from a well location. The maximum storage allowed will be 2,100 barrels utilizing low-profile tanks, and each tank shall have a capacity not to exceed 210 barrels. 
(g)  All tanks shall be provided with a pressure vacuum vent system sufficient to adequately dispense excess gas from the tanks. Vent openings may be made removable, but shall be kept firmly attached. The covers for manholes, handholes and gauge holes shall be made tight-fitting and lockable. 
(Code 1975, § 27-48; Code 1995, § 70-94) 
Sec. 34-134. - Tank batteries, etc., to be enclosed with earthen walls. 
    Any tank, batteries, separators, heater treaters, etc., shall be enclosed with earthen or other acceptable retaining walls and maintained with a storage capacity of at least 11/2 times the liquid capacity of the tanks within the storage. 
(Code 1975, § 27-49; Code 1995, § 70-95) 
Sec. 34-135. - Fencing of tank batteries, booster pumps, etc. 
    Tank batteries, booster pumps, compressor stations, pipeline aboveground appurtenances, and well heads shall be enclosed in woven wire fence of not less than nine-gauge chain link wire mesh of not more than two inches, at least six feet high, and locked gates. Angular extensions outwardly secured by three strands of barbed wire shall be placed on top of the tank fence. Such fence shall be constructed not less than three feet in distance from the outside of the base of embankment. Such fence shall be installed prior to production. 
(Code 1975, § 27-50; Code 1995, § 70-96) 
Sec. 34-136. - Use of portable oil pump. 
    Every person operating a portable pumping unit used for the pumping of oil within the corporate limits of the city shall equip same, before the operation for use thereof, on both the service and discharge sides, with steel flexible tubing or pipe composed of some other material that is approved by the city manager. All pumping units in Zone X shall be operated by electric motors and have any fencing requirements imposed by the zone in which such pumping unit is located. 
(Code 1975, § 27-52; Code 1995, § 70-97) 
Sec. 34-137. - Use of nonelectric motor-driven equipment and appliances. 
    The use of nonelectric motor-driven equipment on any oil or gas well located in Zone X is prohibited after drilling operations have been completed and during the production phase of such well. This shall not apply to equipment or appliances used for temporary maintenance such as work over rigs. 
(Code 1975, § 27-55; Code 1995, § 70-99) 
Sec. 34-138. - Swabbing and bailing. 
    In swabbing, bailing or purging a well, all deleterious substances removed from the bore hole shall be placed in appropriate tanks, and no substances shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. 
(Code 1975, § 27-56; Code 1995, § 70-100) 
Sec. 34-139. - Fracture and acidizing. 
    In the completion of an oil and gas or injection well, where acidizing or fracturing processes are used, no oil, gas or other deleterious substances or pollutants shall be permitted to pollute any surface or subsurface fresh waters. 
(Code 1975, § 27-57; Code 1995, § 70-101) 
Sec. 34-140. - Flaring of gas. 
    All gas produced during initial testing shall either be sold or flared with the flaring procedures being approved by the oil and gas inspector and the fire marshal. 
(Code 1975, § 27-58; Code 1995, § 70-102) 
Sec. 34-141. - Moving of a drilling rig. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to move or cause to be moved the drilling rig from a well until written permission to do so is obtained from the oil and gas inspector. 
(Code 1975, § 27-59; Code 1995, § 70-103; Ord. No. 1133, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-142. - Abandonment of drilling or production site and related facilities. 
    Upon abandoning an operation because of failure of the well to produce oil or gas in paying quantities or the abandonment of pipelines for the gathering or transmission of gas, natural gas liquids or oil, it shall be the duty of every person owning any oil or gas well within the city and the owners of all pipelines for the gathering or transmission of gas, natural gas liquids or oil, and of the officers, agents and employees of such owners, to begin to remove any aboveground property owned by them, including, but not limited to, all derricks, machinery, concrete foundations, aboveground pipelines, meters, and raisers and any and all other objects that interfere with the leveling of such land, and to grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition as nearly as possible as when the oil or gas well thereon was first commenced. Such clearing is to begin within 30 days from the day of such abandonment and to continue in a workmanlike manner which shall not exceed 60 days. Abandonment of a location terminates the conditional use permit. 
(Code 1975, § 27-54; Code 1995, § 70-104; Ord. No. 1146, § 1, 7-6-2004) 
Sec. 34-143. - [Disposal of drilling mud and other drilling fluids.] 
    The disposal of drilling mud and other drilling fluids shall be by transporting the mud or other fluids by a licensed, bonded transporter, to a state licensed disposal site. The drilling mud and fluids must not be buried in an earthen pit, pumped down the well bore, or down the annulus of a well, nor spread upon the surface of the grounds. 
    Violations of this section shall be punished pursuant to section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1358 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State fire marshal, 74 O.S. § 314 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE (RESERVED) 

Secs. 38-19-38-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks generally, 68 O.S. § 1621 et seq.; authority of city to regulate or prohibit the sale or discharge of fireworks, 11 O.S. § 22-110, 68 O.S. § 1631. 

Sec. 38-40. - Manufacture, purchase, sale and use regulated. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, purchase, sell, furnish, use or discharge any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-45(a); Code 1995, § 50-51) 
Sec. 38-41. - Prohibited types of fireworks. 
(a)  The sale, gift, distribution or use of skyrockets with sticks as defined by the United States Department of Transportation is prohibited. This prohibition shall include, but is not limited to, explosive devices commonly known as "bottle rockets" or "stick rockets." 
(b)  Any and all items of Class C common fireworks not properly labeled according to the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission and identified with the "DOT Class C, Common Fireworks" marking on each retail sale unit is prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 8-45(b); Code 1995, § 50-52) 
Sec. 38-42. - Sale within city prohibited. 
    No person shall sell, or offer to sell, or install any facilities for the sale of any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-46; Code 1995, § 50-53) 
Sec. 38-43. - Public displays. 
    Supervised public displays of fireworks are authorized within the city, subject to the provisions of the laws of the state and subject to the prior approval of the city manager and public safety department. 
(Code 1975, § 8-51; Code 1995, § 50-54) 
State Law reference- Public displays, 68 O.S. § 1629. 
Sec. 38-44. - When discharge by individuals permitted. 
    The discharge of fireworks at any time by individuals within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited, except as a part of a supervised public display as provided for in section 38-43. 
(Code 1975, § 8-52; Code 1995, § 50-55) 
Chapter 42 - HEALTH[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city regarding health generally, 63 O.S. § 1-209. 

Sec. 42-1. - Health and safety statutes; adopted by reference. 
    All provisions of O.S. title 63 are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set out, and a violation of any such provision in the city shall constitute a violation of this Code and be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 58-1; Ord. No. 1164, § 1, 2-1-2005) 
Sec. 42-2. - Hospitals. 
(a)  No new hospital shall be developed, either through construction or conversion of existing space, in the city unless a permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. 
(b)  Before developing a facility for use as a newly licensed hospital, the person proposing to operate the hospital shall apply to the city clerk for a permit for the facility in addition to any other required approvals. The application for a permit shall be in such form as the city clerk shall prescribe and shall include a demonstration of the hospital's probable impact on existing hospital and surgical services in the city, including permitted facilities not yet completed. 
(c)  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee equal to one percent of the capital cost of the proposed hospital, with a minimum fee and a maximum fee established by resolution. It is intended that the fee charged herein shall be used to cover the costs of the application evaluation. Any excess of fees collected over costs incurred over the minimum fee but less than the maximum fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(d)  Within 30 days after receiving a completed application for a permit, the city clerk shall cause a paid public notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the hospital is to be located and in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the application is available for inspection. The notice shall include the name and proposed location of the facility, a brief description of the proposal, information on where the original application can be viewed, and an explanation of how parties may file materials to be considered along with the application. 
(e)  Any person may submit written evidence and an argument regarding the proposed hospital to the city clerk to be reviewed by city staff. Written materials shall be submitted to the city clerk within 30 days after publication of the paid notice. The applicant shall have 45 days after publication of the paid notice to respond in writing to materials timely filed by other persons. 
(f)  No permit to establish a hospital shall be issued by the city clerk unless, after reviewing the application and timely filed written materials and responses, the city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed hospital will contribute to the orderly development of hospital and surgical services in the city; 
(2)  The proposed hospital will not cause an undue financial or staffing hardship on any existing provider of essential hospital or surgical services in the city, including permitted facilities not yet completed; and 
(3)  The proposed hospital can be adequately served by the city's existing utility systems and/or infrastructure. 
(g)  The city clerk shall schedule the application for a permit for consideration by the city council within 120 days after publication of the paid notice. A permit shall be effective for 36 months from the date of issue, during which time an applicant shall start construction or conversion work on the hospital. If construction or conversion work is not started within the time required by this section, the permit shall be null and void. 
(h)  The city staff may establish standards for review and approval of detailed building plans and specifications that are in addition to the requirements for a permit under this section. 
(i)  For the purposes of this section, the term "hospital" does not include a long-term care facility where the average patient stay is greater than 25 days and no operating suite and no public emergency room treatment is available. 
(Code 1995, § 59-1; Ord. No. 1157, § 1, 12-7-2004) 
State Law reference- Hospitals, 63 O.S. § 1-701 et seq. 
Sec. 42-3. - Ambulatory surgical care facilities. 
(a)  No new ambulatory surgical care facility shall be developed, either through construction or conversion of existing space, in the city unless a permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "ambulatory surgical care facility" means an establishment licensed by the state as an ambulatory surgical care facility with an organized medical staff of physicians, with permanent facilities that are equipped and operated primarily for the purpose of performing surgical procedures, with continuous physician services available on call, and registered professional nurse services on site, whenever a patient is in the facility, which provides services or other accommodations for patients to recover for a period not to exceed 23 hours after surgery. 
(c)  Before developing a facility for use as a newly licensed ambulatory surgical care facility, the person proposing to operate the ambulatory surgical care facility shall file a completed application with the city clerk for a permit for the facility in addition to any other required approvals. The application for a permit shall be in such form as the city staff shall prescribe and shall provide an impact study including a demonstration of the ambulatory surgical care facility's probable impact on the existing surgical services in the city. All necessary studies shall be provided by the applicant. 
(d)  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee equal to one percent of the capital cost of the proposed facility, with a minimum fee and a maximum fee established by resolution. It is intended that the fee charged herein shall be used to cover the costs of the application evaluation. Any excess of fees collected over costs incurred over the minimum fee but less than the maximum fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(e)  Within 30 days after receiving a completed application for a permit, the city clerk shall cause a paid public notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the ambulatory surgical care facility is to be located and in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the application is available for inspection. The notice shall include the name and proposed location of the facility, a brief description of the proposal, information on where the original application can be viewed, and an explanation of how parties may file materials to be considered along with the application. 
(f)  Any person may submit written evidence and an argument regarding the proposed ambulatory surgical care facility to the city clerk to be reviewed by city staff. Written materials shall be submitted to the city clerk within 30 days after publication of the paid notice. The applicant shall have 45 days after publication of the paid notice to respond in writing to materials timely filed by other persons. 
(g)  No permit to establish an ambulatory surgical care facility shall be issued by the city clerk unless, after reviewing the application and timely filed written materials and responses, the city staff makes the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed ambulatory surgical care facility will fulfill a demonstrated need in the community for the facility, and its development is in the best interest of the health and welfare of the community; 
(2)  The proposed ambulatory surgical care facility will serve and be in the interest of the health and welfare of the community; 
(3)  The proposed ambulatory surgical care facility can be adequately served by the city's existing utility systems and/or infrastructure; 
(4)  The applicant must obtain and hold in good standing during its operation a transfer agreement with an accredited acute care facility within the corporate limits of the city; 
(5)  Doctors practicing at the proposed center must be credentialed and on staff in good standing with an accredited acute care facility within the corporate limits of the city; 
(6)  The ownership structure of the facility does not violate the federal anti-kickback statutes and Stark I and II provisions; and 
(7)  The applicant has obtained a license from the state commissioner of health as required under O.S. title 63. 
(h)  Should an objection be filed by any interested party or governmental entity to the granting of said permit, the city clerk shall schedule the application for hearing before an administrative law judge appointed by the city council within 120 days after publication of the paid notice. 
(i)  A permit shall be effective for 36 months from the date of issue, during which time an applicant shall start construction or conversion work on the ambulatory surgical care facility. If construction or conversion work is not started within the time required by this section, the permit shall be null and void. Should construction or conversion work be completed within the 36-month period as provided, then the permit shall remain valid so long as the center is in compliance with the state regulatory requirements and the requirements as set forth in this section. 
(j)  Any person or governmental entity aggrieved by a decision of the administrative law judge shall appeal by filing an action in the district court within 30 days from the issuance of the decision by the administrative law judge. 
(k)  Upon the completed filing of all documents required herein, providing that no protests are filed during the protest period, the city staff shall issue the permit administratively. This is subject to all other zoning, building, and other requirements being met. 
(l)  The city staff may establish standards for review and approval of detailed building plans and specifications that are in addition to the requirements for a permit under this section. 
(Code 1995, § 59-2; Ord. No. 1157, § 2, 12-7-2004) 
State Law reference- Ambulatory surgical centers, 63 O.S. § 2657 et seq. 
Sec. 42-4. - Diagnostic imaging centers/facilities. 
(a)  No new diagnostic imaging center/facility shall be developed, either through construction or conversion of existing space, in the city unless a permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "diagnostic imaging center/facility" means an establishment recognized as a diagnostic imaging center/facility with an organized medical staff of physicians with permanent facilities that are equipped and operated primarily for the purpose of performing diagnostic imaging procedures to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
(2)  Computed tomography (CT). 
(3)  Diagnostic injections. 
(4)  Pain management procedures. 
(5)  Bone densitometry. 
(6)  Ultrasound. 
(7)  Radiology. 
(8)  Fluoroscopy. 
(9)  Mammography, etc. 
(10)  Continuous physician services and on call services available, and registered professional technicians on site whenever a patient is in the facility, which provide services or other accommodations for patients to undergo screening and diagnostic testing and recover as appropriate for a period not to exceed 23 hours after a procedure. 
(c)  Before developing a facility for use as a newly licensed diagnostic imaging center/facility, the person proposing to operate the diagnostic imaging center/facility shall file a completed application with the city clerk for a permit for the facility in addition to any other required approvals. The application for a permit shall be in such form as the city staff shall prescribe and shall provide an impact study including a demonstration of the diagnostic imaging center/facility's probable impact on the existing diagnostic imaging services in the city. All necessary studies shall be provided by the applicant. 
(d)  The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee equal to one percent of the capital cost of the proposed facility, with a minimum fee and a maximum fee as established by resolution. It is intended that the fee charged herein shall be used to cover the costs of the application evaluation. Any excess of fees collected over costs incurred over shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(e)  Within 30 days after receiving a completed application for a permit, the city clerk shall cause a paid public notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the diagnostic imaging center/facility is to be located and in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the application is available for inspection. The notice shall include the name and proposed location of the facility, a brief description of the proposal, information on where the original application can be viewed, and an explanation of how parties may file materials to be considered along with the application. 
(f)  Any person may submit written evidence and an argument regarding the proposed diagnostic imaging center/facility to the city clerk to be reviewed by the city staff. Written materials shall be submitted to the city clerk within 30 days after publication of the paid notice. The applicant shall have 45 days after publication of the paid notice to respond in writing to materials timely filed by other persons. 
(g)  No permit to establish a diagnostic imaging center/facility shall be issued by the city clerk unless, after reviewing the application and timely filed written materials and responses, the city staff makes the following findings: 
(1)  The proposed diagnostic imaging center/facility will fulfill a demonstrated need in the community for the facility, and its development is in the best interest of the health and welfare of the community; 
(2)  The proposed diagnostic imaging center/facility will serve and be in the interest of the health and welfare of the community; 
(3)  The proposed diagnostic imaging center/facility can be adequately served by the city's existing utility systems and/or infrastructure; 
(4)  The applicant must obtain and hold in good standing during its operation, a transfer agreement with an accredited acute care facility within the corporate limits of the city; 
(5)  Doctors practicing at the proposed diagnostic imaging center/facility must be credentialed and on staff in good standing with an accredited acute care facility within the corporate limits of the city; 
(6)  The ownership structure of the facility does not violate federal anti-kickback statutes and Stark I and II provisions; and 
(7)  The applicant has met all licensing requirements as appropriate. 
(h)  Should an objection be filed by any interested party or governmental entity to the granting of said permit, the city clerk shall schedule the application for hearing before an administrative law judge appointed by the city council within 120 days after publication of the paid notice. 
(i)  A permit shall be effective for 36 months from the date of issue, during which time an applicant shall start construction or conversion work on the diagnostic imaging center/facility. If construction or conversion work is not started within the time required by this section, the permit shall be null and void. Should construction or conversion work be completed within the 36-month period as provided, then the permit shall remain valid so long as the facility is in compliance with the state regulatory requirements and the requirements as set forth in this section. 
(j)  Any person or governmental entity aggrieved by a decision of the administrative law judge shall appeal by filing an action in the district court within 30 days from the issuance of the decision by the administrative law judge. 
(k)  Upon the completed filing of all documents required herein, providing that no protests are filed during the protest period, the city staff shall issue the permit administratively. This is subject to all other zoning, building, and other requirements being met. 
(l)  The city staff may establish standards for review and approval of detailed building plans and specifications that are in addition to the requirements for a permit under this section. 
(Code 1995, § 59-3; Ord. No. 1158, § 1, 12-7-2004) 
Chapter 46 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Libraries generally, 65 O.S. § 1-101 et seq.; city-county libraries generally, 65 O.S. § 151 et seq.; municipal libraries generally, 11 O.S. § 31-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YUKON PUBLIC LIBRARY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-19. - Library established. 
    There is hereby established a Yukon Public Library. 
State Law reference- Authority to establish and maintain a public library, 11 O.S. § 31-101. 
(Code 1975, § 2-141; Code 1995, § 62-27) 
Sec. 46-20. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of the city council to provide free public library service to the residents of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-140; Code 1995, § 62-26) 
Sec. 46-21. - Appointment of library personnel; budget; policies. 
    The city manager, after consulting with the library board, shall appoint a suitable librarian and assistants and set their compensation, and shall recommend an annual budget to the city council. The city manager shall set the policies of the library, subject to approval by the city council, and the city council shall control the expenditures of all money. The city manager shall supervise the care of the grounds, rooms and buildings. 
(Code 1975, § 2-145; Code 1995, § 62-31) 
Sec. 46-22. - Failure to timely return library property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person borrowing property including, but not limited to, books, pamphlets, periodicals, papers and works of art from the Yukon Public Library to keep such property in their possession more than 30 days from the due date of such property. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section, or who shall fail to comply with an order properly made in connection with the enforcement of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 2-146; Code 1995, § 62-32) 
State Law reference- Authority to prescribe penalties, 11 O.S. § 31-106. 
Secs. 46-23-46-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LIBRARY BOARD 

Sec. 46-48. - Membership; terms; removal; vacancies. 
(a)  The Yukon Public Library shall be advised by a library board composed of seven members, two of whom shall be from the membership rolls of the Yukon Ladies Library Club. 
(b)  Each member of the library board shall be appointed according to the provisions in section 2-327. Appointees of the Yukon Ladies Library Club to the library board shall be appointed upon such conditions and for such terms as the Yukon Ladies Library Club may direct. 
(c)  The mayor, with the approval of the council, may remove a member at any time. 
(d)  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms in the same manner as original appointments. 
(e)  The city manager shall be an ex officio member of the library board, but shall have no vote. 
(Code 1975, § 2-142; Code 1995, § 62-28) 
Sec. 46-49. - Compensation of board members. 
    Members of the library board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1975, § 2-143; Code 1995, § 62-29) 
Sec. 46-50. - Election of board officers; duties. 
    Every year, at the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a new member or members of the library board, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the library board shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, a secretary, and such other officers as the board may deem necessary. They shall recommend to the city manager such rules and regulations for the governance and operation of the library as they deem necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 2-144; Code 1995, § 62-30) 
Chapter 50 - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adjudication means a judicial sentence or formal judgment. 
    Alcoholic beverages means alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. The term "alcoholic beverages" includes intoxicating beverages and low-point beer. 
    At school means on school grounds, in school vehicles, at school-sponsored activities, or at school-sanctioned events. 
    Bullying means any pattern of harassment, intimidation, threatening behavior, physical acts, verbal or electronic communication directed towards a student that results in or is reasonably perceived as being done with the intent to cause negative educational or physical results for the targeted student and is communicated in such a way as to disrupt or interfere with the school's educational mission or the education of any student. 
    Chief of police means the peace officer in charge of the police force of this city. 
    Citation means a style of summons issued to a person who is in violation of an ordinance of this city and is an official summons to appear in municipal court. 
    Citizen's complaint means a style of case in which a citizen charges another with an offense. 
    CLEET means Council on Law Enforcement Education and Training. 
    Clerk or city clerk means the clerk of the city, including any deputy or member of the office staff of the clerk while performing duties of the clerk's office. 
    Complaining party means a citizen that pursues an offense against another. 
    Controlled dangerous substance means a drug, substance, or immediate precursor in Schedules I through V of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substance Act or any drug, substance or immediate precursor listed either temporarily or permanently as a federally controlled substance. Any conflict between state and federal law with regard to the particular schedule in which a substance is listed shall be resolved in favor of state law. 
    Conviction means the final adjudication of guilt, either by plea or judgment of the municipal judge, including, but not limited to, a bond forfeiture. 
    Court means the municipal court of this city. 
    Court administrator (also known as court clerk ) means the clerk of the municipal court. 
    Deliver means the means or intent to transfer from one person to another. 
    Department of public safety (also known as DPS ) means the state agency in which driving privileges are granted and records retained. 
    Disorderly conduct means actions that disturb others or the peace, recklessly creating a risk to self or others, or engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior. 
    Distribute means to deliver or intend to deliver. 
    District court means the district court of Canadian County, State of Oklahoma. 
    Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or fashioned specifically for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled dangerous substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Act. 
    Electronic communication means the communication of any written, verbal, pictorial information or video content by means of an electronic device, including, but not limited to, a telephone, cellular device, or computer and includes all forms of social media. 
    Imitation controlled substance means a substance that is not a controlled dangerous substance, which by dosage unit appearance, color, shape, size, markings or by representations made, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the substance is a controlled dangerous substance. In the event the appearance of the dosage unit is not reasonably sufficient to establish that the substance is an imitation controlled substance, the court or authority concerned should consider, in addition to all other factors, the following factors as related to representations made in determining whether the substance is an imitation controlled substance: 
(1)  Statements made by an owner or by any other person in control of the substance concerning the nature of the substance, or its use or effect; 
(2)  Statements made to the recipient that the substance may be resold for inordinate profit; 
(3)  Whether the substance is packaged in a manner normally used for illicit controlled substances; 
(4)  Evasive tactics or actions utilized by the owner or person in control of the substance to avoid detection by law enforcement authorities; 
(5)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or any other person in control of the object, under state or federal law related to controlled substances or fraud; and 
(6)  The proximity of the substances to controlled dangerous substances. 
    Judge means the judge of the municipal court, including any acting judge thereof as provided for by the statutes of this state and this chapter. 
    Juvenile means any person under 18 years of age. 
    Legal guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
    Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
    Municipal court (also known as Yukon Municipal Court ) means the City of Yukon Municipal Court. 
    OBN means the Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics. 
    OSBI means the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation. 
    Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or stepparent of another person. 
    Police department (also known as Yukon Police Department ) means the police that control and keep lawful order of the city. 
    Premises means any residence or other private property, place, or premises, including any commercial or business premises. 
    Prosecutor (also known as city prosecutor ) means the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. 
    Threatening behavior means any pattern of behavior or isolated action, whether or not it is directed at another person, that a reasonable person would believe indicates potential for future harm. 
    Trespass means entry upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. 
    Vapor product means a noncombustible product, that may or may not contain nicotine, that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a vapor in a solution or other form. The term "vapor product" includes any vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine that is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. 
(Code 1975, § 14-2; Code 1995, § 34-27; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 50-2. - Application of chapter; conflicts with other ordinances. 
    This chapter shall govern the organization and operation of the municipal court of the city, as put into operation by resolution duly passed on January 7, 1969, and filed in accordance with law, as authorized by 11 O.S. §§ 27-101, 27-102, a certified copy of such resolution having been filed in the office of the county clerk on January 14, 1969, and a certified copy of such resolution having been filed in the office of the clerk of the supreme court of the State of Oklahoma on January 15, 1969. To the extent of conflict between any provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1975, § 14-1; Code 1995, § 34-26) 
Sec. 50-3. - Jurisdiction. 
    The court shall exercise original jurisdiction to hear and determine all prosecutions wherein a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city is charged. 
(Code 1975, § 14-4; Code 1995, § 34-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-103. 
Sec. 50-4. - Qualifications of judge. 
    The municipal judge shall be licensed to practice law in the state and a resident of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 14-6; Code 1995, § 34-29) 
State Law reference- Judge need not be attorney in certain cases, 11 O.S. § 27-104. 
Sec. 50-5. - Judge's salary. 
    The judge shall be paid a salary to be fixed by the city council and paid in the same manner as the salaries of other officials of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 14-8; Code 1995, § 34-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-104. 
Sec. 50-6. - Authority of judge to prescribe rules. 
    The judge may prescribe rules, consistent with the laws of the state and with the ordinances of the city, for the proper conduct of the business of the court. 
(Code 1975, § 14-9; Code 1995, § 34-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-114. 
Sec. 50-7. - Acting judge. 
(a)  If, at any time, there is no judge duly appointed and qualified available to sit as judge, the mayor shall appoint some person possessing the qualifications required by this chapter for the judge who shall preside as acting judge over the court in the disposition of pending matters until such time as a judge shall be available. 
(b)  An acting judge, other than the mayor, shall be paid a salary to be fixed by the city council for each day devoted to the performance of his duty, except that for any month the total payments so calculated shall not exceed the salary of the judge in whose stead he sits. An acting judge who sits for an entire month shall receive the amount fixed by the council as the salary of the judge in whose stead he sits. 
(Code 1975, § 14-10; Code 1995, § 34-32) 
State Law reference- Acting judge, 11 O.S. § 27-106. 
Sec. 50-8. - Removal of judge. 
    The judge shall be subject to removal from office, by the city council, for the causes prescribed by the Constitution and laws of this state for the removal of public officers. Proceedings for removal shall be instituted by the filing of a verified written petition, setting forth facts sufficient to constitute one or more legal grounds for removal. Petitions may be signed and filed by the mayor or by 58 or more qualified electors of the city. In the latter event, verification may be executed by one or more of the petitioners. The city council shall set a date for hearing the matter, and shall cause notice thereof, together with a copy of the petition, to be served personally upon the judge at least ten days before the hearing. At the hearing, the judge shall be entitled to representation by counsel, to present testimony and to cross-examine the witnesses against him and to have all evidence against him presented in open hearing. Judgment of removal shall be entered only upon individual votes, by a majority of all members of the city council, in favor of such removal. 
(Code 1975, § 14-11; Code 1995, § 34-33; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Removal of judge, 11 O.S. § 27-104. 
Sec. 50-9. - Vacancy in office of judge. 
    A vacancy in the office of judge shall occur if the incumbent: 
(1)  Dies; 
(2)  Resigns; 
(3)  Ceases to possess the qualifications for the office; or 
(4)  Is removed, and the removal proceeding has been affirmed finally in judicial proceedings or is no longer subject to judicial review. 
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of judge, the mayor shall appoint a successor to complete the unexpired term, upon the same procedure as an original appointment is made. 
(Code 1975, § 14-12; Code 1995, § 34-34) 
State Law reference- Filling of vacancies, 11 O.S. § 27-107. 
Sec. 50-10. - Change of venue not allowed; disqualification of judge. 
    In prosecutions before the court, no change of venue shall be allowed, but the judge before whom the case is pending may certify his disqualification or he may be disqualified from sitting under the terms, conditions and procedure provided by law for courts of record. If the judge is disqualified, the matter shall be heard by an acting judge, appointed as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 14-13; Code 1995, § 34-35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-105. 
Sec. 50-11. - Court clerk designated; general duties and bond. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate a court clerk who shall be the clerk of the court. The clerk shall assist the judge in recording the proceedings of the court and in preparing writs, processes and other papers. The clerk shall administer oaths required in proceedings before the court, shall enter all pleadings, processes and proceedings on the dockets of the court, perform such other clerical duties relating to the proceedings of the court as the judge shall direct, and receipt and disburse to the municipal treasurer all fines, forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of money properly payable to the city. All funds, while in the custody of the clerk, shall be deposited and disbursed upon vouchers as directed by the city council. 
(b)  The clerk of the court shall post a bond in the amount of $10,000.00, the cost of which shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 14-14; Code 1995, § 34-36; Ord. No. 1264, § 1, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Provisions similar to subsection (a) of this section, 11 O.S. § 27-109; clerk's bond, 11 O.S. § 27-111. 
Sec. 50-12. - Prosecuting officer. 
    The attorney for the city shall be the prosecuting officer of the court. He shall prosecute all alleged violations of the ordinances of the city. He shall be authorized, in his discretion, to prosecute and resist appeals, proceedings in error and review from the court to any other courts of the state, and to represent the city in all proceedings arising out of matters in the court. 
(Code 1975, § 14-15; Code 1995, § 34-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-108. 
Sec. 50-13. - Direction of writs and process. 
    All writs or process of the court shall be directed, in his official title, to the chief of police or to some other appropriate peace officer. 
(Code 1975, § 14-16; Code 1995, § 34-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-113. 
Sec. 50-14. - Style of prosecutions; complaints. 
    All prosecutions for violation of ordinances of the city shall be styled "The City of Yukon, Oklahoma vs. ________ (naming the person or persons charged)." Except as otherwise provided in chapter 110 of this Code with respect to traffic violations, prosecutions shall be initiated by the filing of a written complaint, subscribed and verified by the person making complaint, and setting forth concisely the offense charged. 
(Code 1975, § 14-17; Code 1995, § 34-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-115. 
Sec. 50-15. - Issuance, contents and service of summons. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complaint charging violation of an ordinance, the judge, unless he determines to issue a warrant of arrest, or unless the defendant previously has been issued a citation or has been arrested and has given bond for appearance, shall issue a summons, naming the person charged, specifying his address or place of residence, if known, stating the offense with which he is charged and giving him notice to answer the charge in the court on a day certain, containing a provision for the official return of the summons, and including such other pertinent information as may be necessary. 
(b)  The summons shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant personally. If he fails to appear and to answer the summons within the prescribed period, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest, as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 14-18; Code 1995, § 34-40) 
Sec. 50-16. - Issuance, form and execution of warrant of arrest. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, upon the filing of a complaint approved, by endorsement, by the city attorney or by the judge, there shall be issued a warrant of arrest, in substantially the following form: 
    "The City of Yukon, Oklahoma, to the Chief of Police of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
    Complaint upon oath having this day been made by (naming complainant) that the offense of (naming the offense in particular by general terms) has been committed and accusing (name of defendant[s]) thereof, you are commanded therefore forthwith to arrest the above named (defendant[s]) and bring (insert them), before me, at the police department of said City. 
    Witness my hand this ________ day of, (year) ___________. 
    Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma." 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police, personally or through a duly constituted member of the police force, or through any other persons lawfully authorized so to act, to execute the warrant of arrest as promptly as possible. 
(Code 1975, § 14-19; Code 1995, § 34-41; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 50-17. - Arrest; bond; forfeiture of bond for failure to appear. 
(a)  Arrests; release by signing citation; bail; amount and conditions; temporary cash bond. 
(1)  If a resident of a municipality served by a municipal court is arrested by a law enforcement officer for the violation of any traffic ordinance for which subsection (b) of this section does not apply, or is arrested for the violation of a nontraffic ordinance, the officer shall immediately release said person if the person acknowledges receipt of a citation by signing it. Provided, however, the arresting officer need not release said person if it reasonably appears to the officer that the person may cause injury to himself or others or damage to property if released, that the person will not appear in response to the citation, or the person is arrested for an offense against a person or property. If said person fails to appear in response to the citation, a warrant shall be issued for his arrest and his appearance shall be compelled. 
(2)  If the arrested resident is not released by being permitted to sign a citation as provided for in this subsection, he shall be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment, or shall be released on personal recognizance. 
(3)  If a nonresident of a municipality served by a municipal court is arrested by a law enforcement officer for a violation of any ordinance for which subsection (b) of this section does not apply, the defendant shall be eligible to be admitted to bail either before or after arraignment. 
(4)  The amount and conditions of bail granted pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section shall be determined by the judge who shall prescribe rules for the receipt of bail and for the release on personal recognizance. The amount of bail for each offense shall not exceed the maximum fine plus court costs, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of bail shall not exceed $1,000.00. In the event of arrests at night, emergencies, or when the judge is not available, a court official, the chief of police or his designated representative may be authorized by the judge, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge, to accept a temporary cash bond in a sufficient amount to secure the appearance of the accused. The cash bond shall not exceed the maximum fine provided for by ordinance for each offense charged, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of the cash bond shall not exceed $1,000.00. The court official, chief of police or his designated representative is authorized, subject to such conditions as shall be prescribed by the judge, to release a resident of the municipality on personal recognizance. 
(b)  Arrest for misdemeanor traffic violation other than parking or standing. If a resident or nonresident of a municipality having a municipal court is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a traffic ordinance, other than an ordinance pertaining to a parking or standing traffic violation, and the arrested person is eligible to sign a written promise to appear and be released upon personal recognizance as provided for in 22 O. S. § 1115.1, then the procedures provided for in the State and Municipal Traffic, Water Safety, and Wildlife Bail Bond Procedure Act (22 O.S. § 1115 et seq.) as applied to municipalities, shall govern. Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the municipal court may prescribe a bail bond schedule for traffic offenses. The amount of bail shall not exceed the maximum fine and costs provided by ordinance for each offense, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of bail shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(c)  Failure to appear according to terms of bond; forfeiture. 
(1)  If, without sufficient excuse, a defendant fails to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, given by a bail bondsman as defined in 59 O.S. § 1301, either for hearing, arraignment, trial, or judgment, or upon any other occasion when the presence of the defendant in court or before the judge may be lawfully required: 
a.  The court shall perform the procedures set forth in 59 O.S. § 1332 whereby the municipal court clerk shall issue the required notices; or 
b.  The municipal judge shall issue an order declaring the bond to be forfeited on the day the defendant failed to appear and stating the reasons therefor, and within five days of the order of forfeiture, the municipal court clerk shall file a certified copy of the order with the district court in the county where the municipal government is located. The district court clerk shall treat the certified order of forfeiture as a foreign judgment and proceed in accordance with the provisions of 59 O.S. § 1332. A surety shall have all remedies available under the provisions of 59 O.S. § 1108 and 59 O.S. §§ 1301-1340. 
(2)  Court costs shall be collectible from the proceeds of a forfeited bond. 
(Code 1975, § 14-20; Code 1995, § 34-42; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. §§ 27-117-27-118. 
Sec. 50-18. - Arraignment; general procedure after plea. 
    Upon making an appearance in court, the defendant shall be arraigned. The judge or the city attorney shall read the complaint to the defendant, inform him of his legal rights, and ask him to plead guilty, nolo contendere, otherwise known as no contest, or not guilty. If the defendant enters a plea of guilty, the court may proceed to judgment and sentence or may continue the matter for subsequent disposition. If the plea is not guilty, the court may proceed to try the case, or may set it for hearing at a later date. 
(Code 1975, § 14-21; Code 1995, § 34-43; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-116. 
Sec. 50-19. - Jury trials; qualifications of jurors. 
    In all prosecutions in the municipal court for any offense for which the city, with the concurrence of the court, seeks imposition of a fine of more than $500.00, excluding court costs, or imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment, a jury trial shall be had unless waived by the defendant and the city, provided that the city has compiled its penal ordinances in accordance with the provisions of 11 O.S. §§ 14-109 and 14-110. If the city has not compiled its ordinances as provided by law, the fine shall not exceed $50.00. In prosecutions for all other offenses, or in cases wherein a jury trial is waived by the defendant and the city, trial shall be to the court. A jury in the municipal court shall consist of six jurors, five of whom may return a verdict. Jurors shall be good and lawful men and women, citizens of the county in which the court sits, having the qualifications of jurors in the district court. 
(Code 1975, § 14-21.1; Code 1995, § 34-44; Ord. No. 1019, § 1, 8-18-1998; Ord. No. 1195, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-119. 
Sec. 50-20. - Postponement of trial. 
    Before a trial in the court commences, either party, upon good cause shown, may obtain a reasonable postponement thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 14-22; Code 1995, § 34-45) 
Sec. 50-21. - Defendant to be present at trial. 
    The defendant must be present in court and in person at his trial. If the defendant fails to appear, this shall cause a Fail to Appear Warrant to be issued and the established fine and costs assessed. 
(Code 1975, § 14-23; Code 1995, § 34-46; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 50-22. - Trial procedure. 
    In all trials in the municipal court, as to matters not covered in this chapter or by the statutes relating to municipal courts or by rules duly promulgated by the state supreme court, the procedure applicable in trials of misdemeanors in the district courts shall apply to the extent that they can be made effective. 
(Code 1975, § 14-24; Code 1995, § 34-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-113. 
Sec. 50-23. - Witness fees. 
    Witnesses in any proceeding in the court, other than police officers or peace officers, shall be entitled to $20.00 for each day of attendance, plus current mileage reimbursement as allowed by the Internal Revenue Service, for each mile actually and necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the place of attendance, if his residence is outside the limits of the city. No witness shall receive fees or mileage in more than one case for the same period of time or the same travel. A defendant seeking to subpoena witnesses must deposit with the clerk a sum sufficient to cover fees and mileage for one day of attendance for each witness to be summoned. Such deposit shall not be required from an indigent defendant who files an affidavit setting out: 
(1)  The names of no more than three witnesses; 
(2)  That the defendant, by reason of his poverty, is unable to provide the fees and mileage allowed by law; 
(3)  That the testimony of the witnesses is material; and 
(4)  That the attendance of the witnesses at the trial is necessary for his proper defense. 
The fees for such witnesses shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 14-25; Code 1995, § 34-48; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Authority to set fees and mileage, 11 O.S. § 27-121. 
Sec. 50-24. - Rendition and recording of judgment. 
    At the close of a trial in the court, judgment must be rendered immediately by the judge, who shall cause it to be entered in his docket. 
(Code 1975, § 14-26; Code 1995, § 34-49) 
Sec. 50-25. - Discharge of defendant upon acquittal. 
    If the judgment of the court is of acquittal, and the defendant is not to be detained for any other legal cause, he must be discharged at once. 
(Code 1975, § 14-27; Code 1995, § 34-50) 
Sec. 50-26. - Judgment; amount of penalty. 
(a)  If the defendant pleads guilty or is convicted after trial, the court must render judgment thereon, fixing the penalty within the limits prescribed by the applicable ordinances and imposing sentence accordingly, which penalty shall not exceed $750.00, exclusive of court costs of $30.00. 
(b)  The municipal attorney may ask the court to require a person confined in a city or county jail for any offense, to pay the jail facility the costs of incarceration, before and after conviction, upon conviction or receiving a deferred sentence. The costs shall not be assessed if, in the judgment of the court, such costs would impose a manifest hardship on the person, or if, in the opinion of the court, the property of the person is needed for the maintenance and support of the immediate family. 
(c)  The costs of incarceration may include booking, receiving and processing out, housing, food, clothing, medical care, dental care, and psychiatric services. The cost for incarceration may be an amount equal to the actual cost of the services and shall be determined by the chief of police for city jails. The cost of incarceration may be paid to all jail facilities where the person is held before and after conviction. 
(Code 1975, § 14-28; Code 1995, § 34-51; Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 1067, § 1, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1093, § 1, 1-15-2002; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 50-27. - Fines and costs; imprisonment for nonpayment. 
    The court clerk shall collect the following fees: 
(1)  The municipal court, not a court of record, shall not impose a penalty, including a fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine and costs which is greater than that established by state statute for the same offense. The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for traffic-related offenses relating to speeding or parking shall not exceed $200.00, unless otherwise allowed by statute. The maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine for alcohol-related or drug-related offenses shall not exceed $800.00. For all other offenses, the maximum fine or deferral fee in lieu of a fine shall not exceed $750.00 unless otherwise allowed by statute. This section shall be amended in accordance with the state statute and shall not require additional modification. 
(2)  The court clerk shall collect a drug and alcohol training fee in the sum of $50.00 in accordance with the state prescribing legislation. The fee shall be collected from any person convicted a drug or alcohol related offense, or from any person forfeiting a bond when charged with said offense. Said fee shall be distributed timely to the Yukon Police Department, in accordance with the state statute and used for the purpose of defraying the costs of enforcement of laws relating to juveniles access to alcohol, other laws relating to other intoxicating substances, and traffic related offenses involving alcohol, or other intoxicating substances. 
(3)  If the judgment of conviction is entered, the judge may assess court costs in the sum of $30.00 to the defendant and may impose an additional fine and hold the defendant imprisoned for the nonpayment of fines and costs and such sums shall be satisfied at the rate of $25.00 per day if the defendant works on city projects. 
(4)  For the purpose of providing for the record-keeping and personnel expense for the municipal court, it is hereby provided that in every case there shall be assessed the sum of $30.00 to pay for the expense of handling such case, and that these costs may be assessed against the losing party, whether the defendant or the complaining party. 
(5)  The court clerk shall collect a fingerprinting fee in the amount of $10.00 and a penal (forensic)(AFIS) assessment fee in the amount of $10.00 in accordance with the state statute. The fees shall be collected from any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of $10.00 or more excluding seatbelt, parking or standing violations, or from any person forfeiting a bond when charged with said offense. Said fees shall be distributed timely to the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation, also known as the OSBI, in accordance with state statute. 
(6)  The court clerk shall collect an officer training fee in the amount of $2.00 for the purpose of providing funds for police officer training. The fee shall be collected from any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of $10.00 or more, excluding seatbelt, parking or standing violations, or from any person forfeiting a bond when charged with said offense. Said fees shall be distributed timely to the police department in accordance with the city ordinance. 
(7)  The court clerk shall collect a penal assessment fee in the amount of $10.00 in accordance with the state statute prescribing legislation. The fee shall be collected from any person convicted of an offense punishable by a fine of $10.00 or more, excluding seatbelt, parking or standing violations, or from any person forfeiting a bond when charged with said offense. Said fees shall be distributed timely to the Council of Law Enforcement Education and Training, also known as CLEET, in accordance with state statute. 
(8)  The court clerk shall collect a drug education fee in the amount of $5.00 in accordance with the state statute regarding any case of possession of marijuana or drug paraphernalia. The fee shall be collected from any person convicted of said offense. Said fee shall be distributed timely to the Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics, also known as OBN, in accordance with state statute. 
(9)  The court clerk shall collect a surety bond fee in the amount of $35.00 in accordance with the state statute. The fee shall be collected on each offense when a defendant posts a surety bond after arrest. The Court Clerk shall remit $25.00 to the police department and shall be used to defray the costs of housing municipal prisoners. The court clerk shall retain $10.00 as court costs. Said fees shall be distributed timely and in accordance with state statute. 
(10)  The court clerk shall collect an OSBI Lab fee in the amount of $150.00 in accordance with the state prescribing legislation. The fee shall be collected if blood is withdrawn by a medical facility and analysis laboratory services are rendered by the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation Lab. It shall be the responsibility of the police department to notify the court clerk if the lab services are utilized. Said fees shall be distributed timely to the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation, also known as the OSBI, in accordance with the state statute. 
(11)  The court clerk shall collect all state-mandated fees and costs in addition to all other fines, fees, costs or assessments. 
(Code 1975, § 14-29; Code 1995, § 34-52; Ord. No. 1066, § 1, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 1082, § 1, 7-2-2001; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 1339, § 1, 9-20-2016; Ord. No. 1348 , § 1, 8-15-2017; Ord. No. 1350 , § 1, 11-7-2017; Ord. No. 1351 , § 1, 11-7-2017) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, 11 O.S. § 14-111; fees and costs, 20 O.S. §§ 1313.2, 1313.3; surety bond fee, 28 O.S. § 153.3. 
Sec. 50-28. - Suspension or deferral of sentence; probation fee; minor defendants; community service. 
    After conviction and sentencing, the judge may suspend sentence in accordance with the provisions of and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed by 11 O.S. § 27-123. The judge of the municipal court imposing a judgment and sentence, at his discretion, is empowered to modify, reduce, or suspend or defer the imposition of such sentence, or any part thereof, and to authorize probation for a period not to exceed six months from the date of sentence, under such terms and conditions as the judge may specify. 
(1)  Suspended sentence. Whenever the judge suspends judgment or costs or both and allows the person to be released upon his own recognizance, the defendant so released shall be required to report at such times and to such persons as the judge shall direct. 
a.  At the expiration of such period and upon successful completion of the probationary period, the judge may allow the municipal attorney to amend the charge to a lesser offense. 
b.  If the defendant has been guilty of violation of any city, state or federal law during the probationary period or if the defendant is habitually associating with lewd or vicious persons or is indulging in vicious habits, or fails to meet the requirements of probation, the judge may cause a warrant to issue for the defendant and, upon delivery of the person or defendant to the court, the defendant shall be delivered forthwith to the place of confinement to which he was originally sentenced to serve the full term of such sentence. 
(2)  Deferred sentence. Upon successful completion of the probation term, the defendant shall be discharged without a judgment of guilty, and the verdict, judgment of guilty or plea of guilty shall be expunged from the record and said charge dismissed with prejudice to any further action. 
(Code 1975, § 14-31(1), (2); Code 1995, § 34-53) 
Sec. 50-29. - Community service. 
    Whenever any person is convicted of a violation of this Code, the court may order the defendant to a term of community service or remedial action in lieu of a fine or in conjunction with imprisonment. If the defendant fails to perform the required community service or if the conditions of community service are violated, the judge may impose a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed the maximum allowable for the violation for which the defendant was convicted. 
(Code 1975, § 14-31(4); Code 1995, § 34-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-122.2. 
Sec. 50-30. - Contempt of court. 
    Obedience to the orders, rules and judgments made by the judge or by the court may be enforced by the judge, who may fine not more than $250.00 for contempt committed as to him while holding court, or committed against processes issued by him. 
(Code 1975, § 14-32; Code 1995, § 34-55; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Contempt of court, 11 O.S. § 27-125. 
Sec. 50-31. - Appeals from court. 
    An appeal may be taken from the final judgment of the court by the defendant to the district court, in accordance with the provisions of and subject to the conditions and procedures imposed by 11 O.S. § 27-129. 
(Code 1975, § 14-33; Code 1995, § 34-56) 
Sec. 50-32. - Receipt and disposition of funds. 
    The clerk of the court shall receive and receipt for forfeitures, fees, deposits, and sums of money payable to the city, and shall pay to the city treasurer all funds deposited and disbursed upon vouchers as directed by the city council. All money so paid to the treasurer shall be placed in the general fund of the city, or in such other fund in accordance with state statute, and it shall be used in the operation of the city government in accordance with budgetary arrangements governing the fund in which it is placed. 
(Code 1975, § 14-34; Code 1995, § 34-57; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 50-33. - Fee for issuance of bail bonds. 
    The municipal court clerk shall charge a fee of $35.00 for the initial filing of any bond or any security deposited with the municipal court clerk for the subsequent court appearance of the defendant, which fee shall be assessed as an additional court cost to the defendant. The municipal court clerk shall remit on a monthly basis $25.00 of every $35.00 fee collected to a special revenue fund. The municipal court clerk shall make such remittance to a special revenue fund of the entity operating the jail for the municipality or to a fund designated by the city council for operating a jail housing municipal prisoners. 
(Code 1995, § 34-58; Ord. No. 1177, § 1, 8-16-2005) 
Sec. 50-34. - Schedule of fines and bond. 
    Any person released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before the defendant is required to appear for arraignment by pleading guilty or nolo contendere in the court clerk's office and paying the fine according to the following schedule, in addition to court costs, and state mandated fees. Upon arrest, the defendant shall be eligible for release upon the giving of bail according to the following bond schedule, in addition to court costs, and state mandated fees. 
Advertising: Place sign on public property $200.00 Place sign on private property $200.00 Alarm: Fail to register alarm $200.00 No alarm permit $25.00 False alarm $50.00 Pulled fire alarm $200.00 Illegal use of 911 $500.00 Alcoholic beverages: Carry a weapon under the influence of alcohol $750.00 Consume, possess, purchase alcohol and/or low point beer and under 21 years of age (First offense) $300.00 Consume, possess, purchase alcohol and/or low point beer and under 21 years of age (Second offense) $600.00 Consume, possess, purchase alcohol and/or low point beer and under 21 years of age (Third offense) $900.00 Contribute to the delinquency of a minor with alcoholic beverage $200.00 Drunk or drink in public place $100.00 Enter, attempt to enter restricted area of those under 21 years of age $300.00 Hire motor vehicle for transport of persons under 21 years of age to consume alcoholic beverages $500.00 Loiter on premises where alcohol is sold $100.00 Minor in possession of alcoholic beverage (First offense) $300.00 Minor in possession of alcoholic beverage (Second offense) $600.00 Minor in possession of alcoholic beverage (Third offense) $900.00 Misrepresent age to purchase alcoholic beverage $300.00 Possession of intoxicating beverage, under 21 years of age, and without a vehicle $300.00 Possession of alcohol and/or low point beer, under 21 years of age, and without a vehicle $300.00 Public intoxication $100.00 Social Host with alcohol and/or drugs $500.00 Transporting an open container of alcohol $500.00 Unlawful sale or furnish alcoholic beverage to minor $500.00 Animals: Bark/howl/creating noise $90.00 Cruelty to animals $450.00 Fail to restrain/animal run at large $50.00 Harboring vicious animal $350.00 Keeping of swine $50.00 Neglect care or abandonment $400.00 No kennel license $50.00 No license tag $35.00 Nuisance animal $90.00 Unsanitary maintenance of premises $50.00 Arrest: Attempting to elude an officer $500.00 Escape from arrest $750.00 Obstructing an officer $500.00 Refusing to assist officer $200.00 Resisting arrest $750.00 Assault and Battery: Assault and battery $750.00 Battery $500.00 Simple assault $500.00 Burglary/burglary implements: Breaking and entering without intention to commit crime $200.00 Breaking and entering with intention to commit crime $750.00 Possession of burglary implements $750.00 Burn: Burning substance during a state burn ban $750.00 Deposit of harmful or burning substance $200.00 Illegal burning $750.00 Throw a burning substance from a motor vehicle not during a state burn ban $200.00 Development Services: Application required prior to excavation or opening ground $750.00 Disorderly house $200.00 Disorderly placement of structure $200.00 No contractor's license $200.00 No contractor's permit $200.00 No development without flood plain permit $750.00 No journeyman on job site $200.00 No journeyman's license $200.00 Violating builders code $200.00 Curfew: Juvenile 15 years of age or younger $200.00 Juvenile 16 years of age or older $100.00 Defrauding/fraudulent activities: Defrauding innkeeper $200.00 Obtain money or property by false pretenses $200.00 Harmful deception $200.00 Delinquency: Continuous delinquency of minor $200.00 Child neglect/abandonment $750.00 Contributing to delinquency of minor $350.00 Destruction of property: Destruction of city or private property $750.00 Disorderly conduct: Disorderly conduct $200.00 Disturbing the peace: Disturbing the peace $200.00 Loud or amplified noise in a motor vehicle $100.00 Loud or amplified noise not in a motor vehicle $200.00 Drug: Misdemeanor drug possession with a vehicle $750.00 Misdemeanor drug possession without a vehicle $750.00 Possession of a chemically synthesized substance to emulate marijuana/fake marijuana $750.00 Possession of controlled dangerous substance with a vehicle $750.00 Possession of controlled dangerous substance without a vehicle $750.00 Possession of marijuana with a vehicle $750.00 Possession of marijuana without a vehicle $750.00 Possession of drug paraphernalia with a vehicle $750.00 Possession of drug paraphernalia without a vehicle $750.00 Public intoxication from a drug(s) $100.00 Social host of controlled dangerous substance and allow possession or consumption $500.00 Embezzlement: Embezzlement under $500.00 $750.00 False representation: Impersonating an officer $500.00 Warrant/contempt of court: Failure to pay fine warrant $280.00 Contempt of court $250.00 Failure to appear warrant $200.00 Firearms and weapons: Carry concealed weapon without a permit in area designated no weapons $200.00 Unlawful discharge of firearm/air rifle/bb gun $350.00 Point weapon at another $350.00 Fireworks: Fireworks $200.00 Graffiti: Graffiti or tagging $750.00 Insurance: Fail to maintain valid insurance verification in motor vehicle $250.00 Possession of fraudulent insurance verification/fictitious insurance form $500.00 Juvenile: Possession of alcoholic beverage, 17 years of age or under, and in a vehicle $300.00 Possession of alcoholic beverage, 17 years of age or under, and without a vehicle $300.00 Littering: Littering by throwing a burning substance from a motor vehicle not during a state burn ban $200.00 Littering from a motor vehicle $100.00 Littering where prohibited $100.00 Loitering: Loiter on or in public place/property or curfew of another after midnight $200.00 Loiter on public or private property $200.00 Loiter on school property $200.00 Malicious mischief: Malicious mischief $200.00 Molesting, injuring, or loitering at a motor vehicle $750.00 Obscene gesture or the use of profane language $100.00 Obtain money or property by trick, deception, or false pretenses $750.00 Outraging public decency $500.00 Slander or false rumors $300.00 Theft or utility service after locked by this city $750.00 Throw or shoot stones or other objects $200.00 Throwing or dropping an object at a moving vehicle $750.00 Vandalism $200.00 Miscellaneous: Aiding in the commission of a misdemeanor $500.00 Bullying $750.00 Conspiracy to commit a misdemeanor $500.00 Operate golf cart on city street $50.00 Stalking/harassment $750.00 Threatening or planning serious bodily harm to another $750.00 Transporting hazardous substances without proper safety devices $200.00 Use of language calculated to arouse anger $100.00 Nuisances: Create nuisance $200.00 Disorderly placement of structure $200.00 Grass/weeds/etc. $200.00 Loud/unusual noises $100.00 Sound system $100.00 Permitting water to flow $200.00 Water restriction $200.00 Disorderly house $200.00 Petty larceny: Petty larceny under $500.00 $500.00 Shoplifting from a retailer under $500.00 $500.00 Skateboards: Skateboarding on roadway $50.00 Solicitors: Soliciting without a permit $200.00 Solicitor trespass after posting of "no solicitor" sign $200.00 Trash: Illegal dumping on private property without permission $750.00 Tobacco: Juvenile in possession - 1 st offense $100.00 Juvenile in possession - 2 nd offense $200.00 Purchase tobacco for underage person - 1 st offense $100.00 Purchase tobacco for underage person - 2 nd offense $200.00 Trespassing: Trespassing $250.00 Truancy: Truancy from school - 1 st offense $75.00 Truancy from school - 2 nd offense $125.00 Truancy from school - 3 rd offense $250.00 Weapon: Minor in possession of firearm $750.00 Point weapon at another $350.00 Possession of firearm while under the influence of alcohol or drug $500.00 Possession of knife, bowie, switchblade, metal knuckles - 1 st offense $300.00 Possession of knife, bowie, switchblade, metal knuckles - 2 nd offense $500.00 Reckless conduct or create unreasonable risk with weapon $500.00 Transporting a firearm without a permit in a vehicle(amount set specifically by state law) $70.00 Unlawful discharge of a firearm $350.00 Unlawful discharge of a firearm/air rifle/BB gun $350.00  
(Code 1995, § 34-59; Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 1239, § 1, 4-7-2009; Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 1359 , § 1, 7-2-2018) 
Sec. 50-35. - Effect of payment. 
    If the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere such plea shall be accepted by the court and the full payment of the fine, court costs, and state mandated fees shall constitute a final determination of the cause against the defendant. If the defendant has posted and fails to appear for court, the bond posted shall be forfeited. Failure of the defendant to make a full payment shall result in prosecution under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1312, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Chapter 54 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to define, abate, etc., nuisances generally, 11 O.S. § 22-121; nuisances generally, 50 O.S. § 1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Creation or maintenance prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain a public nuisance within the city, or to permit a public nuisance to remain on premises under his control within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 46-26; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-2. - Certain nuisances declared. 
    In addition to other public nuisances declared by other sections of this Code or law, the following are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  The sale, or offering for sale, of unwholesome food or drink; or the keeping of a place where such sales or offerings are made. 
(2)  The sale, offering for sale or furnishing of intoxicating liquor in violation of state law or ordinances of the city; or the keeping of a place where intoxicating liquor is sold, offered for sale or furnished in violation of state law or ordinances of the city. 
(3)  The exposure, display, sale or distribution of obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines, papers, documents or objects; or the keeping of a place where such are exposed, displayed, sold or distributed. 
(4)  The keeping of a place where persons gamble, whether by cards, slot machines, punch boards or otherwise. 
(5)  The keeping of a place where prostitution, illicit sexual intercourse or other immoral acts are practiced. 
(6)  The keeping of a place where activities in violation of state law or ordinance are practiced or carried on. 
(7)  The conduct or holding of public dances in violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city; or the keeping of a place where such dances are held. 
(8)  The public exposure of a person having a contagious disease. 
(9)  The continued making of loud or unusual noises which annoy persons of ordinary sensibilities; or the keeping of an animal which makes such noises. 
(10)  The operation or use of any electrical apparatus or machine which materially and unduly interferes with radio or television reception by others. 
(11)  Any use of a street or sidewalk or a place adjacent thereto which causes crowds of people to gather so as to obstruct traffic on such street or sidewalk, or which otherwise obstructs traffic thereon, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance. 
(12)  Permitting water or other liquid to flow or fall, or ice or snow to fall, from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  All wells, pools, cisterns, bodies or containers of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, or which are so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety. 
(14)  Rank weeds or grass, carcasses, accumulations of manure, refuse or other things which are, or are likely to be, breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, vermin or disease germs; and the premises on which such exist. 
(15)  Any building or structure which is dangerous to the public health or safety because of damage, decay or other condition. 
(16)  Any pit, hole or other thing which is so constructed, formed, conditioned or situated as to endanger the public safety. 
(17)  Any fire or explosion hazard which endangers the public safety. 
(18)  Any occupation or activity which endangers the public peace, health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1995, § 46-27; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-3. - General abatement. 
(a)  Some nuisances are of such nature as to constitute a grave and immediate danger to the peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of one or more persons or of the public generally. It is recognized that circumstances may be such as to justify, and even to require, the city to take immediate and proper action summarily to abate such nuisances, or to reduce or suspend the danger until more deliberate action can be taken toward such abatement. In the event such a nuisance exists, the city manager or his designee is hereby authorized in his discretion to take the least invasive action necessary to abate the nuisance until such time as proceedings provided for in this article may be held. 
(b)  The city manager, the chief of the fire department, the chief of police, the city attorney, the city development services director, the city health officer, the Code official, the electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector, the fire inspector or any other officer subordinate to the city manager, any health officer, any council member or any resident of the city may submit to the city council a statement as to the existence of a nuisance as defined by this Code or other law, and a request or recommendation that it be abated. 
(c)  Before proceeding to abate the nuisance or to have it abated, the city shall give the owner and/or party responsible for the property on which the nuisance exists, ten days' notice within which time the nuisance must be abated by the owner and/or responsible party of the property. The notice shall be personally served or mailed to the owner and/or party responsible for the property at the address shown on the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office. The city shall obtain a receipt of mailing by the post office for the mailing of the notice. If the property owner and/or responsible party is unable to be personally served or notified by mail, then notice shall be posted on the property. The notice shall state the nature of the nuisance and the contact number of the code enforcement office, and shall advise the owner and/or responsible party of the property that he has a right to request a hearing before the city council. 
(d)  If, at a hearing held pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the council finds that a public nuisance does in fact exist, it shall direct the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the public nuisance to abate it within a specified time, if the public interest would not be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay. If the public interest would be unduly jeopardized by the consequent delay, or if the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the public nuisance does not abate it within the specified time, the council shall direct the city manager to abate the public nuisance or to have it abated, if summary abatement is practical, as authorized by 50 O.S. § 16. The city clerk shall send a statement of the cost of such abatement to the owner or other persons responsible for or causing the nuisance, as may be just under the circumstances, if their names and addresses are known. Until paid, such cost shall constitute a debt to the city collectible as other debts may be collected. 
(e)  If summary abatement is deemed impractical, the council, by motion or resolution, shall direct the bringing of a suit in the district court to abate the public nuisance, as authorized by 50 O.S. § 17. 
(Code 1995, § 46-28; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to define nuisances, 50 O.S. § 16. 
Sec. 54-4. - Enforcement. 
    The Code official is designated as the enforcement officer for the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 46-29; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-5. - Abatement of health nuisances. 
(a)  Pursuant to authority granted by 63 O.S. § 1-1011, the Code official shall have authority to order the owner or occupant of any private premises in the city to remove from such premises, at his own expense, any source of filth, cause of sickness, condition conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents that might contribute to the transmission of disease, or any other condition adversely affecting the public health, within 24 hours, or within such other time as might be reasonable, and a failure to do so shall constitute an offense. Such order shall be in writing and may be served personally on the owner or occupant of the premises, or authorized agent thereof, by the Code official or by a police officer, or a copy thereof may be left at the last usual place of abode of such owner, occupant or agent, if known and within the state. If the premises are unoccupied and the residence of such owner, occupant or agent is unknown, or is without the state, such order may be served by posting a copy thereof on the premises, or by publication in at least one issue of a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. 
(b)  If an order given pursuant to subsection (a) of this section is not complied with, the Code official may cause the order to be executed and complied with, and the cost thereof shall be certified to the city clerk, and the cost of removing or abating such nuisance shall be added to the water bill or other city utility bill of the owner or occupant, if he is a user of water from the city water system or other utility service. The cost shall be treated as a part of such utility bill to which it is added, and shall become due and payable, and be subject to the same regulations relating to delinquency in payment as the utility bill itself. If the owner or occupant is not a user of any city utility service, such cost, after certification to the city clerk, may be collected in any manner in which any other debt due the city may be collected. 
(Code 1995, § 46-30; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-6. - Abatement procedures cumulative. 
    The various procedures for abating or dealing with public nuisances, as prescribed by this article and other provisions of state law and city ordinances, shall be cumulative one to the other and the city may elect to follow any such procedure which is applicable in abating any particular nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 46-31; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-7. - Person responsible. 
    Every successive owner and/or responsible party of property who neglects to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of the property is liable for all costs set forth in this article. 
(Code 1995, § 46-32; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-8. - Time does not legalize. 
    No lapse of time can legalize a public nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 46-33; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-9. - Remedies against a public nuisance. 
    The remedies against a public nuisance are: 
(1)  Prosecution on complaint before the municipal court; 
(2)  Prosecution on information or indictment before another appropriate court; 
(3)  Civil action; or 
(4)  Abatement: 
a.  By the person injured by the nuisance as provided in 50 O.S. § 12. 
b.  By the city in accordance with this Code or other law. 
(Code 1995, § 46-34; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-10. - Remedies against private nuisances. 
    The remedies against a private nuisance are: 
(1)  Civil action; or 
(2)  Abatement by any person injured by the nuisance as provided in 50 O.S. §§ 14 and 15. 
(Code 1995, § 46-35; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-11. - Abatement by suit in district court. 
    In cases where it is deemed impractical to summarily abate a nuisance, the city may bring suit in the district court of the county where the nuisance is located, as provided in 50 O.S. § 17. 
(Code 1995, § 46-36; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Secs. 54-12-54-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRASH, WEEDS, GRASS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- For state law similar to this article and authority of city to proceed in the manner prescribed in this article, see 11 O.S. § 22-111. 

Sec. 54-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cleaning means the removal of trash from property. 
    Owner means the owner of record as shown by the most current tax rolls of the county treasurer. 
    Trash means any refuse, litter, ashes, leaves, debris, paper, combustible materials, rubbish, offal or waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded or abandoned. 
    Weed includes, but is not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac and all vegetation, including grass, at any state of maturity which: 
(1)  Exceeds ten inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs or produce for human consumption grown on a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of such weeds; 
(2)  Regardless of height, harbors, conceals or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash; 
(3)  Harbors rodents or vermin; 
(4)  Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors; 
(5)  Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or 
(6)  Is dead or diseased. 
The term "weed" shall not include tended crops on land zoned for agricultural use which are planted more than 150 feet from a parcel zoned for other than agricultural use. 
(Code 1995, § 46-41; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-42. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    Any accumulation of trash or growth of grass or weeds within the city which meets conditions described in section 54-41 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be administered under this article or considered to be a public offense under this section, at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 46-42; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-43. - Report to city manager. 
    Any officer or employee of the city who discovers, upon any premises in the city, what seems to him to be a public nuisance shall report such condition to the city manager. 
(Code 1995, § 46-43; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-44. - Hearing to determine existence of nuisance. 
(a)  Notice; hearing. At least ten days' notice shall be given to the owner of the property by mail at the address shown by the current year's tax rolls in the county treasurer's office before the city manager or his designee holds a hearing or takes action pursuant to this article. The notice shall order the property owner to clean the property of trash, or to cut or mow the weeds or grass on the property, as appropriate, and the notice shall further state that unless such work is performed within ten days of the date of notice, the work shall be done by the city and a notice of lien shall be filed with the county clerk against the property owner. The city shall obtain a receipt of mailing from the postal service, which receipt shall indicate the date of mailing and the name and the address of the addressee. However, if the property owner cannot be located within ten days from the date of mailing by the city manager or his designee, notice may be given by posting a copy of the notice on the property or by publication, as defined in 11 O.S. § 1-102, one time not less than ten days prior to any hearing or action by the city. 
(b)  Summary abatement. The notice, whether by mail, posting or publication, shall state that any accumulations of trash or excessive weed or grass growth on the owner's property occurring within six months from and after the date of this notice may be summarily abated by the city; and that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the owner; and that a lien may be imposed on the property to secure such payment, all without further prior notice to the property owner. 
(Code 1995, § 46-44; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-45. - Removal or mowing with owner's consent. 
    The owner of the property, after receiving notice pursuant to this article, may give his written consent to the city authorizing the removal of the trash or the mowing of the weeds or grass. By giving written consent, the owner waives his right to a hearing by the city, agrees to pay the cost thereof and that a lien may be placed upon the property if the costs are not paid within 30 days. 
(Code 1995, § 46-45; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-46. - Hearing to determine detriment or danger to property. 
    Upon request, a hearing may be held by the city manager or his designee after notice has been given pursuant to this division to determine whether the accumulation of trash or the growth of weeds or grass has caused the property to become detrimental to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and the community or a hazard to traffic, or creates a fire hazard to the danger of property. 
(Code 1995, § 46-46; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-47. - City's right to abate. 
    Upon a finding by the city manager or his designee, after notice has been given pursuant to this article, that the condition of the property constitutes a detriment or hazard, and that the property would be benefited by the removal of such conditions, the city manager or his designee shall give the property owner or responsible party a reasonable time within which to abate the nuisance. In the event the property owner or responsible party has not abated the nuisance in a timely manner, the agents of the city are granted the right of entry on the property for the removal of trash, mowing of weeds or grass, and performance of the necessary duties as a governmental function of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 46-47; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-48. - Property owner's right to appeal. 
    The property owner shall have the right of appeal to the city council from any order of the city manager or his designee. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after the city manager or his designee's administrative order is rendered. Upon receiving such notice, the city council shall consider the appeal at a regularly scheduled emergency or special meeting. The council shall affirm the order, affirm the order subject to modification or deny the order. 
(Code 1995, § 46-48; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-49. - Determination of cost; statement to owner. 
    The city manager or his designee shall determine the actual cost of cleaning and mowing incurred pursuant to this article and any other expenses as may be necessary in connection therewith, including administrative costs and the cost of notice and mailing. The clerk shall forward by mail to the property owner at the address specified in section 54-44 a statement of such actual cost and demanding payment. If the cleaning and mowing are done by the city, the cost to the property owner for the cleaning and mowing shall not exceed the actual cost thereof. If the cleaning and mowing are done on a private contract basis, the contract shall be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. 
(Code 1995, § 46-49; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-50. - Lien for nonpayment. 
(a)  Statement filed with county. 
(1)  If payment of the cost of cleaning and mowing incurred pursuant to this article is not made within 30 days from the date of the mailing of the statement, the city clerk shall forward a certified statement of the amount of the cost to the county treasurer and the cost shall be levied on the property and collected by the county treasurer as other taxes authorized by law. 
(2)  The cost and the interest thereon shall be a lien against the property from the date the cost is certified to the county treasurer, coequal with the lien of ad valorem taxes and all other taxes and special assessments and prior and superior to all other titles and liens against the property, and the lien shall continue until the cost is fully paid. 
(b)  County collection fee; civil remedy; discharge of lien. 
(1)  At the time of collection, the county treasurer shall collect a fee of $5.00 for each parcel of property. The fee shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the county. 
(2)  At any time prior to the collection as provided in this section, the city may pursue any civil remedy for collection of the amount owing and interest thereon. 
(3)  Upon receiving payment, if any, the city clerk shall forward to the county treasurer a notice of such payment directing discharge of the lien. 
(Code 1995, § 46-50; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-51. - Recurring abatement. 
    If the city manager or his designee causes property within the city limits to be cleaned of trash and weeds or grass to be cut or mowed in accordance with the procedures provided for in this article, any subsequent accumulations of trash or excessive weeds or grass growth on the property occurring within a six-month period may be declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated without further prior notice to the property owner. At the time of each summary abatement, the city shall notify the property owner of the abatement and the costs thereof. The notice shall state that the property owner may request a hearing within ten days after the date of mailing the notice. The notice and hearing shall be provided for in this article. Unless otherwise determined at the hearing, the cost of the abatement shall be determined and collected as provided in sections 54-49 and 54-50 and this section. 
(Code 1995, § 46-52; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-52. - Agricultural property. 
    Except as to trash and debris, the provisions of this article shall not apply to any property zoned and used for agricultural purpose. 
(Code 1995, § 46-53; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-53. - Penalty for violation of section 54-42. 
(a)  Any owner and any person in possession of any property in the city who shall violate section 54-42 shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  Each day's continuous violation shall constitute a separate offense and may be punishable as such. 
(Code 1995, § 46-54; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Secs. 54-54-54-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCE VEHICLES 

Sec. 54-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junk vehicle means any vehicle, as defined herein, which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, deteriorated, decayed, lacks necessary repairs or maintenance, abandoned, bearing no state license plate or bearing a state license plate that is more than three months out of date, or discarded. 
    Owner means any person, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property, including an officer, guardian, executor, administrator, mortgagee in possession or managing or leasing agent of such person, firm, or corporation. 
    Private property means any real property which is not public property. 
    Public property means that property which is dedicated to the public use and over which the federal, state or municipal government or any political subdivision thereof exercises control and dominion. 
    Vehicle means a device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported, pulled or drawn upon a highway, except devices designed to be moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The term "vehicle" shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, boats and trailers. 
(Code 1995, § 46-66; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-83. - Prohibited; nuisance declared. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked, or partially dismantled condition whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the city for a period of time in excess of 72 hours. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a lawful business enterprise, and properly operated in the appropriate zone, pursuant to the zoning provisions or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designated for operation on drag strips or raceways or any vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection purposes in a storage place maintained in a lawful place and manner. 
(Code 1995, § 46-67; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-84. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  Whenever it comes to the attention of the city manager or his designee that any nuisance, as defined by this article, exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this article. 
(b)  The notice shall be given at least ten days before the time designated for compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice, when a copy of the notice is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property upon which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner or occupant of the private property at his last known address. 
(c)  The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this article, and the notice shall advise that, upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city shall prosecute a criminal complaint for failure to abate the nuisance and/or shall undertake such removal with the cost to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property. 
(Code 1995, § 46-68; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-85. - Hearing. 
(a)  The person to whom the notices are directed pursuant to the provisions of this article, or his duly authorized agent, may file a written request for hearing before the city council within the ten-day period of compliance for the purpose of defending the charges by the city. 
(b)  The hearing shall be held as soon as practical after the filing of the request and the person to whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of such hearing. At such hearing the city and the person to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. 
(Code 1995, § 46-69; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-86. - Responsibility for removal. 
    Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city or its designee, the owner, or occupant of the private property where same is located, shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(Code 1995, § 46-70; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-87. - Removal of vehicles from property. 
    If the violation described in the notice served pursuant to this article has not been remedied within the ten-day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing had, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the city council, the city manager or his designee shall have the right to take possession of the subject vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder, or to refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 46-71; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-88. - Notice of removal. 
    Within 48 hours of the removal of a vehicle pursuant to this article, the city manager or his designee shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed, that said vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this article. The notice shall give the location where the vehicle is stored, and the proper procedure for redeeming said vehicle, including cost of redemption. 
(Code 1995, § 46-72; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-89. - Appraisal. 
    Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of this article, the city shall, after ten days, cause it to be appraised. If the vehicle is appraised at $75.00 or less, the city manager, or his designee, shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle. After complying with the above, the city may summarily dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale. If the vehicle is appraised at over $75.00, notice of public sale shall be given not less than ten days before the date of the proposed sale. 
(Code 1995, § 46-73; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-90. - Collection of city's costs of removal. 
(a)  Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property from which the vehicle has been removed by the city to pay the unrecovered expense incurred by the city in such removal, including storage, cost of appraisal, cost of sale and all other expenses related to the removal, the amount of the unrecovered cost may be added to the municipal utility bills of the private property from which the vehicle was removed and recovered in the same manner as such bills. 
(b)  If the private property is not served by municipal utilities or if collection efforts are not successful, the cost may be certified by the city clerk to the county treasurer in which the property is located who shall add the same to the ad valorem taxes assessed against the property until paid, and such costs shall be collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes assessed against the property and, when collected, shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1995, § 46-74; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 54-91. - Penalty. 
    In addition to the procedures for removal of vehicles, any person who shall violate any of the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of an offense against the city. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense and may be chargeable as such. Each day's continued violation of any of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense and may be chargeable as such and punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 46-75; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 11-1-2011) 
Chapter 74 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes and punishments generally, 21 O.S. § 1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Adoption by reference. 
    All nonfelony provisions of the state penal code (21 O.S. § 1 et seq.) are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set out, and a violation of any of such provisions in the city shall constitute a violation of this Code and be punished as provided in section 1-7 or as established by city ordinance. 
(Code 1995, § 74-1) 
Sec. 74-2. - Business owners' rights in regards to self-defense act. 
    Nothing contained in any provision of the Oklahoma Self-Defense Act (21 O.S. § 1290.1 et seq.) shall be construed to limit, restrict or prohibit in any manner the existing rights of any person, property owner, tenant, employer or other entity to control the possession of weapons on any property owned or controlled by the person or entity. 
(Code 1995, § 74-1.1; Ord. No. 929, § 1, 11-21-1995; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 74-3. - Attempted offenses. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense against the ordinances of the city, and in such attempt does any act toward the commission of such offense, but fails or is prevented or intercepted in the perpetration thereof, is guilty of an offense, and shall be punished in the manner prescribed for the attempted offense itself. 
(Code 1975, § 12-1; Code 1995, § 74-2) 
State Law reference- Attempts to commit crimes, 21 O.S. § 42. 
Sec. 74-4. - Unlawful throwing or shooting of stones or other objects. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other object into or across any street or alley, or in any place where he is likely to hit another person wrongfully or to injure property, or to throw or shoot any stone, shot or other object at any person, vehicle, structure, electric light or other property of another, whether public or private, except in cases where such is done in defense of oneself, of another person or of property. 
(Code 1975, § 12-7; Code 1995, § 74-3) 
State Law reference- Manufacture, sale, etc., of slung-shots prohibited, 21 O.S. § 1281 et seq. 
Sec. 74-5. - Discharging firearms. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the city except when doing so in the line of duty, when lawfully doing so in defense of oneself, of another person, or of property or when otherwise authorized by this Code or any law or ordinance. It is unlawful to discharge an air rifle or BB gun in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 74-3.1; Ord. No. 920, § 1, 11-7-1995) 
Sec. 74-6. - Resisting, obstructing, etc., city employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully resist, oppose or obstruct the municipal judge or any employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties; or, by threats, to intimidate or attempt to intimidate any such employee from the discharge of his official duties; or to assault or beat such employee in the discharge of his official duties. 
(Code 1975, § 12-38; Code 1995, § 74-4; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Obstructing public officers, 21 O.S. § 540. 
Sec. 74-7. - Display of insulting or abusive signs, flags, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to display any sign, emblem, badge, flag or device which, in its common acceptance, is insulting, profane, or abusive to the citizens of the city, and which is calculated or of which the natural consequence is to cause a breach of the peace or an assault. 
(Code 1975, § 12-13; Code 1995, § 74-5) 
Sec. 74-8. - Loud noise, music or words. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quietude of any reasonable person by operating, having operated or permitting to be operated any contrivance, whether electric or not, with or without a loudspeaker, in such a manner as to emit loud music, noise or words. This section shall not prohibit religious bodies from playing chimes, bells or carillons or other religious music. 
(Code 1975, § 12-14; Code 1995, § 74-6) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit disturbances, 11 O.S. § 22-110; noise control and abatement, 63 O.S. § 1-1511 et seq. 
Sec. 74-9. - Gaming. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to play, to open or cause to be open, or to operate, carry on or conduct, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, poker, roulette, craps, any banking, percentage or other games played with dice, cards, or any other device, for money, checks, chips, credit or anything of value; to set up, operate or permit to be operated any slot machines or other device whatsoever where money, checks, chips, credit or any other thing of value are played, when the act of playing the same might result in a gain or loss to the party playing; or to gamble knowingly in any other manner, or knowingly to permit his premises, house, lot or other property to be used in connection with, or for, any act declared unlawful in this section. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the sponsoring and operation of bingo games by nonprofit religious, fraternal, charitable or educational organizations, provided the organizations are properly licensed and operated in accordance with the law. The nonprofit organization shall secure a permit from the development services department for a fee set forth by resolution by the city council of City of Yukon. 
(Ord. No. 1384 , 2-5-2019; Ord. No. 1386 , 2-19-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1384 , adopted Feb. 5, 2019, repealed the former § 74-9 and enacted a new 74-9 as set out herein. The former 74-9 pertained to gambling and derived from Code 1975, § 12-15 and Code 1995, § 74-7. 
State Law reference- Gambling generally, 21 O.S. § 941 et seq.; authority of city to prohibit gambling, 11 O.S. § 22-108; disorderly houses, 11 O.S. § 22-109. 
Sec. 74-10. - Carrying concealed weapons on city property. 
    No person shall carry any concealed weapon on property owned or controlled by the City of Yukon including any structure, building, or office space owned or leased by the City of Yukon for the purpose of conducting business with the public. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1995, § 74-8; Ord. No. 930, § 1, 12-5-1995; Ord. No. 1357 , 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 74-11. - Carrying of concealed weapons by city employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided in 21 O.S. §§ 1289.24 and 1289.8, no employee, agent, contractor, subcontractor, franchisees or employees or agents of contractors, subcontractors or franchisees of the city shall carry a concealed weapon while in the scope and course of employment for the city. This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer or to any person authorized by law to carry a concealed weapon in the course of employment. 
(Code 1995, § 74-9; Ord. No. 931, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 74-12. - False alarm; complaint or information; nonemergency call; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall call the number of nine-one-one (9-1-1) for the purpose of making a knowingly false alarm or complaint or reporting, knowingly, false information, or making a nonemergency call which could result in a dispatch of emergency services from any public agency. Any person violating the provision of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00 and by an assessment for the resulting costs of any dispatching of emergency personnel and equipment for such offense. 
(b)  As used above, the term "public agency" means any city, town, county, municipal corporation, public district, public trust, or public authority located within the state which provides or has the authority to provide firefighting, law enforcement, ambulance, emergency medical or other emergency services. 
(Code 1995, § 74-10; Ord. No. 969, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 74-13. - Truancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any child who is over 12 years of age and under 18 years of age and who has not finished four years of high school work to neglect or refuse to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private, or other school, or receive an education by other means for the full term the schools of the district are in session, unless the child is excused from attendance by the provisions of 70 O.S. § 10-105 et seq. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other person having custody of a child who is over the age of five years, and under the age of 18 years, to neglect or refuse to cause or compel such child to attend and comply with the rules of some public, private or other school, unless other means of education are provided for the full term the schools of the district are in session or the child is excused as provided in this section. One-half day of kindergarten shall be required of all children five years of age or older unless the child is excused from kindergarten attendance as provided in this section. A child who is five years of age shall be excused from kindergarten attendance until the next school year after the child is six years of age if a parent, guardian, or other person having custody of the child notifies the superintendent of the district where the child is a resident by certified mail prior to enrollment in kindergarten, or at any time during the first school year that the child is required to attend kindergarten pursuant to this section, of election to withhold the child from kindergarten until the next school year after the child is six years of age. 
(c)  Any guardian, custodian, child or other person violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of $75.00 for the first offense, $125.00 for the second offense, and $250.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(Code 1995, § 74-11; Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 7-21-1998; Ord. No. 1173, § 1, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 74-14. - Transporting alcohol in opened containers. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any operator to knowingly transport or for any passenger to possess in any moving vehicle upon a public highway, street or alley any intoxicating beverage or low-point beer, as defined by 37 O.S. §§ 163.1 and 163.2, except in the original container which shall not have been opened and from which the original cap or seal shall not have been removed, unless the opened container is in the rear trunk or rear compartment, which shall include the spare tire compartment in a station wagon or panel truck, or any outside compartment which is not accessible to the driver or any other person in the vehicle while it is in motion. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the passenger area of buses and limousines; however, it shall be unlawful for the driver of the bus or limousine to consume or have in the driver's immediate possession any intoxicating beverage or low-point beer. 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  The term "bus" means a vehicle as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-105 chartered for transportation of persons for hire. The term "bus" shall not mean a school bus, as defined by 47 O.S. §1-160, transporting children or a vehicle operated pursuant to a franchise with a city or town operating over a regularly scheduled route; and 
(2)  The term "limousine" means a chauffeur-driven motor vehicle, other than a bus or taxicab, as defined by 47 O.S. § 1-174, designed and used for transportation of persons for compensation. 
(Code 1975, § 3-6; Code 1995, § 6-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1220. 
Sec. 74-15. - Public intoxication; drinking in public places. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if the person shall: 
(1)  In any public place, or in or upon any passenger coach, streetcar, or in or upon any other vehicle commonly used for the transportation of passengers, or in or about any depot, platform, waiting station or room, drink or otherwise consume any intoxicating liquor, unless authorized by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, intoxicating substance, or intoxicating compound of any kind, or inhale glue, paint or other intoxicating substance; 
(2)  Be drunk or intoxicated in any public or private road, or in any passenger coach, streetcar, or any public place or building, or at any public gathering, from drinking or consuming such intoxicating liquor, intoxicating substance or intoxicating compound or from inhalation of glue, paint or other intoxicating substance; or 
(3)  Be drunk or intoxicated from any cause and disturb the peace of any person. 
(b)  Arrest and immunity from prosecution. 
(1)  A peace officer may not take a person into custody based solely on the commission of an offense involving alcohol described in subsection (b)(2) of this section if the law enforcement officer, after making a reasonable determination and considering the facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that all of the following apply: 
a.  The law enforcement officer has contact with the person because the person requested emergency medical assistance for an individual who reasonably appeared to be in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption; and 
b.  The person: 
1.  Provided the person's full name and any other relevant information requested by the law enforcement officer, 
2.  Remained at the scene with the individual who reasonably appeared to be in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption until emergency medical assistance arrived; and 
3.  Cooperated with emergency medical assistance personnel and law enforcement officers at the scene. 
(2)  A person who meets the criteria of subsection (b)(1) of this section is immune from criminal prosecution for violation of subsection (a) of this section if the offense involved a state of intoxication caused by the person's use of alcohol or if the offense involved the person being, or becoming, intoxicated as a result of the person's use of alcohol. 
(Code 1975, § 3-18; Code 1995, § 6-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 8, 8a. 
Sec. 74-16. - Permitting or allowing gatherings where minors are consuming alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. The term "alcoholic beverage" includes intoxicating beverages and low-point beer as defined herein. 
    Gathering means a party, gathering, or event, where a group of three or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. 
    Intoxicating beverage means and includes beverages containing more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2 percent) alcohol by weight. 
    Legal guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
    Low-point beer means and includes beverages containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2 percent) alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer or cereal malt beverages obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion of barley or other grain, malt or similar products. 
    Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
    Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent, or stepparent of another person. 
    Premises means any residence or other private property, place, or premises, including any commercial or business premises. 
    Response costs means the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire, and other emergency response providers to a gathering, and are limited to: 
(1)  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a gathering, and the administrative costs attributable to such response; and 
(2)  The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use of any such equipment in responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of a gathering. 
(b)  Consumption of alcohol by minor in a public place, place open to the public, or place not open to the public. Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any minor to: 
(1)  Consume at any public place or any place open to the public alcoholic beverages; or 
(2)  Consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage, unless in connection with the consumption of the alcoholic beverage that minor is being supervised by his parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  Hosting, permitting, or allowing a party, gathering, or event where minors consuming alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(1)  It is the duty of any person having control of any premises, who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a gathering at said premises to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable steps are: controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government-issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the gathering. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person having control of any premises to knowingly host, permit, or allow a gathering to take place at said premises where at least one minor consumes an alcoholic beverage, whenever the person having control of the premises knows a minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusively between a minor and his parent or legal guardian. 
(4)  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any family activity held in the confines of the family home from providing the use of alcohol to immediate family members within the supervision of parents and guardians. However, if a minor leaves such a family gathering intoxicated and is found in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a nonfamily gathering. 
(5)  Nothing in this section should be interpreted to prohibit any religious practice which includes the use of alcohol. However, if a minor leaves such a religious gathering intoxicated and is found to be in public, then said providers of alcohol will be held responsible in the same manner as a nonreligious gathering. 
(6)  This section shall not apply to any premises licensed by the state to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction thereof, shall be assessed a fine as provided in section 1-7 or as established by city ordinance. 
(e)  Reservation of legal options. Violations of this section may be prosecuted by the city criminally, civilly, and/or administratively as provided by this Code. The city may seek administrative fees and response costs associated with enforcement of this section through all remedies or procedures provided by statute, ordinance, or law. This section shall not limit the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this section, nor shall they limit the city's ability to initiate and prosecute any criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this section. 
(f)  Local authority. This section shall not apply where prohibited or preempted by state or federal law. 
(Code 1995, § 74-150; Ord. No. 1209, § 1, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Secs. 74-17-74-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY 

Sec. 74-36. - Impersonating city officer or employee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate any officer or employee of the city, falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the city, or exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of an officer or employee of the city, without being duly authorized to do so. 
(Code 1975, § 12-39; Code 1995, § 74-31) 
State Law reference- Impersonation of public officers, 21 O.S. § 1533. 
Sec. 74-37. - False representations to city officer, employee or agency. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any material misrepresentation to any officer, employee or agency of the city government in any official application to, or official dealing or negotiation with, such officer, employee or agency; or to commit perjury before any tribunal or officer of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 12-40) 
Sec. 74-38. - Prisoners; aiding to escape. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, in any illegal manner, to set at liberty, rescue, or attempt to set at liberty or rescue, any prisoner from any officer or employee of the city having legal custody of such prisoner or from the city jail or other place of confinement by the city, or to assist such prisoner in any manner to escape from such prison or custody. 
(Code 1975, § 12-42; Code 1995, § 74-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 441. 
Secs. 74-39-74-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 74-67. - Entering, starting, meddling with, etc., vehicle of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to crank, start, otherwise meddle with, molest, enter, occupy, loiter in, take or drive away any automobile or other vehicle belonging to another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 12-55; Code 1995, § 74-56) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1787. 
Sec. 74-68. - Damaging, defacing, and/or destroying property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure, deface, besmear or molest any structure, building, outbuilding, fence or any other property, real or personal, public or private, belonging to another; or to use any such property wrongfully to the detriment of the owner or other person entitled to its use; or to interfere wrongfully with the use of any such property by its owner and any other person entitled to its use. 
(Code 1975, § 12-56; Code 1995, § 74-57; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Damaging property of another, 21 O.S. § 1760 et seq. 
Sec. 74-69. - Injuring trees or shrubbery on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any tree or shrubbery on a street or alley or other public area in the city. This shall not prohibit the lawful and proper care and removal of such trees and shrubbery. 
(Code 1975, § 12-57; Code 1995, § 74-58) 
Sec. 74-70. - Placing signs on property of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, stick, tack, paste, post, paint, mark, write, or print any sign, poster, picture, announcement, advertisement, bill, placard, device or inscription upon any building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicle or other property of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 12-58; Code 1995, § 74-59; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 74-71. - Placing advertising matter on public property. 
    No person, except a duly authorized public officer or employee, shall erect, construct or maintain, paste, paint, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, poster, sign, advertisement, or notice of any kind, or cause or suffer the same to be done, on any curbstone, lamppost, pole, bench, hydrant, bridge, wall, tree, fence, sidewalk or structure in or upon any public street, alley or place, except as may be required or permitted by ordinance or law, or as may be allowed by written agreement with the city, the city council or the city municipal authority. 
(Code 1975, § 12-59; Code 1995, § 74-60; Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 1-6-1998) 
Sec. 74-72. - Unlawful intrusion upon land. 
    Every person who intrudes or squats upon any lot or piece of land within the city without license or authority from the owner thereof, or who erects or occupies thereon any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure without such license or authority, and every person who places, erects or occupies, within the bounds of any street, alley or avenue of the city, any hut, hovel, shanty or other structure whatever, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 12-61; Code 1995, § 74-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1353. 
Sec. 74-73. - Unlawful entry. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another or into an area or structure on such property, whether such property, area or structure is public or private, when such entrance is plainly forbidden by signs or otherwise or when the property, area or structure is enclosed, except when such entrance is in the line of duty, or with the expressed or tacit consent of the owner or person in charge, or otherwise by authority of law or ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 12-62; Code 1995, § 74-62) 
State Law reference- Unlawful intrusion upon lands, 21 O.S. § 1353. 
Sec. 74-74. - Trespassing. 
(a)  The term "trespass" shall mean entry upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession of the premises without the express or the implied consent of the owner or other person in lawful possession. The term "trespass" shall also mean: 
(1)  Remaining upon the premises of an owner or other person in lawful possession after having been told to leave the premises by the owner, or the agent, or employee of the owner, or other person in lawful possession of the premises. 
(2)  Remaining on private property at any time other than during posted hours of business operation after having been directed to vacate such premises by a police officer; provided that, the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons, including employees, whose presence upon such premises is authorized by the owner or by a person in lawful possession of such premises; nor shall the provisions of this section apply unless hours of business operations are posted upon such premises. 
(3)  Returning to private property before the posted time of opening for business operation on the next business day after having been directed to vacate such premises under the terms of this subsection. 
(b)  Parked vehicles in violation of this section may be impounded by the police department. 
(Code 1975, § 12-63; Code 1995, § 74-63; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Unlawful intrusion upon lands, 21 O.S. § 1353. 
Sec. 74-75. - Parent liability for criminal or delinquent acts of minor. 
(a)  The parents of a child under the age of 18 years, when the child is living with the parents, where such child commits any criminal or delinquent act resulting in damage to or larceny of any property, real, personal or mixed, including, but not limited to: Holiday lights and displays, bathroom fixtures or facilities, street signs, street lights, curbs, temporary signs, sidewalks, public places, etc., belonging to the city shall be liable in civil court to the city for damages in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. 
(b)  This provision shall be cumulative to other ordinances that may otherwise define conduct as an offense. 
(Code 1995, § 74-64; Ord. No. 1197, § 1, 11-21-2006) 
Sec. 74-76. - Graffiti; prohibited. 
(a)  Legislative findings. The city council hereby makes the following findings: 
(1)  That unsightly graffiti on public and private property within the city is detrimental to the beauty of the community and decreases the value of property; 
(2)  That graffiti on public and private property within the city is often related to criminal street gang activity, with graffiti being used to convey information to gang members and mark gang territory; 
(3)  That gang-related graffiti often provides a catalyst for gang-related criminal violence within the city; and 
(4)  That gang-related graffiti constitutes a growing blight on and a substantial detriment to the health and safety of the residents of our community. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide for the prevention of graffiti within the city. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advertising means any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner or occupant of the property, or an agent of such owner or occupant, for the purpose of promoting products or services or conveying information to the public. 
    Applies graffiti, apply graffiti or applying graffiti means the act of drawing, painting, chiseling, scratching or etching graffiti on public or private property within the city. 
    Graffiti means, without limitation, any letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind visible to the public that is drawn, painted, chiseled, scratched or etched on a rock, tree, wall, bridge, fence, gate, building or other structure; provided, however, that the term "graffiti" shall not include advertising or any other letter, word, name, number, symbol, slogan, message, drawing, picture, writing, or other mark of any kind lawfully placed on property by an owner of the property, an occupant of the property, or by an authorized agent for such owner or occupant. 
(d)  Application of graffiti prohibited; offense; penalty. 
(1)  No person shall apply graffiti to public or private property within the city. 
(2)  Any person who applies graffiti to public or private property within the city shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each act of applying graffiti shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Any person convicted of the offense of applying graffiti to public or private property within the city shall be punished by a fine not less than $750.00, excluding costs. 
(4)  The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the police department. 
(Code 1995, § 74-65; Ord. No. 1234, § 1, 2-17-2009) 
Secs. 74-77-74-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RIOT CONTROL AND PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Riot Control and Prevention Act, 21 O.S. §§ 1321.1-1321.10; authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to such Act, 21 O.S. § 1321.9. 

Sec. 74-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew means a prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city, excepting persons officially designated to duty with reference to an emergency. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the city, or in case of his removal, death, resignation or inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the vice-mayor, or in case of the removal, death, resignation or inability to discharge the powers and duties of office by both the mayor and vice-mayor, the city manager. 
    State of emergency means an emergency proclaimed as such by the mayor pursuant to section 74-97. 
(Code 1975, § 12-74; Code 1995, § 74-86) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1321.2. 
Sec. 74-97. - Proclamation and termination of state of emergency. 
(a)  The mayor, after finding that a public disorder, disaster or riot exists within the city or any part thereof, which affects life, health, property or the public peace, may proclaim a state of emergency in the area affected. 
(b)  The proclamation of a state of emergency shall be in writing and shall be signed by the mayor and shall then be filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  The mayor shall give as much public notice as practical through the news media of the issuance of a proclamation pursuant to this section. 
(d)  The state of emergency shall cease to exist upon the issuance of a proclamation of the mayor declaring its termination; provided that, the mayor must terminate the state of emergency when order has been restored in the area affected. 
(Code 1975, § 12-75; Code 1995, § 74-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1321.3. 
Sec. 74-98. - Powers of mayor during state of emergency. 
(a)  The mayor, during the existence of a state of emergency, by proclamation, may, in the area described by the proclamation, which proclamation shall not cover any part or portion of the city not affected by public disorder, disaster or riot at the time the proclamation is issued, prohibit: 
(1)  Any person being on the public streets, or in the public parks or at any other public place during the hours declared by the mayor to be a period of curfew; 
(2)  Such number of persons, as designated by the mayor, from assembling or gathering on the public streets, parks or other areas of the city, either public or private; 
(3)  The manufacture, transfer, use, possession or transportation of a Molotov cocktail or any other device, instrument or object designed to explode or produce uncontained combustion; 
(4)  The transporting, possessing or using of gasoline, kerosene or combustible, flammable or explosive liquids or materials in a glass or uncapped container of any kind except in connection with the normal operation of motor vehicles, normal home use or legitimate commercial use; 
(5)  The possession of firearms or any other deadly weapon by a person, other than a law enforcement officer, in a place other than that person's place of residence or business; 
(6)  The sale, purchase or dispensing of alcoholic beverages (including 3.2 beer); 
(7)  The sale, purchase or dispensing of other commodities or goods, as he reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace; 
(8)  The use of certain streets, highways or public ways by the public; and 
(9)  Such other activities as he reasonably believes should be prohibited to help preserve and maintain life, health, property or the public peace. 
(b)  In imposing the restrictions provided for by this section, the mayor may impose them for such times, upon such conditions, with such exceptions and in such areas of the city as he, from time to time, deems necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 12-76; Code 1995, § 74-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1321.4. 
Sec. 74-99. - Offenses during state of emergency-Generally. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply during a state of emergency. 
(b)  A person is guilty of riot when he participates with two or more persons in a course of disorderly conduct: 
(1)  With intent to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony or misdemeanor; 
(2)  With intent to prevent or coerce official action; or 
(3)  When the accused or any other participant, to the knowledge of the accused, uses or plans to use a firearm or other deadly weapon. 
(c)  Any person upon any public way within the described area who is directed by the authorities to leave the public way but refuses to do so shall be guilty of an offense. 
(d)  A person is guilty of an offense under this section, committed by another person, when: 
(1)  Acting with the state of mind that is sufficient for commission of the offense, he causes an innocent or irresponsible person to engage in conduct constituting the offense; 
(2)  Intending to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, he: 
a.  Solicits, requests, commands, importunes or otherwise attempts to cause the other person to commit it; 
b.  Aids, counsels or agrees or attempts to aid the other person in planning or committing it; or 
c.  Having a legal duty to prevent the commission of the offense, fails to make a proper effort to do so; or 
(3)  His conduct is expressly declared by a statute of this state to establish his complicity. 
(e)  In any prosecution for an offense under this section in which the criminal liability of the accused is based upon the conduct of another person pursuant to this section, it is no defense that: 
(1)  The other person is not guilty of the offense in question because of irresponsibility or other legal incapacity or exemption, or because of unawareness of the criminal nature of the conduct in question or of the accused's criminal purpose, or because of other factors precluding the mental state required for the commission of the offense; or 
(2)  The other person has not been prosecuted for or convicted of any offense based on the conduct in question, or has previously been acquitted thereof, or has been convicted of a different offense or in a different degree, or has legal immunity from prosecution for the conduct in question. 
(f)  The term "disorderly conduct," as used in this section, means a course of conduct by a person who: 
(1)  Causes public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creates a risk thereof by: 
a.  Engaging in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior; 
b.  Making an unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance, gesture or display, or addressing abusive language to any person present; 
c.  Dispersing any unlawful procession or meeting of persons not being a peace officer of this city and without lawful authority; 
d.  Creating a hazardous or physically offensive condition which serves no legitimate purpose; or 
(2)  Engages with at least one other person in a course of disorderly conduct, as defined in subsection (f)(1) of this section, which is likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, and refuses or knowingly fails to obey an order to disperse, made by a peace officer to the participants. 
(Code 1975, § 12-77; Code 1995, § 74-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 21 O.S. § 1321.6. 
Sec. 74-100. - Same-Destroying or damaging property or injuring another person. 
(a)  During a state of emergency, any person who maliciously destroys or damages any real or personal property or maliciously injures another person shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  A person is guilty of an offense under this section committed by another person when: 
(1)  Acting with the state of mind that is sufficient for commission of the offense, he causes an innocent or irresponsible person to engage in conduct constituting the offense; or 
(2)  Intending to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense he: 
a.  Solicits, requests, commands, importunes or otherwise attempts to cause the other person to commit it; 
b.  Aids, counsels or agrees or attempts to aid the other person in planning or committing it; or 
c.  Having a legal duty to prevent the commission of the offense, fails to make a proper effort to do so. 
(c)  In any prosecution for an offense under this section in which the criminal liability of the accused is based upon conduct of another person pursuant to this section, it is no defense that: 
(1)  The other person is not guilty of the offense in question because of unawareness of the criminal nature of the conduct in question or of the accused's criminal purpose, or because of other factors precluding the mental state required for the commission of the offense; or 
(2)  The other person has not been prosecuted for or convicted of any offense based on the conduct in question, or has previously been acquitted thereof, or has been convicted of a different offense or in a different degree, or has legal immunity from prosecution for the conduct in question. 
(Code 1975, § 12-78; Code 1995, § 74-90; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Secs. 74-101-74-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CURFEW 

Sec. 74-129. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means: 
(1)  12:01 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; and 
(2)  1:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Knowingly permit means the parent or other responsible adult and/or operator is aware of the fact the minor is in violation of the curfew hours or that the person, by exercise of reasonable care, would have known that the minor is in violation of the curfew hours. 
    Minor means any person under 18 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and retail establishments. 
    Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
    Responsible adult means any person having, assuming or charged with permanent and/or temporary care and/or custody of a minor, including, but not limited to, any: 
(1)  Legal guardian or adult exercising legal guardianship over a minor. 
(2)  Adult who stands in loco parentis to a minor. 
(3)  Any person to whom legal custody of a minor has been given by order of a court. 
(4)  Adult who has, assumes or is charged with the care and/or custody of a minor at the request of or on behalf of a parent, guardian, loco parentis or person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1995, § 74-111; Ord. No. 901, art. 1, § 12-21(A), 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 74-130. - Penalty for violation. 
    A person who violates this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable as provided in this Code. The court may prescribe community service work in lieu of a fine and costs. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1995, § 74-117; Ord. No. 901, art. 1, § 12-21(G), 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 74-131. - Commission of offense. 
    A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1995, § 74-112; Ord. No. 901, art. 1, § 12-21(B), 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 74-132. - Responsibility of parent, guardian. 
    A parent and/or other responsible adult of a minor commits an offense if: 
(1)  He knowingly permits or allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; and 
(2)  The parent and/or other responsible adult of a minor has twice previously acted within any consecutive six-month period so as to knowingly permit or allow such minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. Every subsequent violation thereof will constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1995, § 74-113; Ord. No. 901, art. 1, § 12-21(C), 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 74-133. - Responsibility of establishment. 
    The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly permits or allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1995, § 74-114; Ord. No. 901, art. 1, § 12-21(D), 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 74-134. - Defenses to prosecution. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article if the minor in question was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or responsible adult; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or responsible adult, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending, going to or returning home, without any detour or stop, from an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults or an event sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly or other rights protected by the United States or the state Constitution; or 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1995, § 74-115; Ord. No. 901, art. 1, § 12-21(E), (F), 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 74-135. - Pre-arrest procedure. 
    Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in a public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that based on any response or circumstance, no defense under this article is present. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1995, § 74-116; Ord. No. 901, art. 1, § 12-21(G), 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 74-136. - Statutory punishment. 
    The municipal court's jurisdiction over a minor who violates this article shall be expressly subject to O.S. Title l0A, Children and Juvenile Code. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1995, § 74-118; Ord. No. 901, art. 1, § 12-21(H), 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 74-137. - Loitering on school property or in public building or depot. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be on or about the premises of a public or private school, or in or about any other public building, or in or about a depot of a public carrier without proper authorization from the owner or person in control thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 12-22; Code 1995, § 74-119) 
Secs. 74-138-74-157. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PREVENTION OF YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Prevention of Youth Access to Tobacco Act, 37 O.S. § 600.1 et seq. 

Sec. 74-158. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Deliver means the means or intent to transfer from one person to another. 
    Distribute means the means to deliver. 
    Person means any individual, firm, fiduciary, partnership, corporation, trust, or association, however formed. 
    Proof of age means a driver license, license for identification only, or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the individual as 18 years of age or older and contains a photograph or other likeness of the individual and appears on its face to be valid. 
    Sample means a tobacco product distributed to members of the public at no cost for the purpose of promoting the product. 
    Sampling means the distribution of samples to members of the public place. 
    Tobacco product means any type of product that contains tobacco. 
    Vapor product means noncombustible products, that may or may not contain nicotine, that employ a mechanical heating element, battery, electronic circuit, or other mechanism, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce a vapor in a solution or other form. The term "vapor product" shall include any vapor cartridge or other container with or without nicotine or other form that is intended to be used with an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and any vapor cartridge or other container of a solution, that may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo or electronic device. The term "vapor product" does not include any products regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
(Code 1995, § 74-141; Ord. No. 970, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.2. 
Sec. 74-159. - Unlawful to sell or furnish. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell or furnish in any manner any tobacco product or vapor product to another person who is under 18 years of age, or to purchase in any manner a tobacco product or vapor product on behalf of any such person. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under 18 years of age to handle tobacco products or vapor products when required in the performance of the employee's duties. 
(b)  A person engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products or vapor products shall demand proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient if an ordinary person would conclude on the basis of appearance that the prospective purchaser may be under 18 years of age. 
(c)  If an individual engaged in the sale or distribution of tobacco products or vapor products has demanded proof of age from a prospective purchaser or recipient who is not under 18 years of age, the failure to subsequently require proof of age shall not constitute a violation of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be guilty of an offense and assessed a fine of $100.00 for the first offense and assessed a fine of $200.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(e)  If the sale is made by an employee of a store at which tobacco products or vapor products are sold at retail, the employee shall be guilty of the violation and shall be subject to the fine and costs. If the sale is made by an employee that has previously been twice found to be in violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the owner of the store, if the owner knew of the employee's previous violations, shall also be found to be in violation and shall be subject to an identical fine. 
(f)  Upon failure of any individual to pay the fine and costs authorized by this section within 90 days of the day of the assessment of such fine, the city shall notify the state department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver license to the individual until proof of payment has been provided. 
(g)  For purposes of determining the liability of a person controlling franchises or business operations in multiple locations for any violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, each individual franchise or business location shall be deemed a separate entity. 
(Code 1995, § 74-142; Ord. No. 970, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 972, 2-4-1997; Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 2-3-1998; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.3. 
Sec. 74-160. - Unlawful to purchase, accept or possess. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person who is under 18 years of age to purchase, receive, or have in their possession a tobacco product or vapor product, or to present or offer to any person any purported proof of age which is false or fraudulent for the purpose of purchasing or receiving any tobacco product or vapor product. It shall not be unlawful for an employee under 18 years of age to handle tobacco products or vapor products when required in the performance of the employee's duties. 
(b)  When a person violates subsection (a) of this section, the city shall assess such person a fine of $100.00 for a first offense, and shall assess a fine of $200.00 for each subsequent offense within a one-year period following the first offense. Upon failure of an individual to pay such fine within 90 days of the day of such fine, the city shall notify the state department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver license to the individual until proof of payment has been provided. 
(Code 1995, § 74-143; Ord. No. 970, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 2-3-1998; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 10A O.S. § 2-8-224. 
Sec. 74-161. - Distribution of tobacco samples. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute tobacco products or vapor products to any person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, no person shall distribute tobacco product samples in or on any public street, sidewalk, or park that is within 300 feet of any playground, school, or other facility when the facility is being used primarily by persons under 18 years of age. 
(c)  When a person violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section, the city shall assess such person a fine of $100.00 for the first offense and shall assess a fine of $200.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(d)  Upon failure of any individual to pay any fine authorized by this section within 90 days of the assessment of such fine, the city shall notify the state department of public safety, as such department is authorized to suspend or not issue a driver license to the individual until proof of payment has been provided. 
(Code 1995, § 74-144; Ord. No. 970, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 1007, § 1, 2-3-1998; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.8. 
Sec. 74-162. - Sale of cigarettes in original package. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes except in the original, sealed package in which they were placed by the manufacturer. 
(b)  When a person violates subsection (a) of this section, the city shall assess such person a fine in accordance with section 1-7 or as established by city ordinance. 
(Code 1995, § 74-145; Ord. No. 970, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 1313, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 37 O.S. § 600.9. 
Secs. 74-163-74-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN PUBLIC PLACES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Smoking in Public Places and Indoor Workplaces Act, 63 O.S. § 1521 et seq. 

Sec. 74-193. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Electronic smoking device means an electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. The term "electronic smoking device" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. 
    Indoor workplace means any indoor place of employment or employment-type service for or at the request of another individual, or any public or private entity, whether part-time or full-time and whether for compensation or not. Such services shall include, without limitation, any service performed by an owner, employee, independent contractor, agent, partner, proprietor, manager, officer, director, apprentice, trainee, associate, servant or volunteer. The term "indoor workplace" includes work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, any other spaces used or visited by employees, and all space between a floor and ceiling that is predominantly or totally enclosed by walls or windows, regardless of doors, doorways, open or closed windows, stairways, or the like. The provisions of this section hall apply to such indoor workplace at any given time, whether or not work is being performed. 
    Outdoor area means any covered area, partially covered area or area open to the sky that is on a property owned by the city. 
    Public place means any enclosed indoor area where individuals other than employees are invited or permitted. The term "public place" is synonymous with the phrase "any indoor place used by or open to the public." 
    Recreational area means any area that is owned, controlled or used by the city and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes, but is not limited to, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, and skateboard parks. 
    Restaurant means any eating establishment regardless of seating capacity. 
    Smoking means the carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted smoking device. 
    Stand-alone bar, stand-alone tavern, and cigar bar mean an establishment that derives more than 60 percent of its gross receipts, subject to verification by a competent authority, from the sale of alcoholic beverages and low-point beer, and no person under 21 years of age is admitted, except for members of a musical band employed or hired as provided in 37 O.S. § 537(B)(2), and that is not located within, and does not share any common entryway or common indoor area with, any other enclosed indoor workplace, including a restaurant. 
    Tobacco product means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body. The term "tobacco product" does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. 
(Code 1995, § 74-171; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 1-1522. 
Sec. 74-194. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person who knowingly violates this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00, plus applicable court costs. 
(Code 1995, § 74-176; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 74-195. - Enforcement. 
    The state or local governmental agency or the person who owns or operates a public place shall, at a minimum, do the following in order to prevent smoking in public places: 
(1)  Post signs at entrances to places where smoking is prohibited which state that smoking is prohibited or that the indoor environment is free of tobacco smoke; and 
(2)  Ask smokers to refrain from smoking upon observation of anyone violating the provisions of this act. 
(Code 1995, § 74-177; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 74-196. - Exemptions. 
    The restrictions provided in section 74-197 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Stand-alone bars, stand-alone taverns and cigar bars; 
(2)  The room or rooms where licensed charitable bingo games are being operated, but only during the hours of operation of such games; 
(3)  Up to 25 percent of the guest rooms at a hotel or other lodging establishment; 
(4)  Retail tobacco stores predominantly engaged in the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental and in which no food or beverage is sold or served for consumption on the premises; 
(5)  Workplaces where only the owner or operator of the workplace, or the immediate family of the owner or operator, performs any work in the workplace, and the workplace has only incidental public access. The term "incidental public access" means that a place of business has only an occasional person, who is not an employee, present at the business to transact business or make a delivery. The term "incidental public access" does not include businesses that depend on walk-in customers for any part of their business; 
(6)  Workplaces occupied exclusively by one or more smokers, if the workplace has only incidental public access; 
(7)  Private offices occupied exclusively by one or more smokers; 
(8)  Private residences and workplaces within private residences, except that smoking shall not be allowed inside any private residence that is used as a licensed child care facility during hours of operation; 
(9)  Medical research or treatment centers, if smoking is integral to the research or treatment; 
(10)  A facility operated by a post or organization of past or present members of the Armed Forces of the United States which is exempt from taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 USC § 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19), when such facility is utilized exclusively by its members and their families and for the conduct of post or organization nonprofit operations, except during an event or activity which is open to the public; and 
(11)  Any outdoor seating area of a restaurant; provided, smoking shall not be allowed within 15 feet of any exterior public doorway or any air intake of a restaurant. 
(Code 1995, § 74-173; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 1-1523. 
Sec. 74-197. - Prohibition of tobacco products and electronic smoking in certain places. 
(a)  The possession of lighted tobacco in any form is a public nuisance and dangerous to public health and is hereby prohibited when such possession is in any indoor place used by or open to the public, public transportation, or any indoor workplace, except where specifically allowed by law. 
(b)  All buildings, or portions thereof, including indoor and outdoor areas, owned or operated by this city, shall be entirely tobacco-free to include all forms of tobacco products, including electronic smoking devices. 
(c)  All indoor and outdoor recreational areas owned or operated by the city shall be entirely tobacco-free to include all forms of tobacco products including electronic smoking devices. 
(Code 1995, § 74-172; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 1-1523. 
Sec. 74-198. - Designated smoking rooms and areas. 
(a)  An employer not otherwise restricted from doing so under this article may elect to provide smoking rooms where no work is performed except for cleaning and maintenance during the time the room is not in use for smoking, provided each smoking room is fully enclosed and exhausted directly to the outside in such a manner that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area. No exhaust from a smoking room shall be located within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. 
(b)  If smoking is to be permitted in any space exempted in this article or in a smoking room pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, such smoking space must either occupy the entire enclosed indoor space or, if it shares the enclosed space with any nonsmoking areas, the smoking space shall be fully enclosed, exhausted directly to the outside with no air from the smoking space circulated to any nonsmoking area, and under negative air pressure so that no smoke can drift or circulate into a nonsmoking area when a door to an adjacent nonsmoking area is opened. Air from a smoking room shall not be exhausted within 15 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. Any employer may choose a more restrictive smoking policy, including being totally smoke-free. 
(c)  A nursing facility licensed pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act (63 O.S. § 1-1900 et seq.) may designate smoking rooms for residents and their guests. Such rooms shall be fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, and shall be under negative air pressure so that no smoke can escape when a door is opened and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building. 
(d)  Restaurants shall be totally nonsmoking or may provide nonsmoking areas and designated smoking rooms. Food and beverage may be served in such designated smoking rooms which shall be in a location which is fully enclosed, directly exhausted to the outside, under negative air pressure so smoke cannot escape when a door is opened, and no air is recirculated to nonsmoking areas of the building. No exhaust from such room shall be located within 25 feet of any entrance, exit or air intake. Such room shall be subject to verification for compliance with the provisions of this subsection by the state department of health. 
(Code 1995, § 74-174; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 63 O.S. § 1-1522. 
Sec. 74-199. - Posting. 
(a)  The person who owns or operates a place where smoking or tobacco use is prohibited by law shall be responsible for posting a sign or decal, at least four inches by two inches in size, at each entrance to the building indicating that the place is smoke-free or tobacco-free. 
(b)  Responsibility for posting signs or decals shall be as follows: 
(1)  In privately owned facilities, the owner or lessee, if a lessee is in possession of the facilities, shall be responsible; 
(2)  In corporately owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the facility involved shall be responsible; and 
(3)  In publicly owned facilities, the manager and/or supervisor of the facility shall be responsible. 
(Code 1995, § 74-175; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 6-17-2014) 
Chapter 78 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish and maintain parks, playgrounds and other recreation facilities, 11 O.S. § 33-103; parks and recreation generally, 11 O.S. § 33-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Department of parks and recreation-Established. 
    There is hereby established a department of parks and recreation, the head of which shall be the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1975, § 16-1; Code 1995, § 78-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Same-General duties. 
    The department of parks and recreation shall maintain and operate the community center and all parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and other recreational facilities and programs operated by the city, and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by the city council or the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 16-2; Code 1995, § 78-2) 
Sec. 78-3. - Park lakes-Swimming and wading prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or wade in any lake or other body of water in a city park, except a swimming pool constructed and maintained for such purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 16-3; Code 1995, § 78-3) 
Sec. 78-4. - Same-Boats and rafts prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or place any boat, canoe or raft in or upon any lake or other body of water in any city park. 
(Code 1975, § 16-4; Code 1995, § 78-4) 
Sec. 78-5. - Park rules; penalty for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, engage in, conduct, or authorize any of the following activities in a city park or city facility, without the prior express written approval of the city: 
(1)  Disturb or harm any animal or fish, or disturb or destroy the nest of any bird, or disturb or destroy the den or nest or abode of any animal in any city park, provided, however, that fish may be taken for noncommercial purposes in accordance with state fishing laws. No person shall use a spear or bow and arrow in the course of such fishing activities; 
(2)  Injure, damage, destroy, disturb, or remove any flora (plants) or fauna (animals) in a city park, or disturb or remove any surface or subsurface materials; 
(3)  Deface, damage, destroy, disturb or remove any building, structure, sign, improvement, or facility in a city park; 
(4)  Solicit or sell any goods, wares, or merchandise of any nature whatsoever in a city park or facility, without the express written approval of the city; 
(5)  Build a fire, except in designated areas; 
(6)  Allow or permit an animal to enter or remain in a swimming pool, or the fenced area immediately around a swimming pool; 
(7)  Possess or carry a bow and/or arrow, an air or gas weapon, or other dangerous or deadly instrument; 
(8)  Enter or remain in any park or park facility in violation of the posted closing time; 
(9)  Operate a motor vehicle in any park area, except upon a parking lot or upon a roadway, clearly distinguished as such; 
(10)  Stop, stand/or park a vehicle in a park, except in parking lots or parking areas clearly marked as such; 
(11)  Stop, stand/or park a vehicle in a parking lot or parking area for a city park, except while utilizing the park or park facilities. In no event shall a parking lot or parking area for a park be utilized for private or residential parking; 
(12)  Ride, permit or allow a horse or other livestock to enter or remain in a city park; or 
(13)  Camp in any city park. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(c)  In addition to the punishment as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, any person who is found guilty of violating this section may be denied access to or the use of all park facilities and activities. 
(Code 1975, § 16-5; Code 1995, § 78-5) 
Secs. 78-6-78-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK BOARD 

Sec. 78-29. - Established; composition; appointment, terms and removal of members. 
(a)  The park board shall, from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived, consist of five members nominated and confirmed as provided in section 2-327. Each appointed member of the park board shall serve a term of office as provided for in section 2-327. 
(b)  The city manager shall be an ex officio member of the park board, but shall have no vote. 
(c)  The mayor, with the approval of the city council, may remove a member at any time. 
(Code 1975, § 16-15; Code 1995, § 78-26) 
Sec. 78-30. - Members not compensated. 
    Members of the park board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1975, § 16-16; Code 1995, § 78-27) 
Sec. 78-31. - Election of officers. 
    Every year, at the time prescribed for the beginning of the term of a new member or members of the park board, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the park board shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the board. 
(Code 1975, § 16-17; Code 1995, § 78-28) 
Sec. 78-32. - Meetings. 
    The park board shall determine the time and place of its regular meetings. The chairperson or any three members may call special meetings of the board. 
(Code 1975, § 16-18; Code 1995, § 78-29) 
Sec. 78-33. - Powers. 
(a)  The park board shall have power to make rules and regulations relating to the administration and operation of all parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and other recreational facilities and programs operated by the city, subject to the approval of the city council and any ordinances which the council may enact. 
(b)  The park board shall also have power to consider any matter relating to parks and other recreational facilities and programs, and to make proper recommendations thereon to the council, the city manager, the head of the administrative department in charge of such matters, or to others, as it deems appropriate. 
(Code 1975, § 16-19; Code 1995, § 78-30) 
Chapter 82 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Transient Merchant Licensing Act, 19 O.S. § 1601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Defined. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the term "solicitor" shall mean and include any person not having a fixed or established place of business in the city, and not representing any person, firm, partnership or corporation having a permanent established place of business in the city, who shall peddle, canvass or solicit from house to house, or upon any street or public place, for any money, goods, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals or other things of value. 
(Code 1995, § 82-1; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-2. - Exemptions from chapter. 
    This chapter shall not apply to persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such property, nor to the sale or delivery of newspapers, nor to persons who offer for sale or sell, or who peddle and sell from house to house, vegetables, butter, eggs and farm products produced and raised on lands owned or controlled by them. 
(Code 1995, § 82-4; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-3. - Hours of permitted soliciting; hours for application. 
    No solicitor, whether registered under this chapter or not, shall take orders for or sell any goods, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals or other things of value except during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Applications for a solicitor's registration card shall be made only between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(Code 1995, § 82-2; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-4. - Orders to be in duplicate, etc. 
    All orders taken by solicitors wherein payment or deposit is made in advance of delivery shall be in writing in duplicate, stating the terms thereof, and the amount paid in advance. One copy shall be given to the purchaser. 
(Code 1995, § 82-3; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-5. - Soliciting in roadway and public right-of-way prohibited; exceptions. 
    Soliciting in roadways and public rights-of-way is prohibited, provided, however, the city police department may issue a special permit for soliciting in roadways and public rights-of-way upon written application, and further provided that proper safety devices and measures be implemented as directed in the special permit. 
(Code 1995, § 82-5; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Secs. 82-6-82-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION CARD 

Sec. 82-29. - Required. 
    No solicitor shall peddle, canvass or solicit for money or peddle, canvass, solicit or sell any goods, wares, merchandise, services, magazines, periodicals or other things of value within the city without having first applied for and obtained a solicitor's registration card, for that purpose, from the police chief or his designee. The registration card must be kept on the person of the solicitor, on display and visible at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 82-15; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-30. - Application; applicant's photograph and fingerprints. 
    An applicant for a solicitor's registration card under the terms of this article shall be required to: 
(1)  Complete a registration form provided by the police department, which shall show the name of the person, firm or corporation on whose behalf the applicant proposes to solicit; the address of said person, firm or corporation; the kind of products, merchandise or service to be solicited; and any other pertinent facts as required to provide the police department with sufficient information to investigate the application. 
(2)  File a photograph and fingerprints with the police department. 
(3)  No license shall be issued under this article to any person under the age of 16 years except those persons and/organizations exempted under subsection 82-59(1). 
(4)  No license shall be issued less than three business days after a complete application is received. 
(Code 1995, § 82-16; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-31. - Applicant's bond. 
    Every applicant for a registration card required by this article, who shall require, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery of any goods, wares, or merchandise, shall file a surety bond, in the amount of $500.00, conditioned upon making final delivery of the goods ordered in accordance with the terms of such order, or failing therein, that the advance payment be refunded. Any person aggrieved by the action of the solicitor shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of the money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 60 days after the expiration of any registration card issued under this article, unless sooner released by the city manager. 
(Code 1995, § 82-17; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-32. - Fee. 
(a)  A registration fee is hereby levied for the purpose of defraying the cost of registration on each person applying for registration with the police department as a solicitor. Such fee shall be as established by resolution. 
(b)  Any veteran who qualifies under 72 O.S. § 5 and those persons representing charitable associations or groups which have tax-exempt status shall be exempt from the payment of any registration fee under this section. 
(Code 1995, § 82-18; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-33. - Issuance or denial. 
    The police chief or his designee is hereby authorized to issue a solicitor's registration card in all proper cases and when the applicant has complied with this article. Registration may be denied any applicant for a solicitor's registration card, if he is not of good moral character; if he has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has such criminal charges pending; or if the proposed sales proposition shall include some element of trickery, fraud or deceit, in which case in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the applicant shall not be registered. Any person aggrieved by the action of the police chief or his designee may appeal to the city council, and may appeal from the city council to the district court of the county in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1995, § 82-19; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-34. - Revocation. 
    Upon good cause, any registration card issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked. Revocation may be based upon the following, among other causes: 
(1)  Information received after the permit is issued; 
(2)  Violation of any federal, state or municipal law, rule or regulation; or 
(3)  Complaints by citizens. 
(Code 1995, § 82-20; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Secs. 82-35-82-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENTERING POSTED PREMISES 

Sec. 82-57. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context otherwise requires. 
    Peddlers means any persons who go from house to house, place to place, or street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise, or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales or delivering articles to the purchasers. 
    Solicitors means any persons who go from house to house, place to place, or street to street, soliciting anything of value, sales or taking orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise (including magazines, books, periodicals, realty, or tangible or intangible personal property of any nature, including insurance) and such orders for future delivery or for service to be performed in the future, irrespective of such persons having, carrying or exposing for sale a sample of the subject of such order, and irrespective of such persons collecting or not collecting advance payments on such orders. 
(Code 1995, § 82-25; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-58. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 82-28; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-59. - Exemptions. 
    Persons exempt from the provisions of this article are: 
(1)  Those persons representing charitable associations or groups which have tax-exempt status. 
(2)  Those peddlers or solicitors invited on the premises by the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1995, § 82-27; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 82-60. - Invitation required to enter on posted premises. 
    No peddler or solicitor shall enter on any premises or attempt to peddle or solicit where the owner or occupant of such premises has indicated his desire not to be contacted for sales or solicitations by the placing of a "No Solicitors" sign on the premises, and such entrance or attempt to peddle or solicit shall constitute a trespass upon private property. 
(Code 1995, § 82-26; Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Chapter 86 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIREFIGHTER AND POLICE OFFICER RETIREMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Firefighter retirement, 11 O.S. § 49-100.1 et seq.; police retirement, 11 O.S. § 50-101 et seq. 

Sec. 86-19. - To be operated in accordance with state law. 
    The police pension and retirement system and the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund shall be operated in accordance with state law relating to the fund, and pensions and other benefits shall be paid as provided by state law. 
(Code 1975, § 17-12; Code 1995, § 86-26) 
Sec. 86-20. - Board of trustees, Firemen's Fund. 
    There is hereby created a board of trustees of the Firemen's Relief and Pension Fund of the city, with membership, organization, powers, duties and functions as prescribed by 11 O.S. § 49-103 et seq., and as may be provided by any later laws passed by the legislature relating to such board. 
(Code 1975, § 17-11; Code 1995, § 86-27) 
Chapter 90 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act, 27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq.; municipal solid waste management systems, 27A O.S. § 2-10-901 et seq. 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Rubbish means solid and/ordinary waste, other than garbage, accumulated by family residents, including glass and broken wire, discarded clothing, trash, tin cans, bottles, papers and tree limbs, and grass and weed cuttings properly contained or bundled as prescribed in this chapter. 
    Solid waste means all putrescible and nonputrescible refuse in solid or semisolid form including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes or incinerator residue, street refuse, dead animals, demolition wastes, construction wastes, solid or semisolid commercial and industrial wastes including explosives, biomedical wastes, chemical wastes, herbicide and pesticide wastes. The term "solid waste" shall not include: 
(1)  Scrap materials which are source separated for collection and processing as industrial raw materials, except when contained in the waste collected by or in behalf of a solid waste management system; or 
(2)  Used motor oil, which shall not be considered to be a solid waste, but shall be considered a deleterious substance, if the used motor oil is recycled for energy reclamation and is ultimately destroyed when recycled. 
(Code 1975, § 10-1; Code 1995, § 98-1) 
Sec. 90-2. - Duty to request and use city's collection service. 
    To assist in maintaining the general sanitation and health of the city, it shall be the duty of every person occupying or having control of the occupancy of any premises located on a regularly established solid waste route to notify the city clerk at the beginning of such occupancy and request, accept and use the solid waste pickup and collection service; provided, however, that failure of any owner, rental agent or occupant of such premises to make such request shall not prevent or in any way impair or impede the department of public works from adding the address of such premises to the proper collection route records and providing such service and otherwise enforcing by appropriate action the regulatory measures prescribed in this chapter and causing the fees or charges therefor to be paid. 
(Code 1975, § 10-2; Code 1995, § 98-2) 
Sec. 90-3. - Private hauling of garbage and rubbish prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not under contract with the city to haul any solid waste over the city streets; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude a person from removing rubbish from his own premises, at his own expense, and hauling the same over city streets, provided it is done in a neat and sanitary manner. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, any private commercial hauler of solid waste may provide disposal services and may haul solid waste over city streets for commercial or other miscellaneous establishments utilizing or requiring garbage service for the disposal of more than 300 cubic yards of solid waste per month; provided, however: 
(1)  That any business hauling or disposing of solid waste pursuant to this section shall be required to pay to the city a business or occupational license tax in the amount of $100.00 per year, per pickup location. This tax shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 18. 
(2)  That the commercial or other miscellaneous user request in writing that it be allowed to use the services of a private hauler. 
(Code 1975, § 10-3; Code 1995, § 98-3; Ord. No. 1243, § 1, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1251, § 1, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 1288, § 1, 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 90-4. - Littering prohibited; general container requirements. 
(a)  No person shall throw, sweep, deposit or place any solid waste in any alley, street or other public place within the city, nor shall any person deposit or place it upon private property, whether owned by such person or not, within the limits of the city, unless the same is enclosed in a suitable container. 
(b)  Containers referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be 90-gallon plastic carts or one-, two-, or three-yard dumpsters on wheels. Such carts or dumpsters, and the grounds immediately around the same will be kept in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)  One plastic cart will be furnished to each residence and to each small business establishment having a low enough volume of solid waste that it can be accommodated in one 90-gallon cart. 
(d)  Any resident or business establishment may purchase additional carts at the cost of such carts to the city. 
(Code 1975, § 10-4; Code 1995, § 98-4) 
State Law reference- Littering prohibited, 21 O.S. §§ 1753.3, 1761.1. 
Sec. 90-5. - Placement of carts for collection. 
(a)  By 6:00 a.m. on the day of pickup, the 90-gallon plastic carts shall be placed in the street right-of-way adjacent to the curb or edge of the street surface whereby collectors can obtain same without going on to private property. The business establishments providing carts or dumpsters may place carts or dumpsters in the rear of the establishment near the alley right-of-way, providing availability of alley access is maintained. 
(b)  Carts shall be removed from the street right-of-way and returned to a location behind the front building line of the residence within 24 hours after the cart has been emptied by the collectors. Residents will be furnished once a week pickup. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Code 1995, § 98-5) 
Sec. 90-6. - Responsibility for repair of carts. 
    The city shall be responsible for all normal wear and tear upon carts provided for by this chapter, but any damage done through neglect or omission of the resident shall be repaired by the city and the cost of such repair shall be added to the next bill. Failure of the resident to promptly pay for such repair shall give the city the right to terminate water and solid waste service to the resident. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5.1; Code 1995, § 98-6) 
Sec. 90-7. - Vandalism or damage to carts; punishment. 
    The vandalism or damage done to a cart by a party not the resident (third party) is declared to be a misdemeanor punishable in the municipal court and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5.2; Code 1995, § 98-7) 
Sec. 90-8. - Return of carts upon termination of service; replacement of carts with dumpster. 
(a)  Upon a resident or businessman terminating his solid waste service, the resident or businessman will account for the cart provided by the city and return the same in good and working condition, normal wear and tear excepted, and the failure to return such cart shall result in the total value of the cart being charged against the resident or businessman on his final bill. 
(b)  Any businessman who has purchased additional carts and wishes to purchase a dumpster to replace the carts may trade in the carts upon purchase of a dumpster. Allowance for value of carts shall be based on condition of the carts as determined by the sanitation superintendent. In no case will such value exceed the original cost of the carts. 
(c)  Repair and maintenance of dumpsters. The owner of a dumpster who is also a utility customer of the city may request, in writing, that the city be responsible for the repair, maintenance, cleaning, painting and rehabilitation of the dumpster upon terms and conditions as determined by the director of public works. The city may accept or reject the request. If the request is accepted, services shall be provided at least quarter annually and more often if necessary. The cost of the service shall be determined by the director of public works each fiscal year. The cost of the service shall be included in the owner's utility bill. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5.3; Code 1995, § 98-8; Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 10-6-2009) 
Sec. 90-9. - Placement of substances deleterious to carts prohibited. 
    No substances which are deleterious to the plastic cart shall be placed in them and if such cart is damaged by a substance placed therein, the expense of repair will be charged to the resident in accordance with section 90-6. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5.4; Code 1995, § 98-9) 
Sec. 90-10. - Preparation of limbs, grass cuttings, etc., for collection. 
(a)  Tree limbs and cuttings will be picked up by the city or its contractors if tied in bundles in lengths not to exceed four feet and not to exceed 50 pounds in weight and placed at the curb, alley or regular pickup station. Grass and weed cuttings shall be placed in the cart or in plastic bags, placed at the curb, alley or regular pickup station and picked up, if not over 50 pounds in weight. 
(b)  Plastic, metal or paper containers other than carts or dumpsters will not be emptied and returned to the curb, alley or regular pickup station. 
(c)  Ashes may be picked up if put in tied bags and placed in carts or dumpsters 24 hours prior to regular pickup day. 
(Code 1975, § 10-6; Code 1995, § 98-10) 
Sec. 90-11. - Collection charges. 
(a)  The sanitary department is hereby authorized to inspect the premises, collect and remove solid waste from the owner or occupant of any premises in the city. 
(b)  There are hereby levied the following charges to be collected from the owner occupying any premises, or occupant, or one in possession or control of the premises located on an established route within the city, for the removal and disposition of solid waste, to be paid monthly to the city clerk; the same to be paid by the 15th day of the month following the month for which the service was rendered: 
(1)  For each single-family residence, $18.79 per month; provided, however, that each single-family residence using 3,000 gallons of water or less per billing period shall pay $5.46 per month for each living unit in such dwelling or trailer park. 
(2)  Multiple dwellings and trailer parks using dumpsters approved by the city manager for the deposit of solid waste shall pay $17.44 per month for each living unit in such dwelling or trailer park. 
(3)  Multiple dwellings and trailer parks not using dumpsters approved by the city manager for the deposit of solid waste shall pay $18.79 per month for each living unit in such dwelling or trailer park. 
(4)  There shall be minimum charge of $18.79 for all residential, commercial and other miscellaneous establishments unless specifically provided for herein. 
(5)  Commercial and other miscellaneous establishments shall pay at the following rates: 
95 GAL CARTS 2 YARD 4 YARD 6 YARD 8 YARD Frequency 
Per Week First 
Dumpster Additional 
Dumpster First 
Dumpster Additional 
Dumpster First 
Dumpster Additional 
Dumpster First 
Dumpster Additional 
Dumpster First 
Dumpster Additional 
Dumpster 1 20.47 17.40 48.38 43.19 75.54 61.00 97.59 81.40 131.58 109.76 2 25.99 20.81 66.02 50.01 111.36 102.24 159.45 138.97 208.16 181.42 3 31.65 23.74 83.45 57.15 145.49 115.12 201.65 161.30 255.18 204.13 4 40.06 28.04 105.18 65.65 177.55 135.96 243.56 183.70 307.63 232.34 5 50.40 33.40 126.12 73.18 206.50 154.44 280.86 200.63 355.50 253.95 6 65.01 39.01 162.34 87.91 259.30 192.43 352.50 241.98 446.30 306.40  
(c)  Upon a citizen's request the city shall provide a curbside pickup at the rate of $25.00 for four cubic feet. Additional charges for a curbside pickup in excess of four cubic feet shall apply. 
(Code 1975, § 10-7; Code 1995, § 98-11; Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 8-4-1998; Ord. No. 1118, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 1212, § 1, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 1278, § 1, 10-21-2012; Ord. No. 1368 , § 1, 10-16-2018; Ord. No. 1372 , § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 90-12. - Deferred payment. 
    A deferred utility payment plan shall be made available to all customers with an outstanding delinquent balance in water, sewer and sanitation services; such plan shall not be made available more than two times in any calendar year between January 1 and December 31. A fee of $10.00 will be added to the customer's bill for the first-time failure to pay any deferred utility payment pursuant to the agreed plan. An additional fee of $20.00 will be added pursuant to the agreed plan for each subsequent failure to pay. 
(Code 1975, § 26-9(c); Code 1995, § 98-12; Ord. No. 1182, § 1, 11-1-2005) 
State Law reference- Authority to collect charges for collection and disposal of solid waste, 27A O.S. § 2-10-901(B). 
Sec. 90-13. - County solid waste fee. 
    Beginning on September 1, 1990, the city shall collect a monthly county solid waste fee in the amount of $0.25 from each customer of the city's solid waste disposal service. The fee shall be listed on the city's water, sewer and solid waste bill each month and shall be in addition to the normal solid waste collection fee. 
(Code 1975, § 10-7.1; Code 1995, § 98-13; Ord. No. 933, 1-2-1996) 
Sec. 90-14. - Disposal generally. 
(a)  All disposal of solid waste shall be by an approved method of incineration or by sanitary landfill and cover, such method and sites to be approved by the city council and the state department of health. 
(b)  Pursuant to the agreement with the City of Oklahoma City, household hazardous waste (HHW) may be delivered by the customer to the Oklahoma City HHW collection facility at Southwest 15th Street and Portland Avenue. Customers must provide proof of Yukon residency in the form of a valid driver's license and current Yukon utility statement. Charges for the disposal of HHW are as follows and will be billed by Oklahoma City to the City of Yukon, which will bill the customer through the standard utility billing process. All nonliquid HHW products will be converted through the use of an equivalent rate unit (ERU) measurement scale: 
< = 7.5 gallons 0.5 ERU $ 39.50 > 7.5 gallons to 15 gallons 1.0 ERU $79.00 > 15 gallons to 22.5 gallons 1.5 ERU $118.50 > 22.5 gallons 2.0 ERU $158.00  
Note: Minimum charge per vehicle per arrival = 0.5 ERU. Maximum charge per vehicle per arrival = 2.0 ERU. 
(Code 1975, § 10-8; Code 1995, § 98-14; Ord. No. 1204, § 1, 2-6-2007) 
Sec. 90-15. - Burying prohibited. 
    No solid waste shall be buried within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 10-9; Code 1995, § 98-15) 
Sec. 90-16. - Dumping prohibited. 
    No solid waste shall be dumped within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 10-10; Code 1995, § 98-16) 
Sec. 90-17. - Garbage disposal units required for dwellings. 
    Every kitchen facility in a residential building or dwelling unit constructed after October 20, 1970, and located within an area served by the city's garbage collection service shall be equipped with a proper and efficient kitchen garbage disposal unit to grind up food wastes and wash the same into the city sewerage system, or into a septic tank if the dwelling is not serviced by the city sewerage system. The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 10-11; Code 1995, § 98-17) 
Sec. 90-18. - Maintenance of compost piles or pits. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance of compost piles or pits for the storage and disposition of vegetable matter consisting of grass cuttings, leaves and items of like nature, so long as such piles or pits are maintained in a satisfactory and sanitary manner and do not become a public nuisance by causing the emission therefrom of obnoxious odors. 
(Code 1975, § 10-12; Code 1995, § 98-18) 
Sec. 90-19. - Use of city transfer stations. 
(a)  Availability. Subject to the provisions of this section, the transfer station of the city shall be available for the disposal of household and yard trash and rubbish by persons residing within the city one time each calendar month at no charge. The amount of household, yard trash and rubbish is limited to no larger than a level pickup bed. All other haulers will be charged at the following rates and abide by the following restrictions: 
(1)  Items contained within a passenger automobile or within the level bed of a pickup truck, $10.00. 
(2)  Items contained within a 12-foot trailer, $25.00. (The charge set forth in subsection (1) of this section shall apply if the vehicle transporting the trailer also contains items for disposal.) 
(3)  Items contained within a trailer more than 12 feet and less than 18 feet in length, $45.00. 
(4)  Trailer charges will only apply to trailers with sides not exceeding one foot in height. 
(5)  All items that fall outside the listed parameters will be assessed at a rate of $8.50 per cubic yard. 
(6)  Tires will be accepted at a rate of $5.00 per tire for 16.5-inch and below, $10.00 for 17-inch to 19.5-inch, and $15.00 for 20-inch to 25-inch. Nothing larger than 25-inch tires will be accepted. No agricultural or off road tires will be accepted. 
(7)  Disclosed batteries will be accepted at a rate of $5.00 per battery. 
(8)  Liquids and radioactive, volatile, highly flammable, explosive or toxic materials will not be accepted. 
(b)  Proof of residency required for the once a month disposal at no charge. A resident may use the transfer station by presenting his driver's license and his current month Yukon municipal utility bill. The driver's license must match the address on the utility bill. Only household trash or rubbish may be disposed. No construction materials or commercial waste will be accepted. At all other times, regular rates and restrictions of the transfer station will be charged. 
(c)  When open. The transfer station will be open to the public for trash disposal from October 1 to March 31, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. and the first Saturday of each month, 8:00 a.m. through 2:00 p.m. From April 1 to September 30, the transfer station will be open Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. and Sunday, 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(d)  Annual adjustment of rates. The transfer station rates will be adjusted annually based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) for the southern region city average as published by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Labor Statistics and rounded up to the nearest $0.25. The CPI-U shall be as of the month of February of each and every year. The adjustment shall be effective July 1 of each year. 
(e)  Rules and procedures. Rules and procedures for the operation and management of the transfer station, with regards to the public, will be established and maintained by the state environmental management authority. Applicable rules will be posted on-site for the public. 
(Code 1975, § 10-13; Code 1995, § 98-19; Ord. No. 1059, § 1, 7-6-2000; Ord. No. 1064, § 1, 9-19-2000; Ord. No. 1083, § 1, 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 1085, § 1, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 1223, § 1, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 90-20. - Collection deposit. 
    Any person using the solid waste service of the city who has not made a deposit with the city clerk for water or sewage services shall deposit the sum of $40.00 as a solid waste collection deposit. 
(Code 1975, § 10-14; Code 1995, § 98-20) 
Sec. 90-21. - Special deposit fund; application to bill; refund. 
    At the time of making application for solid waste service with the city, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk the sum of $40.00. Such deposit will be carried in a special fund, and unless applied to the payment of a solid waste collection bill or any other sum due the city, shall be refunded by the city clerk to the depositor when the service is cancelled and discontinued. 
(Code 1975, § 10-15; Code 1995, § 98-21) 
Sec. 90-22. - Solid waste disposal facilities not owned, operated or managed by the City of Yukon. 
    Solid waste disposal facilities not owned, operated or managed by the City of Yukon shall be operated and managed to comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All operations conducted in connection with the facility shall occur within an area enclosed by walls and doors constructed in such a manner so as not to produce or emit noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odors, glare, toxic or noxious matter, heat, fire or explosive hazards. 
(2)  No solid waste, garbage or refuse shall be kept or maintained on the premises overnight. 
(3)  No hazardous materials shall be accepted by the facility except in strict compliance with local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1995, § 98-22; Ord. No. 1079, § 1, 5-15-2001) 
Sec. 90-23. - Rural collection of solid waste. 
(a)  All residents that live within the city limits of the City of Yukon and are designated as rural residents shall be entitled to once a week pickup of solid waste. 
(b)  All rural residents desiring to utilize the above service shall deposit with the city clerk a sum of $40.00. Such deposit shall be carried in a special fund, and unless applied to the payment of a solid waste collection bill or any other sum due the city shall be refunded by the city clerk to the depositor when the service is canceled or discontinued. 
(c)  Rural area residents are hereby charged the fee of $30.05 per month and any other fee imposed by ordinance, state or federal law, for collection services, to be paid by the 15th day of the month following the month for which the service was rendered. Late notices will be mailed to customers who have delinquent accounts on the 18th day of the month, or nearest business day, advising customers that they have until the 25th day of the month to pay their delinquent amount, plus a late fee. Customers who fail to pay by the 25th will be given notice to pay by a specified time and date. Failure to pay by the posted time will result in their solid waste collection service being terminated. The customer's garbage cart will be picked up if the bill remains unpaid, after service has been terminated. In case of extreme hardship, the parties responsible for paying the account may enter into a written agreement to pay the bill at a later date. If payment is not received when agreed, a notice will be served to the customer requesting payment by a specified time and date. If payment is not received, service will be terminated. 
(d)  Each rural resident desiring to utilize the above service will be provided one plastic cart. An additional card may be provided upon request. 
(e)  The cart should be placed at the road for pickup by 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection. Carts not set out by the designated time will be picked up on the next scheduled pick up day. 
(f)  Residents utilizing this service shall be entitled to dispose of solid waste delivered to the transfer station under the terms and conditions set forth in Section 90-19. 
(g)  Rural customers whose service is terminated for nonpayment are subject to applicable fees established in Section 114-68. 
(h)  An additional fee of $10.00 will be added to the customer's bill if their solid waste cart has been picked up by the city for the first service termination due to nonpayment. A $20.00 fee will be charged for each subsequent time the cart is removed thereafter. 
(i)  An additional fee of $25.00 will be added to the customer's bill if their solid waste dumpster is removed or secured from further use for the first time after service is terminated. A $50.00 fee will be added to the customer's bill for each subsequent time thereafter. 
(Code 1995, § 98-23; Ord. No. 1086, 8-7-2001; Ord. No. 1183, § 1, 11-1-2005; Ord. No. 1213, § 1, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 1369 , § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Chapter 94 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Obstructions and use for business purposes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or permit to be placed upon the sidewalks, parkways, streets and alleys of the city any goods, wares, articles or merchandise or any other obstruction, and leave the same thereon, or to use the same as a place to carry on a business or trade, without first obtaining permission in writing from the city manager so to do, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or obstruct the sidewalks of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with pedestrian traffic thereon, or to use or obstruct the streets and alleys of the city in any manner so as to interfere unduly with lawful traffic and parking thereon, without first obtaining permission in writing from the city manager so to do. 
(c)  Permission by the city manager to obstruct a street or sidewalk or carry on a business or trade upon a street or sidewalk as authorized by this section shall be by permit, and shall be granted on a temporary basis only for a period of time not to exceed three consecutive days for any individual permit. No person shall be granted more than four permits per calendar year, unless approved by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 22-8; Code 1995, § 102-2) 
Sec. 94-2. - Use for play. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play on the sidewalks or upon the main-traveled portion of the streets and alleys of the city, except as may be authorized by ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 22-9; Code 1995, § 102-3) 
Sec. 94-3. - Drainage of fluid, mud, etc., onto streets or sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a filling station or other place of business, or any agent or employee thereof, to cause or allow water, grease or other fluid to flow or drain into, upon, over or across any sidewalk, parking, street, alley or other public way. 
(b)  No automobile or other vehicle shall be washed at any place within the city where the water, dirt, mud or other substances removed therefrom by or during the washing thereof shall drain into or upon any street or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 22-10; Code 1995, § 102-4) 
Sec. 94-4. - Owners or occupants of abutting property not to permit sidewalks to become hazardous. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of property abutting upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area to permit the sidewalk or sidewalk area adjacent to the property to become a hazard to persons using the sidewalk or sidewalk area. 
(Code 1975, § 22-11; Code 1995, § 102-5) 
Sec. 94-5. - Duty of owners and occupants of abutting property to trim trees and shrubbery. 
(a)  The owner of any premises abutting on any street of this city shall trim all trees and shrubbery growing in the parking area or between the sidewalks and the roadway of such street, and all trees and shrubbery growing on any part of the premises adjacent to the sidewalks or any street or alley, in such manner that the boughs or limbs thereof shall not obstruct free and convenient passage and travel along the streets, sidewalks and alleys. When such premises are occupied by some person other than the owner, such occupant shall trim the trees and shrubbery in the same manner as hereinbefore required of the owner. Such trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches or foliage shall not be lower than ten feet above the roadway of a street or alley, nor lower than eight feet above the sidewalk. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant who shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim trees and shrubbery as provided in this section, after receiving five days' notice from the director of public works to do so, shall be guilty of an offense against the city. Every day that the owner or occupant shall fail, refuse or neglect to trim such trees or shrubbery, after the expiration of the five days' notice, shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 22-12; Code 1995, § 102-6) 
Sec. 94-6. - Obstructing drainage ditches along streets or alleys. 
    All persons are hereby prohibited from placing any obstruction in drainage ditches or drains along the streets and alleys of the city, and are prohibited from doing any act which will obstruct the flow of water along such ditches or drains. 
(Code 1975, § 22-13; Code 1995, § 102-7) 
Sec. 94-7. - Permit for street banners and street clocks. 
    No person shall erect or maintain over, across or above any public street, alley or other public place, any sign or banner for any purpose whatsoever, or install or maintain any street clock, without first obtaining permission in writing from the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 22-7; Code 1995, § 102-8) 
Sec. 94-8. - Paving contractor's bond. 
    All paving contractors and contractors who make storm sewer and drainage improvements and all appurtenances thereto shall be required to furnish a three-year maintenance bond to the city, or such additional bond as the city council may require. The first year of such bond shall be 100 percent coverage; the second year shall be a minimum of 25 percent coverage; and the final year shall be a minimum of 15 percent coverage. 
(Code 1975, § 22-3; Code 1995, § 102-9) 
Sec. 94-9. - Installation of water services prior to paving. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pave, or cause to be paved, any street, avenue, alley or other public way within the corporate limits of the city with Portland cement concrete, asphaltic concrete or any other permanent paving material, without first having installed in and under the street the necessary copper water services to serve each of the lots or building sites adjacent to the street or way. Such water services shall be installed in accordance with good engineering practices, and shall be approved by the city manager, the director of public works or such other officer or employee of the city as the city manager shall designate. 
(Code 1975, § 22-4; Code 1995, § 102-10) 
Secs. 94-10-94-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 94-37. - Construction or installation of sidewalk, wall, curb on street. 
(a)  Any person desiring to construct or install a sidewalk, retaining wall, curb and gutter, culvert, drain pipe, driveway approach or other structure on any street or other public area in the city shall submit a written application for a permit to the director of public works. The application shall include or be accompanied by plans and specifications or a description of the proposed structure adequate to enable the city officials to understand the proposal. 
(b)  The director of public works shall issue a permit applied for under this section, if he thinks that the proposed construction or installation meets proper standards, is justified and will not unduly endanger the public welfare. If the director refuses a permit, the applicant may appeal, within one month, to the council, and the director shall issue the permit if the council approves the application. The council's decision shall be final. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or install any structure on a street or other public area without a permit as required in this section, or to construct or install a structure thereon except as indicated by the plans and specifications or description submitted, or as approved by the council or the director of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 22-5; Code 1995, § 102-31) 
Sec. 94-38. - Street excavations. 
(a)  Any person desiring to make an opening or excavation in a public street, sidewalk or other public area of the city is required to make written application for a permit to do so to the director of public works. The application shall include or be accompanied by plans and specifications or a description of the proposed opening or excavation adequate to enable the city officials to understand the proposal. The director of public works shall issue a permit if he thinks the request reasonable and justified under the circumstances. If the director of public works refuses a permit, the applicant may appeal, within one month, to the council, and the director of public works shall issue the permit if the council approves the application. The council's decision shall be final. 
(b)  Before a permit is issued under this section, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk an amount of money estimated by the director of public works or the council to be adequate to compensate the city for restoring the street, sidewalk or other area properly, if the applicant fails to do so promptly. If the applicant restores the street, sidewalk or area promptly and properly, the amount deposited shall be returned to him; if not, the city shall retain as much of the amount deposited as is adequate to compensate the city for making the restoration. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make an opening or excavation in a street, sidewalk or other public area without a permit as required herein; or to make such an opening or excavation except as indicated by the plans and specifications or description submitted, or as approved by the council or the director of public works. 
(Code 1975, § 22-6; Code 1995, § 102-32) 
Sec. 94-39. - Curb cuts. 
(a)  Any person desiring to cut or remove a curbing is required to make written application for a permit submitting therewith the payment of $50.00 as application fee, to the city inspector. 
(b)  The city inspector shall issue a permit applied for under this section, if the proposed curb cut meets proper standards, is justified and will not unduly endanger the public welfare. If the inspector refuses a permit, the applicant may appeal within 30 days to the council, and the inspector shall issue a permit if the council approves the application. The council's decision shall be final. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or remove curbing without a permit as required in this section or by not having paid the required fee of $50.00. 
(d)  The cutting and removal of curbing and all other parts of the work in connection therewith shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city inspector and shall be done in compliance with the specifications prescribed by the inspector. 
(Code 1995, § 102-33; Ord. No. 956, 9-3-1996) 
Secs. 94-40-94-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 94-67. - Adoption of standard easement layouts for installation of underground utilities. 
(a)  Conformity with standards. After November 21, 1978, all underground utilities shall be installed in conformity with the standards adopted herein. If the city engineer determines such installation is not in conformity with these standards, he shall halt further installation until such installation conforms to these standards. 
(b)  Standards on file. The standards adopted herein shall be on file in the office of the city engineer for examination by the public. 
(c)  Twenty-foot residential easement layout. The standard 20-foot residential utility easement layout, on file in the office of the city engineer, is incorporated into this article with the same force and effect as if fully set out in this subsection. 
(d)  Perimeter residential easement layout. The standard perimeter residential utility easement layout, on file in the office of the city engineer, is incorporated into this article with the same force and effect as if fully set out in this subsection. 
(e)  Exemption. The specifications set forth in the aforementioned easement layouts shall not apply to cross-over easements between houses. 
(f)  Deviations. Property which is zoned commercial or industrial shall have any deviation from this section approved by the city engineer. 
(g)  Violation, penalty. Violation of this section is punishable as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 22-20; Code 1995, § 102-56) 
Sec. 94-68. - Application required prior to certain excavations or openings. 
    All persons or companies taking easements and/or laying pipelines or underground lines of any kind within the city, other than municipal or subdivision gas, electric, telephone, water and sewer lines, shall make written application to the building inspector prior to making any street or road opening or excavation. 
(Code 1975, § 22-21; Code 1995, § 102-57) 
Sec. 94-69. - Contents of application. 
    The application shall contain or have attached an easement reflecting the complete legal description and location of the line, so that it may be placed upon a map for future reference; the size of the line; a description of any substance to be carried by such line; the pressure of such line; the length of time the line will be used; and such additional information as required by the building inspector. 
(Code 1975, § 22-22; Code 1995, § 102-58) 
Sec. 94-70. - Fee for registration of underground lines. 
    A fee for registering each underground line is hereby set in the sum established by resolution and such fee is for the purpose of administratively handling the request and maintaining a record of such lines for future land use planning and for purposes of safeguarding the lines within such easement from encroachment by other users. Such fee shall not apply to franchise holders or utility companies paying a gross receipts fee to the city, but shall apply to their subcontractors. 
(Code 1975, § 22-23; Code 1995, § 102-59) 
Sec. 94-71. - Application required prior to tearing up or tunneling under rights-of-way, etc. 
    Any person desiring to tear up, tunnel under or open the pavement, curbing or road surface on any street, alley or driveway within the street right-of-way or public ground within the corporate limits of the city shall make written application to the building inspector for permission to do so before making any opening or excavation. The application and permit shall not apply to emergency work which is necessary for the health, welfare or safety of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 22-24; Code 1995, § 102-60) 
Sec. 94-72. - Contents of application. 
    The application under this article shall state dimensions, exact locations and additional information that the building inspector may require and shall be made on a form to be supplied by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 22-25; Code 1995, § 102-61) 
Sec. 94-73. - Fee for cutting, opening and tunneling. 
(a)  A fee for cutting, opening or tunneling a public right-of-way shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(b)  Such fee is for the purpose of administratively handling the request and assuring a proper backfill. Such fee shall not apply to franchise holders or utility companies paying a gross receipts fee to the city but shall apply to their subcontractors. 
(Code 1975, § 22-26; Code 1995, § 102-62; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 94-74. - Backfilling of cuts or excavations. 
    In all cases the cut or excavation must be backfilled to grade immediately and if not permanently repaired, temporarily patched. The permanent repair will be made at such time as the excavation backfill is stable. All work will be done in accordance with the established street standards of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 22-27; Code 1995, § 102-63) 
Sec. 94-75. - Bond required. 
(a)  Each applicant is required to file with the building inspector a two-year bond in the amount established by resolution. 
(b)  Such bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state and approved by the city council. The conditions of the bond shall provide that the principal shall pay promptly all charges or fees levied by city ordinance, and further that the principal will properly maintain for a period of two years all repair and backfill of any trenches excavated by the principal across or along any street in the city. The bond shall be further conditioned that if the principal shall fail to correct any and all settling in a manner satisfactory to the building inspector, then the building inspector shall have the settlement corrected in a proper manner at the expense of the principal. The bond shall be further conditioned that the principal shall indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all loss, costs, damage, expenses, action or cause of action, or liability of any kind, including reasonable attorney's fees, which the city may suffer or be required to pay or which may accrue against it or be recovered from the city by reason of loss, damage or injury incurred by any person by reason of any cutting, altering or excavating on any street in the city by the principal, his agents, servants or employees, or by reason of the neglect, failure or refusal of the principal, his agents, servants or employees to erect, place and maintain proper safety devices, crossing signals or barricades about such work during the process of constructing or repair. This bond shall not apply to franchise holders or utility companies paying a gross receipts fee to the city but shall apply to their subcontractors. 
(Code 1975, § 22-28; Code 1995, § 102-64; Ord. No. 1285, § 1, 1-2-2013) 
Sec. 94-76. - Relationship to existing provisions. 
    Section 94-39 shall govern curb cuts which do not involve opening or tunneling the road surface, and this article shall not apply to such activities. 
(Code 1975, § 22-29; Code 1995, § 102-65) 
Secs. 94-77-94-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 94-96. - Conformity required, modifications. 
    The construction, maintenance and testing of all paving within the city shall be in accordance with specifications prescribed by the city engineer, approved by the city council, and on file in the office of the city clerk. In addition, the following minimum standards are established for improving existing rural and urban streets. Whenever the application of the following minimum standards cannot be achieved, modifications of same shall be made only upon the certificate and approval of the city engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 22-2(a); Code 1995, § 102-86) 
Sec. 94-97. - Standard specifications for construction. 
(a)  There are hereby adopted by reference, as if fully set forth herein, sections 101-109, 201-241, 301-317, 401-425, 501-529, 601-642, 701-740, 801-880, 900-946, and 1000-1060 of the City of Yukon Standard Specifications for Construction, a copy of which shall be kept by the city clerk for sale or other distribution to the public. 
(b)  Interpretation of these specifications will be done in such a manner as to allow the contractor to control this project to the greatest degree possible in producing an end result product which is in all respects acceptable. These specifications should not, however, be interpreted in a manner which allows a contractor to produce an unacceptable product or endanger the public. An acceptable end result product is the essence of the contract. Only projects and substantial conformance to the plans and specifications will be accepted by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 102-86.5; Ord. No. 908, 5-2-1995) 
Sec. 94-98. - Local rural streets. 
    Rural streets are those streets outside the urbanized area shown in the city's comprehensive plan. Rural streets shall meet the minimum paving standards described below: 
(1)  The street shall have a double bituminous surface with a width of 24 feet. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum five-foot shoulder on each side of the street. 
(3)  The maximum slope allowed away from the shoulder shall be 3:1 with a minimum 18-inch bar ditch on each side. 
(4)  Under the double bituminous surface, there shall be a five-inch stabilized aggregate base. 
(5)  Under the aggregate base, there shall be at least a six-inch compacted subgrade. 
(6)  The pavement edge shall be striped on both sides. 
(7)  All base and subgrade areas shall be compacted to a minimum 95 percent Standard Proctor Density compaction. 
(Code 1975, § 22-2(b); Code 1995, § 102-87) 
Sec. 94-99. - Rural residential streets-Asphaltic concrete paving. 
    Rural residential streets are those streets located in rural subdivisions that are not located in the urbanized area as shown in the city's comprehensive plan. Rural residential streets are required to be paved with asphaltic concrete paving meeting the minimum paving standards described below: 
(1)  The street shall have a surface width of not less than 26 feet. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum 4-foot shoulder on each side of the street that is constructed of six inches of ODOT type "A" aggregate base. 
(3)  The maximum slope allowed away from the shoulder shall be 3:1 with a minimum 18-inch bar ditch on each side. Required bar ditches shall have sufficient capacity to manage and contain stormwater drainage. Drainage culverts shall be provided with sufficient capacity to convey stormwater runoff. The size of each drainage culvert shall be shown on the preliminary plat. 
(4)  Portland cement concrete header curbs shall be provided that are 12 inches wide and six inches in height above the eight-inch subgrade modification that extends four feet past the outside header curbs. The ODOT type "A" aggregate base shall have a geotechnical study performed by the owner/engineer to confirm what is required for the subgrade modification. 
(5)  Under the eight-inch subgrade modification base there shall be at least a six-inch compacted subgrade of 95 percent standard proctor density. 
(6)  The distance from the inside base of the header curbs shall be 24 feet. 
(7)  The top layer of asphaltic concrete shall consist of two inches of type B asphaltic concrete (PG 64-22 OK) and shall have a parabolic crown of 21/2 inches. 
(8)  Under type B asphaltic concrete there shall be four inches of type A asphaltic concrete (PG 64-22 OK). 
(9)  Between type A and type B asphaltic concrete there shall be a tack coat. 
(10)  Twelve-inch header curb shall have a number four reinforcing steel (GR 60) at 18 inches, center to center. Install expansion joints with number four by two-foot, six inches smooth dowel at 90-foot intervals with contraction joints at 15-foot intervals. 
(Code 1975, § 22-2(c); Code 1995, § 102-88; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 94-100. - Same-Concrete paving. 
    Urban concrete streets shall meet the minimum paving standards described as follows: 
(1)  Portland cement concrete curbs shall be provided that are 12 inches above the two-inch sand cushion. 
(2)  The top of the curbs shall be six inches in width. The distance from the inside base of the curbs to the outside edge shall be eight inches. 
(3)  The distance from the inside base of the curbs shall be 26 feet. 
(4)  The distance from the outside edge of the curbs shall be 27 feet, four inches. 
(5)  The distance from the inside base of the curbs to the top of the curbs shall be six inches. 
(6)  The paving thickness for the street shall be six inches. 
(7)  There shall be a two-inch sand cushion under the concrete paving. This sand cushion shall extend ten inches beyond the outside edge of the curbs. 
(8)  The street shall have a parabolic crown of 21/2 inches. 
(9)  There shall be a construction joint in the center of the street. In this construction joint, there shall be one-half-inch-diameter tie bars which are 30 inches on center. 
(10)  Two number six diameter smooth dowel bars that are 24 inches in length shall be placed across the curb expansion and contraction joints. All bars shall be coated with asphalt or grease. 
(Code 1975, § 22-2(d); Code 1995, § 102-89) 
Sec. 94-101. - Streets in mobile home and travel trailer parks. 
    All streets in mobile home and travel trailer parks shall conform to the paving specifications in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 22-2(e); Code 1995, § 102-90) 
Secs. 94-102-94-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES, STREET MEETINGS, AND CELEBRATIONS 

Sec. 94-131. - Permit for processions and parades. 
    No procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50 or more vehicles, except the military forces of the United States and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the person designated by the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 24-14; Code 1995, § 102-111) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate processions, 47 O.S. § 15-102(A)(3). 
Sec. 94-132. - Application for permit. 
    At least 48 hours before any person conducts a parade, street meeting or celebration on the streets, highways, bridges or alleys of the city, written application for a permit therefor shall be filed with the city manager, and the application shall be accompanied by a written statement giving the route, date and time of the parade, or location of the area to be occupied for the requested public meeting or celebration, and stating the nature and purpose thereof. If city personnel are necessary to assist in any listed function, application must be made 15 days prior to the beginning date. 
(Code 1975, § 12-81; Code 1995, § 102-112) 
Sec. 94-133. - Investigation. 
    The city manager shall, upon receipt of such application, make such investigation and inquiry as he deems necessary to determine whether any regular municipal service will be hampered, obstructed or delayed and the probable extent of extra policing, traffic-control or other protective service of the city reasonably occasioned thereby. If such interruption of municipal service or extent of extra service is found to be unreasonable or detrimental to the interest of the public, he shall endorse such findings on such application and decline to grant the same. 
(Code 1975, § 12-82; Code 1995, § 102-113) 
Sec. 94-134. - Police and fire department approval required. 
    Before any permit shall be issued under this article, the time, date and route of the parade and location of the proposed public celebration shall be approved by the chief of police and the fire chief for the city. 
(Code 1975, § 12-83; Code 1995, § 102-114) 
Sec. 94-135. - Permit revocable. 
    Any permit granted by the city manager under this article shall be revocable at any time by the city manager or chief of police when, in their discretion, it is determined that the parade, meeting, or celebration has or will unduly hamper or interfere with any regular municipal service, general traffic or public convenience or welfare. 
(Code 1975, § 12-84; Code 1995, § 102-115) 
Secs. 94-136-94-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Railroads generally, 66 O.S. § 1 et seq.; authority of city to regulate railroads, 11 O.S. § 22-119. 

Sec. 94-154. - General duties with respect to street improvements. 
(a)  When a railway company occupies any portion of a street with its tracks running in a general direction of such street, either on or adjacent thereto, the railway company shall improve the space between its tracks and two feet on either side thereof in the same manner that the remainder of the street is to be, or has been, improved, or with such other satisfactory material as the council, by motion or resolution, may approve. In case any railway company shall occupy an alley with its tracks, such company shall improve, gutter, drain and grade such alley, and shall surface or pave it with the same material which is to be, or has been, used on the alley, or with such other satisfactory material as the council, by motion or resolution, may approve. 
(b)  When the tracks of any railroad company cross any street that is being or has been paved, the company shall pave as much of the street as is occupied by its tracks, and two feet on each side thereof, using the same material as is to be, or has been, used on the street, or such other satisfactory material as the council, by motion or resolution, may approve. When more than one track crosses a street within a distance of 100 feet, measuring from inside rail to inside rail, the railroad company shall grade, gutter, drain and curb the street area between its tracks and surface or pave it with the same material which the city is to use, or has used, on the street. 
(c)  Railroad companies shall keep all improvements made by them pursuant to this section in a good state of repair at all times. 
(Code 1975, § 19-1; Code 1995, § 110-396) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 66 O.S. § 12. 
Sec. 94-155. - Duty to construct and maintain sidewalks. 
    Railway companies shall construct sidewalks crossing their rights-of-way, using the same material as is used in adjacent sidewalks, insofar as practicable under the circumstances. They shall construct sidewalks on both sides of the streets, when both sides are used by pedestrians. The company shall keep such sidewalks in a good state of repair at all times. 
(Code 1975, § 19-2; Code 1995, § 110-397) 
Sec. 94-156. - Boarding or clinging to moving trains. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to climb upon, hold to or in any manner attach himself to any railway train, locomotive or car, while such is in motion within the city, unless such person is acting in the line of duty. 
(Code 1975, § 19-5; Code 1995, § 110-398) 
Chapter 98 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal taxation generally, 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 98-1-98-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to contract with state tax commission for collection of city taxes, 68 O.S. § 2702. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 98-19-98-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SALES TAX 

Sec. 98-40. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the city sales tax ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 23-11; Code 1995, § 106-26) 
Sec. 98-41. - Effective date. 
    This division shall become and be effective on and after December 1, 1966, subject to approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city voting on same in the manner prescribed by 11 O.S. § 16-112. 
(Code 1975, § 23-12; Code 1995, § 106-27) 
Sec. 98-42. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1352, are adopted by reference and made a part of this division. 
    Tax collector means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state duly designated according to law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax levied. 
(Code 1975, § 23-14; Code 1995, § 106-28) 
Sec. 98-43. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this division to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 23-13; Code 1995, § 106-29) 
State Law reference- Tax ordinances to be approved by voters, 68 O.S. § 2705. 
Sec. 98-44. - Amendments to division. 
    The people of the city, by their approval of this division at the election provided for in section 98-41, thereby authorize the city council, by ordinances duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this division as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except that the rate of the tax provided for in this division shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Code 1975, § 23-30; Code 1995, § 106-30) 
Sec. 98-45. - Division cumulative. 
    This division shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other sections of this Code or other city ordinances pertaining to taxes. 
(Code 1975, § 23-31; Code 1995, § 106-31) 
Sec. 98-46. - Classification of taxpayers. 
    For the purpose of this division, the classification of taxpayers under this division shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(Code 1975, § 23-16; Code 1995, § 106-32) 
State Law reference- Classification of vendors, 68 O.S. § 1363. 
Sec. 98-47. - Subsisting state permits. 
    All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., are, for the purpose of this division, ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 23-15; Code 1995, § 106-33) 
State Law reference- State permits, 68 O.S. § 1364. 
Sec. 98-48. - Levy. 
    There is levied an excise tax of two percent upon the gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(Code 1975, § 23-17; Code 1995, § 106-34) 
State Law reference- Sales subject to tax, 68 O.S. §§ 1354, 1357(6); authority of city to levy and collect sales taxes for a general or special purpose, 68 O.S. § 2701. 
Sec. 98-49. - Exemptions. 
    There is specifically exempted from the tax levied by this division the gross receipts or gross proceeds and the transfers of tangible personal property exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(Code 1975, §§ 23-18, 23-19; Code 1995, § 106-35) 
State Law reference- Exemptions from state sales tax, 68 O.S. §§ 1355-1360. 
Sec. 98-50. - Due date; manner of payment. 
    The tax levied under this division shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(Code 1975, § 23-21; Code 1995, § 106-37) 
State Law reference- Due date of state tax, 68 O.S. § 1365. 
Sec. 98-51. - Collection by vendor. 
(a)  The tax levied under this division shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor, and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax levied by this division or an amount equal as nearly as possible or practicable to the average equivalent thereof. 
(b)  Vendors shall add the tax imposed under this division or the average equivalent thereof to the sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the vendor until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(c)  A vendor who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied or who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects or refuses to comply with this division or who remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax levied in this division or who makes, in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax or paying the tax for the consumer or user by any adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax or in any manner whatsoever shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 23-23; Code 1995, § 106-38) 
State Law reference- Consumer to pay, vendor to collect tax, 68 O.S. § 1361. 
Sec. 98-52. - Bracket system for collection. 
(a)  The tax levied in this division shall be paid to the tax collector at the time in form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(b)  The bracket system for the collection of the two percent city sales tax by the tax collector shall be as the system is adopted by the agreement of the city and the tax collector, in the collection of both the city sales tax and the state sales tax. 
(Code 1975, § 23-22; Code 1995, § 106-39) 
State Law reference- Remittance of tax, 68 O.S. § 1362. 
Sec. 98-53. - Tax constitutes debt. 
    The tax, penalty and interest due under this division shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1975, § 23-27; Code 1995, § 106-40) 
Sec. 98-54. - Returns and remittances; discounts. 
    Returns and remittances of the tax levied and collected in this division shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., and remittances of the tax collected under this division shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by such code for collection of state sales taxes. 
(Code 1975, § 23-24; Code 1995, § 106-41) 
State Law reference- Reports or returns by taxpayers, 68 O.S. § 221; date due, 68 O.S. § 1365; deduction, 68 O.S. § 1367.1. 
Sec. 98-55. - Interest and penalties; delinquency. 
    68 O.S. § 217 is adopted and made a part of this division, and interest and penalties at the rates and in amounts as therein specified are levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this division. The failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of the tax in the time and manner required by this division shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this division. 
(Code 1975, § 23-25; Code 1995, § 106-42) 
State Law reference- Interest and penalties generally, 68 O.S. § 217; bad checks, 68 O.S. § 218 et seq.; fines and imprisonments, felonies, 68 O.S. § 1361(D)-(F). 
Sec. 98-56. - Waiver of interest and penalties. 
    The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing because of a taxpayer's failure to pay the tax levied in this division may be waived or remitted in the manner as provided for in 68 O.S. § 220, and to accomplish the purposes of this section the applicable portions of 68 O.S. § 220 are adopted by reference and made a part of this division. 
(Code 1995, § 106-43) 
Sec. 98-57. - Erroneous payments; claim for refund. 
    Refund of erroneous payment of the city sales tax levied in this division may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure and under the same limitations of time as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable portions of 68 O.S. § 227 are adopted by reference and made a part of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 23-28; Code 1995, § 106-44) 
State Law reference- Erroneous payments, claims for refund, demand for hearing, 68 O.S. § 227. 
Sec. 98-58. - Fraudulent returns. 
    In addition to all civil penalties provided by this division, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances required or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this division shall be an offense. 
(Code 1975, § 23-26; Code 1995, § 106-45) 
State Law reference- False or fraudulent return, reports, 68 O.S. §§ 240.1, 241; false entries or omissions, 68 O.S. § 242. 
Sec. 98-59. - Records confidential. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect such, 68 O.S. § 205 and each subsection thereof is adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the city sales tax as if set forth in full in this division. 
(Code 1975, § 23-29; Code 1995, § 106-46) 
State Law reference- Reproduction of public records generally, 67 O.S. § 301 et seq.; state tax commission records confidential, 68 O.S. § 205. 
Secs. 98-60-98-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADDITIONAL SALES TAXES AND PROVISIONS 

Sec. 98-77. - City of Yukon Public Employees Sales Tax Ordinance of 2003. 
(a)  Citation. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Yukon Public Employees Sales Tax Ordinance of 2003." 
(b)  Subsisting state permits. All valid and subsisting permits to do business by the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code are, for the purposes of this section, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(c)  Effective date and termination. This section shall become and be effective on and after approval of a majority of the registered voters of the City of Yukon voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law; and shall not be repealed unless repealed by a majority of the registered voters of the city voting to repeal same in the manner as was required for its approval. 
(d)  Purpose of revenues. The excise tax levied hereunder shall be expended for the following: Of the three-fourths of one percent, 30 percent shall be expended providing competitive compensation and benefits for fire personnel, additional firefighting personnel, subject to collective bargaining agreement with the City of Yukon, and firefighting related equipment; 36 2/3 percent of the excise tax levied shall be expended providing competitive compensation and benefits for police personnel, additional commissioned police personnel, subject to collective bargaining agreement with the City of Yukon, and police related equipment; the remaining 33 percent shall be expended providing competitive compensation and benefits for all other full-time employees of the city, additional full-time employees and equipment. 
(1)  Future funding for the fire department shall, at a minimum, be set at an amount equal to the projected revenues generated by the tax established by this section, plus funding from the general fund revenues. General fund revenues are those which currently come from the following sources: taxes, licenses and permits, fines and forfeitures, charges for services, interest and miscellaneous revenues. Expenditures will not be charged against the public employees tax revenues until said general fund revenues budgeted for the fire department have first been used or encumbered. 
(2)  Future funding for the police department shall, at a minimum, be set at an amount equal to the projected revenues generated by the tax established by this section, plus funding from the general fund revenues. General fund revenues are those which currently come from the following sources: taxes, licenses and permits, fines and forfeitures, charges for services, interest and miscellaneous revenues. Expenditures will not be charged against the public employees' tax revenues until said general fund revenues budgeted for the police department have first been used or encumbered. 
(3)  Future funding to provide competitive compensation and benefits for all other full-time employees, additional full-time employees and equipment shall, at a minimum, be set at an amount equal to the projected revenues generated by the tax established by this section, plus funding from the general fund revenues. General fund revenues are those which currently come from the following sources: taxes, licenses and permits, fines and forfeitures, charges for services, interest and miscellaneous revenues. Expenditures will not be charged against the public employees' tax revenues until said general fund revenues budgeted for all other personnel have first been used or encumbered. 
(4)  Purchase of firefighting-related and police-related equipment shall be limited to expenditure of funds held in the limited purpose tax fund provided for herein which exceed an amount equal to one-half of the revenue generated by the tax established by this section for each of those departments from the previous fiscal year. Determination of the amount and type of equipment purchased shall be made by the city manager, and such purchases shall be for the benefit and in the proportion for each department set forth in this subsection. Equipment shall include, but not be limited to, items necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of the designated department and equipment, facilities or memberships which promote physical fitness of department members. 
(5)  Purchase of all other equipment shall be limited to expenditure of funds held in the limited purpose tax fund provided for herein which exceed an amount equal to one-fourth of the revenue generated by the tax established by this section for all other purposes from the previous fiscal year. Determination of the amount and type of equipment purchased shall be made by the city manager. Equipment shall include, but not be limited to, items necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of the city and equipment, facilities or memberships which promote physical fitness of employees. 
(e)  Limited purpose tax fund established. There is hereby established a limited-purpose tax fund to be known as the "Yukon Public Employees Limited Tax Fund," into which the revenue collected pursuant to ordinance number 1132 shall be deposited. Monies in said account shall be accumulated from year to year if not expended for the purpose provided herein and shall be invested in accordance with the laws of the State of Oklahoma, and the Charter of the City of Yukon, and the interest which accrues in said fund shall be retained in the fund. The monies in said fund shall be expended only as accumulated and only for the limited purposes as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. Monies in the limited purpose tax fund may only be appropriated for the authorized purposes as provided by law. 
(f)  Tax rate; sales subject to tax. There is hereby levied an additional excise tax of three-fourths of one percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., including all items listed under the applicable sections of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., as such may be amended from time to time. 
(g)  Exemptions. There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this section the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., including all items listed under the applicable sections of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., as such may be amended from time to time. 
(h)  Other exempt transfers. Also, there is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied the transfer of tangible personal property exempted from the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., inclusive, but not exclusive of, the following: 
(1)  From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a reorganization. As used in this subsection the term "reorganization" means: 
a.  A statutory merger or consolidation. 
b.  The acquisition by a corporation of substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation. 
(2)  In connection with the winding up, dissolution, or liquidation of a corporation only when there is distribution in kind to the shareholders of the property of such corporation. 
(3)  To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or security received by each are substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the transfer. 
(4)  To a partnership in the organization, or such partnership if the former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer members of such partnerships, and the interest in the partnership received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the transfer. 
(5)  From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in the dissolution of such partnership. 
(i)  Tax due when; returns; records. The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(j)  Payment of tax. The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax and under the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(k)  Tax constitutes debt. Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(l)  Classification of taxpayers. For the purpose of this section, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for the purpose of the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(m)  Vendor's duty to collect tax. 
(1)  The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor, and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax practicable to the average equivalent thereof. 
(2)  Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(3)  A vendor, as defined in the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects, or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied herein, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the provisions, or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax levied herein, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500.00 and, upon conviction for a second or other subsequent offense, shall be fined not more than $1,000.00, or incarcerated for not more than 60 days, or both, pursuant to 68 O.S. § 1361, as it may, from time to time, be amended. 
(n)  Returns and remittances, discount. Returns and remittances of the tax levied herein and collected shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form, and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by said Code for collection of state sales tax. 
(o)  Tax collector defined. The term "tax collector" as used herein means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state duly designated according to the law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. 
(p)  Definitions. The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in the 68 O.S. § 1352, as may be amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(q)  Interest and penalties, delinquency. 68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this section, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by said section. Provided, that the failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by said section shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under said section. 
(r)  Waiver of interest and penalties. The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of the taxpayer's failure to pay the tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220; and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(s)  Erroneous payments, claims for refund. Refund of erroneous payment of the sales tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the manner and procedures, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(t)  Fraudulent returns. In addition to all civil penalties provided by this section, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this section, shall constitute a felony, and upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000.00, and not more than $50,000.00, or shall be imprisoned for not less than two years or more than five years, or shall be punished by both said fine and imprisonment. 
(u)  Records confidential. The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205 and each subsection thereof is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of the sales tax as if herein set forth in full. 
(v)  Amendments. The people of Yukon, Oklahoma, by their approval of ordinance number 1132 at the election hereinabove provided, hereby authorize the city council, by ordinances duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this section as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except the rate of the tax herein provided and the purposes of revenues which shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(w)  Provisions cumulative. The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Code 1995, § 106-47; Ord. No. 1132, § 1, 12-16-2003; Ord. No. 1143, § 1, 4-6-2004) 
Sec. 98-78. - City of Yukon Reserve Account Support Sales Tax Ordinance of 2003. 
(a)  Citation. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Yukon Reserve Account Support Sales Tax Ordinance of 2003." 
(b)  Subsisting state permits. All valid and subsisting permits to do business by the Oklahoma Tax Commission pursuant to the Oklahoma Sales Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., are, for the purposes of this section, hereby ratified, confirmed, and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(c)  Effective date and termination. This section shall become and be effective on and after approval of a majority of the registered voters of the city voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law; and shall not be repealed unless repealed by a majority of the registered voters of the city voting to repeal same in the manner as was required for its approval. 
(d)  Purpose of revenues. The excise tax levied hereunder shall be expended first to replenish and maintain the reserve account of the city at a level equal to 25 percent of the previous year's revenues as determined by the city council, and the remainder, if any, to be deposited in the general fund of the city to be used and expended as may be determined by the city council. 
(e)  Limited purpose tax fund established. There is hereby established a limited purpose tax fund to be known as the "Yukon Reserve Account Support Tax Fund," into which the revenue collected pursuant to ordinance number 1138 shall be deposited. Monies in said account shall be accumulated from year to year if not expended for the purpose provided herein and shall be invested in accordance with the laws of the state, and the Charter of the city, and the interest which accrues in said fund shall be retained in the fund. The monies in said fund shall be expended only as accumulated and only for the limited purposes as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. Monies in the limited purpose tax fund may only be appropriated for the authorized purposes as provided by law. 
(f)  Tax rate, sales subject to tax. There is hereby levied an additional excise tax of one-fourth of one percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., including all items listed under the applicable sections of the state tax code, as such may be amended from time to time. 
(g)  Exemptions. There is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied by this section the gross receipts or gross proceeds exempted from the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., including all items listed under the applicable sections of the state sales tax code, as such may be amended from time to time. 
(h)  Other exempt transfers. Also, there is hereby specifically exempted from the tax levied the transfer of tangible personal property exempted from the state sales tax code, inclusive but not exclusive of, the following: 
(1)  From one corporation to another corporation pursuant to a reorganization. As used in this subsection, the term "reorganization" means: 
a.  A statutory merger or consolidation. 
b.  The acquisition by a corporation of substantially all of the properties of another corporation when the consideration is solely all or a part of the voting stock of the acquiring corporation, or of its parent or subsidiary corporation. 
(2)  In connection with the winding up, dissolution, or liquidation of a corporation only when there is distribution in kind to the shareholders of the property of such corporation. 
(3)  To a corporation for the purpose of organization of such corporation where the former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer in control of the corporation, and the stock or security received by each are substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the transfer. 
(4)  To a partnership in the organization or such partnership if the former owners of the property transferred are immediately after the transfer members of such partnerships, and the interest in the partnership received by each is substantially in proportion to his interest in the property prior to the transfer. 
(5)  From a partnership to the members thereof when made in kind in the dissolution of such partnership. 
(i)  Tax due when; returns; records. The tax levied hereunder shall be due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(j)  Payment of tax. The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the form and manner provided for payment of state sales tax under the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(k)  Tax constitutes debt. Such taxes, penalty and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claims of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(l)  Classification of taxpayers. For the purpose of this section, the classification of taxpayers hereunder shall be as prescribed by state law for the purpose of the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(m)  Vendor's duty to collect tax. 
(1)  The tax levied hereunder shall be paid by the consumer or user to the vendor, and it shall be the duty of each and every vendor in this city to collect from the consumer or user the full amount of the tax practicable to the average equivalent thereof. 
(2)  Vendors shall add the tax imposed hereunder, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sales price or charge, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the vendor until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(3)  A vendor, as defined in the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., who willfully or intentionally fails, neglects, or refuses to collect the full amount of the tax levied herein, or willfully or intentionally fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the provisions, or remits or rebates to a consumer or user, either directly or indirectly, and by whatsoever means, all or any part of the tax levied herein, or makes in any form of advertising, verbally or otherwise, any statement which infers that he is absorbing the tax or paying the tax for the consumer or user by an adjustment of prices or at a price including the tax or in any manner whatsoever, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500.00 and, upon conviction for a second or other subsequent offense, shall be fined not more than $1,000.00, or incarcerated for not more than 60 days, or both, pursuant to 68 O.S. § 1361, as it may, from time to time, be amended. 
(n)  Returns and remittances, discount. Returns and remittances of the tax levied herein and collected shall be made to the tax collector at the time and in the manner, form, and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq.; and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by said code for collection of state sales tax. 
(o)  Tax collector defined. The term "tax collector" as used herein means the department of the city government or the official agency of the state duly designated according to the law or contract authorized by law to administer the collection of the tax herein levied. 
(p)  Definitions. The definitions of words, terms, and phrases contained in 68 O.S. § 1352, as may be amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(q)  Interest and penalties, delinquency. 68 O.S. § 217 is hereby adopted and made a part of this section, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are hereby levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by said section. Provided, that the failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by said section shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the taxpayer shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under said section. 
(r)  Waiver of interest and penalties. The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of the taxpayer's failure to pay the tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for said waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state sales tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220; and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 220 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(s)  Erroneous payments, claims for refund. Refund of erroneous payment of the sales tax herein levied may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the manner and procedures, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state sales tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227, and to accomplish the purposes of this section, the applicable provisions of said section 227 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. 
(t)  Fraudulent returns. In addition to all civil penalties provided by this section, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this section, shall constitute a felony, and upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000.00, and not more than $50,000.00, or shall be imprisoned for not less than two years or more than five years, or shall be punished by both said fine and imprisonment. 
(u)  Records confidential. The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the sales tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and each subsection thereof is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to the administration of the sales tax as if herein set forth in full. 
(v)  Amendments. The people of the city, by their approval of ordinance number 1138 at the election hereinabove provided, hereby authorize the city council, by ordinances duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this section as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness, except the rate of the tax herein provided and the purposes of revenues which shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(w)  Provisions cumulative. The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Code 1995, § 106-48; Ord. No. 1138, § 1, 12-16-2003) 
Sec. 98-79. - City of Yukon Sales Tax Ordinance of 2006. 
(a)  Citations and codification. This section shall be known and may be cited as the City of Yukon Sales Tax Ordinance of 2006, and the same shall be codified and incorporated into the Code of Ordinances, City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
(b)  Tax imposed. There is hereby imposed an excise tax of one-fourth of one percent (0.25 percent) (in addition to any and all other excise taxes now in force) to be levied upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all sales taxable under the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. 
(c)  Purpose of revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this section to provide revenues for the use and benefit of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma (the "city"), said revenues to be expended only for the limited purpose of providing capital improvements for the use and benefit of the city and related financing costs, including payment of debt service and costs of bond or note issuance in conjunction with obligations issued by the city or a public trust of which the city is the beneficiary to finance such capital improvements. The revenues generated pursuant to this section may be expended only for the limited purpose described above. All revenues generated by this section shall be deposited in a limited-purpose fund and money in this limited-purpose tax fund shall be expended only as accumulated and only for the purpose specified in this section as approved by a vote of the qualified electors of the city as provided for in subsection (d) hereof. For purposes of this section, the term "capital improvements" shall have and be given the same meaning as set forth in 11 O.S. § 17-110. 
(d)  Effective date. The provisions of this section and the collection of the excise tax referenced herein shall become effective on and after February 1, 2007, subject to approval by a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the same in the manner prescribed by law. 
(e)  Subsisting state permits. All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the state tax commission pursuant to the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. are, for the purposes of this section, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(f)  Payment of tax. The tax herein levied shall be paid to the tax collector at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state sales tax under the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq. and all tax laws of the state. 
(g)  This tax in addition to taxes currently levied; administrative and collection procedures. The tax levied hereby is in addition to any and all other excise taxes levied or assessed by the city including, but not limited to, those levied and assessed by ordinance number 353, ordinance number 607, ordinance number 936, ordinance number 944, ordinance number 1132, and/ordinance number 1138, each as amended. The tax levied by this section shall be administered and collected in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this article in the same manner as provided for the administration and collection of other sales and excise taxes of the city. 
(h)  Amendments. The people of the city, by their approval of this section at the election hereinabove provided for, hereby authorize the city council by ordinance duly enacted to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcing this section as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness or in order to make the same consistent with the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1350 et seq., as amended, except that the rate of the tax and the limited purpose of the use of the tax herein provided for shall not be changed without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(i)  Provisions cumulative. The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of city ordinances. 
(Code 1995, § 106-49; Ord. No. 1194, §§ 1-9, 10-3-2006) 
Secs. 98-80-98-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE TAX 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 98-102-98-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL USE TAX 

Sec. 98-131. - Citation. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the City of Yukon Use Tax Ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 23-60; Code 1995, § 106-66) 
Sec. 98-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The definitions of words, terms and phrases contained in the Oklahoma Use Tax Code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq., are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this division. 
    Tax collector means the department of the municipal government, or the official agency of the state, duly designated according to law, or contract authorized by law, to administer the collection of the tax levied by this division. 
    Transaction means sale. 
(Code 1975, § 23-63; Code 1995, § 106-67) 
Sec. 98-133. - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions hereof shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the municipal ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 23-62; Code 1995, § 106-68) 
Sec. 98-134. - Classification of taxpayers. 
    For the purpose of this division, the classification of taxpayers under this division shall be as prescribed by state law for purposes of the state sales tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq. 
(Code 1975, § 23-64; Code 1995, § 106-69) 
Sec. 98-135. - Subsisting state permits. 
    All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the tax commission pursuant to the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq., are, for the purpose of this division, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement for an additional city permit for the same purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 23-78; Code 1995, § 106-70) 
Sec. 98-136. - Excise tax on storage, use or other consumption of intangible, personal property levied. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal property purchased or brought into this city an excise tax on the storage, use or other consuming within the city of such property at the rate of two percent of the purchase price of such property. Such tax shall be paid by every person storing, using or otherwise consuming within the city tangible, personal property purchased or brought into the city. The additional tax levied under this division shall be paid at the time of importation or storage of the property within the city and shall be assessed to only property purchased outside the state; provided, that the tax levied herein shall not be levied against tangible, personal property intended solely for use outside the city, but which is stored in the city pending shipment outside the city or which is temporarily retained in the city for the purpose of fabrication, repair, testing, alteration, maintenance or other service. Any person liable for payment for the tax authorized herein may deduct from such tax any local or municipal sales tax previously paid on such goods or services; provided, that the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount that would have been due if the taxes imposed by the city had been levied on the sale of such goods or services. 
(Code 1975, § 23-65; Code 1995, § 106-71) 
Sec. 98-137. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply in respect to: 
(1)  The use of an article of tangible, personal property brought into the city by a nonresident individual visiting in this city for his personal use or enjoyment while within the city. 
(2)  The use of tangible, personal property purchased for resale before being used. 
(3)  The use of any article of tangible, personal property on which tax, equal to or in excess of that levied by both the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq., and the city use tax ordinance, has been paid by the person using such tangible, personal property in the city, whether such tax was levied under the laws of the state or some other state or municipality of the United States. If any article of tangible, personal property has already been subjected to a tax by Oklahoma or any other state or municipality in respect to its sale or use in an amount less than the tax imposed by both the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq. and the city use tax ordinance, the provisions of this article shall also apply to it by a rate measured by the difference only between the rate provided by both the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq. and the city use tax ordinance, and the rate by which the previous tax upon the sale or use was computed; provided, that no credit shall be given for taxes paid in another state or municipality if that state or municipality does not grant like credit for taxes paid in the state and the city. 
(4)  The use of machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons establishing new manufacturing or processing plants in the city, and machinery and equipment purchased and used by persons to the operation of manufacturing plants already established in the city. Provided, this exemption shall not apply unless such machinery and equipment is incorporated into, and is directly used in, the process of manufacturing property subject to taxation under the sales tax code of the city. The term "manufacturing plants" shall mean those establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or processing operations, and generally recognized as such. 
(5)  The use of tangible, personal property now specifically exempted from taxation under the sales tax code of the city. 
(6)  The use of any article of tangible, personal property brought into the city by an individual with intent to become a resident of this city where such personal property is for such individual's personal use or enjoyment. 
(7)  The use of any article of tangible, personal property used or to be used by commercial airlines or railroads. 
(8)  Livestock purchased outside the state and brought into the city for feeding or breeding purposes, and which is later resold. 
(Code 1975, § 23-66; Code 1995, § 106-72) 
Sec. 98-138. - Purposes of revenues. 
    It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this division to provide revenues for the support of the functions of the municipal government of the city, and any and all revenues derived hereunder may be expended by the council for any purpose for which funds may be lawfully expended as authorized. 
(Code 1975, § 23-61; Code 1995, § 106-73) 
Sec. 98-139. - Time when due; returns; payment. 
    The tax levied by this division is due and payable at the time and in the manner and form prescribed for payment of the state use tax under the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq. 
(Code 1975, § 23-67; Code 1995, § 106-74) 
Sec. 98-140. - Collection of tax by retailer or vendor-Residents. 
    Every retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state, and making sales of tangible, personal property from a place of business outside this state for use in the city, shall at the time of making such sales collect the use tax levied by this division from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor in the manner and form prescribed by the tax commission, if the tax commission shall, by regulation, require such receipt. Each retailer or vendor shall list with the tax commission the name and address of all his agents operating in the city and location of any and all distribution or sales houses or offices or other places of business in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 23-69; Code 1995, § 106-75) 
Sec. 98-141. - Same-Nonresidents. 
    The tax commission may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax herein levied by any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business within this state but who makes sales of tangible, personal property for use in the city and by the out-of-state place of business of any retailer or vendor maintaining places of business both within and without the state and making sales of tangible, personal property at such out-of-state place of business for use in the city. Such retailer or vendor may be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such taxes by the tax commission in such manner and subject to such regulations and agreements as it shall prescribe. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer or vendor to collect the tax upon all tangible, personal property sold to his knowledge for use within the city. Such authority and permit may be cancelled when at any time the tax commission considers that such tax can more effectively be collected from the person using such property in the city; provided, however, that in all instances where such sales are made or completed by delivery to the purchaser within the city by the retailer or vendor in such retailer's or vendor's vehicle, whether owned or leased (not by common carrier), such sales or transactions shall continue to be subject to applicable city sales tax at the point of delivery and the tax shall be collected and reported under the taxpayer's sales tax permit number accordingly. 
(Code 1975, § 23-70; Code 1995, § 106-76) 
Sec. 98-142. - Tax constitutes debt. 
    Taxes, penalty and interest due under this division shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim, as against the claims of unsecured creditors, and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1975, § 23-68; Code 1995, § 106-77) 
Sec. 98-143. - Interest and penalties-Delinquency. 
    68 O.S. § 217 is adopted and made a part of this division, and interest and penalties at the rates and in the amounts as therein specified are levied and shall be applicable in cases of delinquency in reporting and paying the tax levied by this division; provided, that the failure or refusal of any retailer or vendor to make and transmit the reports and remittances of tax in the time and manner required by this division shall cause such tax to be delinquent. In addition, if such delinquency continues for a period of five days, the retailer or vendor shall forfeit his claim to any discount allowed under this division. 
(Code 1975, § 23-73; Code 1995, § 106-78) 
Sec. 98-144. - Same-Waiver. 
    The interest or penalty or any portion thereof accruing by reason of a retailer's or vendor's failure to pay the use tax herein levied may be waived or remitted in the same manner as provided for such waiver or remittance as applied in administration of the state use tax provided in 68 O.S. § 220; and to accomplish the purpose of this section; the applicable provisions of such section are adopted by reference and made a part of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 23-74; Code 1995, § 106-79) 
Sec. 98-145. - Erroneous payments; claim for refund. 
    Refund of erroneous payment of the municipal use tax levied by this division may be made to any taxpayer making such erroneous payment in the same manner and procedure, and under the same limitations of time, as provided for administration of the state use tax as set forth in 68 O.S. § 227. To accomplish the purpose of this section, the applicable provisions of such section are adopted by reference and made a part of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 23-75; Code 1995, § 106-80) 
Sec. 98-146. - Fraudulent returns. 
    In addition to all civil penalties provided by this division, the willful failure or refusal of any taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this division, shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 and costs. Each day of noncompliance with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 23-76; Code 1995, § 106-81) 
Sec. 98-147. - Records confidential. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the city use tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the use tax as is herein set forth in full. 
(Code 1975, § 23-77; Code 1995, § 106-82) 
Sec. 98-148. - Revoking permits. 
    Whenever any retailer or vendor not maintaining a place of business in this state, or both within and without this state, and authorized to collect the tax levied by this division, fails to comply with any of the provisions of this division or the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq., or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission, the tax commission may, upon notice and hearing as provided for in 68 O.S. § 1408, by order, revoke the use tax permit, if any, issued to such retailer or vendor, and if any such retailer or vendor is a corporation authorized to do business in the state may, after notice and hearing above provided, cancel such corporation's license to do business in the state and shall issue a new license only when such corporation has complied with the obligations under this division, the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq., or any order, rules or regulations of the tax commission. 
(Code 1975, § 23-71; Code 1995, § 106-83) 
Sec. 98-149. - Remunerative deductions allowed vendors or retailers of other states. 
    Returns and remittances of the tax levied by this division and collected shall be made to the tax commission at the time and in the manner, form and amount as prescribed for returns and remittances required by the state use tax code, 68 O.S. § 1401 et seq., and remittances of tax collected hereunder shall be subject to the same discount as may be allowed by such code for the collection of state use taxes. 
(Code 1975, § 23-72; Code 1995, § 106-84) 
Secs. 98-150-98-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADDITIONAL USE TAXES AND PROVISIONS 

Sec. 98-167. - Additional excise tax of three-fourths percent on storage, use or other consumption of tangible, personal property levied. 
(a)  In addition to and cumulative of the excise tax of two percent of the purchase price levied upon the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property within the city, an excise tax in the additional amount of three-fourths of one percent of the purchase price is hereby levied upon the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property taxable under the use tax laws of the state. This additional excise tax of three-fourths of one percent is levied on all storage, use, consumption and all activities, status and conditions to which the two percent excise tax provided for in division 2 of this article is applicable; and further, all administrative and enforcement provisions of the use tax ordinance as contained in division 2 of this article shall be applicable to this additional three-fourths of one percent excise tax imposed by this section. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this section to provide revenues for the use and benefit of the city, said revenues to be expended only for the following limited purposes: 
(1)  Capital improvements and equipment for the use and benefit of the city; and/or 
(2)  For the payment of financing costs for capital improvements and equipment for the use and benefit of the city, including payment of debt service and costs of bond issuance in conjunction with obligations issued by the city or a public trust of which the city is the beneficiary to finance the improvements and purchases referenced in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
The revenues generated pursuant to this section may be expended only for the limited purposes described above. All revenues generated by this section shall be deposited in a limited-purpose fund and money in this limited-purpose tax fund shall be expended only as accumulated and only for the purposes specified in this section. 
(Code 1995, § 106-71.1; Ord. No. 944, § 1, 4-16-1996) 
Sec. 98-168. - Additional excise tax of one-fourth percent on storage, use or other consumption of tangible, personal property levied. 
(a)  In addition and cumulative to all other excise taxes on the purchase price levied by the city on the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property within the city, an excise tax in the additional amount of one-fourth of one percent (0.25 percent) of the purchase price is hereby levied upon the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property taxable under the use tax laws of the state. This additional excise tax of one-fourth of one percent (0.25 percent) is levied on all storage, use, consumption and all activities, status and conditions to which the existing excise taxes of the city use tax ordinances are applicable; and further, all administrative and enforcement provisions of the city use tax ordinance as contained in division 2 of this article shall be applicable to this additional one-fourth of one percent (0.25 percent) excise tax imposed by this section. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this section to provide revenues for the use and benefit of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma (the "city"), said revenues to be expended only for the following limited purposes: 
(1)  Capital improvements for the use and benefit of the city; and/or 
(2)  For the payment of financing costs for capital improvements for the use and benefit of the city, including payment of debt service and costs of bond or note issuance in conjunction with obligations issued by the city or a public trust of which the city is the beneficiary to finance the improvements and expenditures referenced in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
The revenues generated pursuant to this section may be expended only for the limited purposes described above. All revenues generated by this section shall be deposited in a limited-purpose fund and money in this limited-purpose tax fund shall be expended only as accumulated and only for the purposes specified in this section. For purposes of this section, the term "capital improvements" shall have and be given the same meaning as set forth in 11 O.S. 2001 § 17-110. 
(Code 1995, § 106-71.2; Ord. No. 1203, § 1, 2-6-2007) 
Secs. 98-169-98-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX IN LIEU OF UTILITY FRANCHISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of council to levy such tax, 68 O.S. § 2601; tax not applicable to franchise holders, 68 O.S. § 2602. 

Sec. 98-190. - Levied. 
    There is levied and assessed an annual tax in the amount of two percent of the gross receipts from sales of power, light, heat, gas and electricity in the city, from residential and commercial sales; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to any person operating under a valid franchise in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 23-42; Code 1995, § 106-106) 
Sec. 98-191. - In lieu of other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax. 
    The tax levied by this article shall be in lieu of any other franchise, license, occupation or excise tax. 
(Code 1975, § 23-43; Code 1995, § 106-107) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 2601. 
Sec. 98-192. - Tax paid monthly, placed in general revenue fund. 
    The annual tax levied under this article shall be payable monthly and be placed in the general revenue fund of the city. Such payment shall be made to the city clerk not later than 20 days after the expiration of each month. 
(Code 1975, § 23-44; Code 1995, § 106-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 2603. 
Sec. 98-193. - Taxpayer's statements of gross receipts. 
    Every person subject to the provisions of this article shall, with each quarterly payment, furnish a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross receipts from residential and commercial sales within the city during the period for which the quarterly payment is made. 
(Code 1975, § 23-45; Code 1995, § 106-109) 
Sec. 98-194. - Failure to pay; action for collection. 
    Any person failing or refusing to pay the tax levied by this article shall be regarded as a trespasser, and may be ousted from the city. In addition thereto, an action may be maintained against such person for the amount of the tax and all expense of collecting same, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1975, § 23-46; Code 1995, § 106-110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 2604. 
Sec. 98-195. - Tax lien. 
    The tax imposed under this article shall constitute a first and prior lien upon all of the assets located within the city of any person engaged in the business of selling power, light, heat, gas or electricity therein and subject to such tax. 
(Code 1975, § 23-47; Code 1995, § 106-111) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 68 O.S. § 2605. 
Secs. 98-196-98-213. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL TAX ORDINANCE 

Sec. 98-214. - Citation. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the City of Yukon Hotel Tax Ordinance. 
(Code 1995, § 106-112; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-215. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Clerk means the city clerk of the City of Yukon. 
    Hotel means any building or building structures, trailer, or other facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in which five or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms are in one or in several structures. The term "hotel" shall include hotels, apartment hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by "permanent residents," and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. The term "hotel" shall not include hospitals, sanitariums, assisted living centers or nursing homes, nor shall this term affect permanent resident facilities as defined below for residents for terms in excess of 30 days. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel, or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
    Occupant means a person, who for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to the use or possession of any room in a hotel under lease, concession, permit, right to access, license to use, or other agreement. 
    Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, manager or similar agent, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
    Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also any amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any reduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
    Room means any room of any kind in any part or portion of the hotel which is available for or let out for the use of or possessed for any purpose other than a place of assembly. As used herein, the term "place of assembly" means a room or space which is capable of being occupied by 75 or more persons and which is used for educational, recreational or amusement purposes and shall include: dance halls, cabarets, nightclubs, restaurants, any room or space for public or private banquets, feasts, socials, card parties or weddings, lodge and meeting halls or rooms, skating rinks, gymnasiums, swimming pools, billiard, bowling and table tennis rooms, halls or rooms used for public or private catering purposes, funeral parlors, markets, recreational rooms, concert halls, broadcasting studios, and all other places of a similar type of occupancy. 
    Tax means the tax levied pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1995, § 106-113; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-216. - Levied amount. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax of five percent upon the gross proceeds or gross receipts derived from all rent for every occupancy of a room in a hotel in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 106-114; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-217. - Exemptions; acknowledgment required; records required. 
(a)  Exceptions. The following shall be exempt from the tax levied in this article: 
(1)  Permanent residents; 
(2)  The United States Government or any agency or division thereof; 
(3)  The State of Oklahoma or any political subdivision thereof; 
(4)  Any public school or state accredited private school, provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a business for profit; 
(5)  Any church, provided that its primary purpose is not carrying on a business for profit. 
(b)  Acknowledgment required. Every hotel shall submit a monthly exemption form, as provided by the city clerk, with each monthly room tax report. This exemption form will indicate the name of the person seeking exemption, the exempt organization with which they are affiliated, the period of occupancy, number of rooms occupied and any other information required by the city clerk. Every exemption form shall be signed by the hotel manager or authorized agent, so that the signature shall serve as an acknowledgment that all information contained in the exemption form is true and correct. Upon submission of these forms to the city, the city clerk shall make a final determination as to the validity of all claimed exemptions. Should the city clerk determine that a claimed exemption is not valid, the hotel shall be assessed the then-current percentage of tax applicable, within three months of the date that the exemption is claimed. The hotel claiming such exemption shall become liable for payment of the tax and shall submit the same with their next monthly tax remittance. For purposes of this section, an exemption will not be validated by the city clerk unless the exemption is claimed for the month in which it accrues. For good cause shown, the city clerk may grant an extension for claiming an exemption. 
(c)  Records required. Every operator shall be required to maintain copies of monthly room reports, monthly exemption forms and individual exemption forms upon the business premises of the hotel for a period of three years. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the city clerk, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city. For purposes of this section, individual exemption forms shall be available from the city clerk and shall include the following: 
(1)  A statement declaring the reason for exemptions; 
(2)  The name, signature, address, home telephone and work telephone numbers of the person claiming the exemption; 
(3)  The date on which the exemption form is completed; and 
(4)  An acknowledgment, by signature, of the exemption by an employee or agent of the hotel. 
(Code 1995, § 106-115; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-218. - Tax to be separately designated on bills. 
    The operator shall separately designate, charge and show the tax on all bills, statements, receipts or any other evidence of charges or payments of rent for occupancy issued or delivered by the operator. 
(Code 1995, § 106-116; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-219. - Operator responsible for collection. 
    The operator shall be responsible for the collection of the tax from the occupant and shall be liable to the city for the tax. 
(Code 1995, § 106-117; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-220. - Certificates of registration. 
(a)  Prior to commencement of business or opening, every hotel operator shall file with the city clerk: 
(1)  A certificate of registration; 
(2)  An affidavit and designation of operator. 
The required filings shall be made on forms prescribed by the city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk shall, within five days after receipt of the required registration and affidavit, issue without charge, to each operator, a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and duplicates thereof for each additional hotel. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be permanently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the city clerk upon the cessation of business at the hotel named, or upon its sale or transfer, or upon the change of designated operator. 
(Code 1995, § 106-118; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-221. - Records required. 
    Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy of all rent paid, charged or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon in such form as the city clerk may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the city clerk, or a duly authorized agent or employee of the city; and shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the city clerk may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer. 
(Code 1995, § 106-119; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-222. - Returns. 
(a)  Every operator shall file with the city clerk a return of occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the period ending the last day of every month of each year. Said returns are to be filed on a monthly basis and are due no later than the 15th day of the month directly following the reporting period. 
(b)  The clerk may permit or require returns to be made by shorter or longer periods and upon such dates as the clerk may specify. The form of the return shall be prescribed by the clerk and shall contain such information as the clerk may deem necessary for the proper administration of this article. The clerk may require amended returns to be filed within ten days after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice. 
(Code 1995, § 106-120; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-223. - Payment of tax. 
    At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to the clerk the taxes imposed by this article upon the rents included in such return, as well as all other monies collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this article. All taxes for the period for which a return is required to be filed shall be due from the operator and payable to the clerk on or before the date fixed for the filing of the return for such period without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and the taxes due thereon. 
(Code 1995, § 106-121; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-224. - Delinquent taxes. 
    The tax levied by this article shall be due and payable when the return is filed. All taxes not paid within 15 days following the last day of the period shall be delinquent. 
(Code 1995, § 106-122; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-225. - Interest on unpaid/delinquent taxes. 
    If any tax levied by this article becomes delinquent, the person responsible and liable for such tax shall pay interest on such unpaid tax at the rate of one and one-half percent per month on the unpaid balance from the date of delinquency. 
(Code 1995, § 106-123; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-226. - Collection by suit. 
    Such taxes and interest due hereunder shall at all times constitute a prior, superior and paramount claim as against the claim of unsecured creditors and may be collected by suit as any other debt. 
(Code 1995, § 106-124; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-227. - Bond required. 
    Where the clerk believes that any operator is about to cease business, leave the state, or remove or dissipate assets, or for any other similar reason the clerk deems it necessary in order to protect revenues under this article, the clerk may require such operator to file with the city a bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state in such amount as the clerk may fix to secure the payment of any tax or penalties and interest due, or which may become due from such operator. In the event the clerk determines that an operator is to file such bond, the clerk shall give notice to such operator specifying the amount of bond required. The operator shall file such bond within five days after the giving of such notice unless, within such five days, the operator shall request in writing, a hearing before the city council or its designee, at which the propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the city council or its designee. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with, within 15 days thereafter. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the clerk, or cash in such amount as the clerk may prescribe, may be deposited with the clerk, who may at any time after five days' notice to the depositor, apply them to any tax and/or penalties due, and for that purpose the securities may be sold at a public or a private sale. 
(Code 1995, § 106-125; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-228. - Assessment and determination of tax. 
    If a return required by this article is not filed, or if a return when filed is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be assessed by the clerk from such information as may be obtainable and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices such as number of rooms, location, scale of rents, comparable rents, types of accommodations and services, number of employees, or other factors. Written notice of such assessments shall be given to the person liable for the collection and payment of the tax. Such assessment shall finally and irrevocably fix and determine that tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, within 90 days after the giving of notice of such assessment, shall apply in writing to the city council or its designee for a hearing or unless the clerk on his own motion shall reassess the same. After such hearing, the city council or its designee shall give written notice of its determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed and such determination shall be final. 
(Code 1995, § 106-126; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-229. - Refunds. 
(a)  The clerk shall refund or credit any tax erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected if written application to the clerk for such refund shall be made within two years from the date of payment thereof. For like causes, and in the same period, a refund may be so made upon the initiative and the order of the clerk. Whenever a refund is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated in writing. Such application may also be made by the person who has collected and paid such tax to the clerk, providing that the application is made within one year of the payment of the occupant to the operator, but no refund of money shall be made to the operator until he has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made. The clerk, in lieu of any refund required to be made, may allow credit thereof on payment due from the applicant. 
(b)  Upon application for a refund, the clerk may receive evidence with respect thereto, and make such investigation as he deems necessary. After making a determination as to the refund, the clerk shall give notice thereof to the applicant. Such determination shall be final unless the applicant, within 90 days after such notice, shall apply in writing to the city council or its designee for a hearing. After such hearing, the city council, or its designee, shall give written notice of the decision to the applicant. 
(Code 1995, § 106-127; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-230. - Notices. 
    Notices provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been given when such notice has been delivered personally to the operator or deposited in the United States mail, addressed to the last known address of the operator. 
(Code 1995, § 106-128; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-231. - Remedies exclusive. 
    The remedies provided in this article shall be exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this article. 
(Code 1995, § 106-129; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-232. - Failure to file; submitting fraudulent returns; failure to post a bond; penalties. 
    The failure or refusal of any operator/taxpayer to make reports and remittances herein required, or the making of any false and fraudulent report for the purpose of avoiding or escaping payment of any tax or portion thereof rightfully due under this article or failure to post a bond, shall be an offense and, upon conviction thereof, the offending taxpayer shall be subject to costs and to a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense and is subject to all penalties herein. 
(Code 1995, § 106-130; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-233. - Operator's discount for keeping records. 
    In order to remunerate an operator for keeping tax records, filing reports, and remitting the tax when due, a two percent discount shall be allowed upon all taxes paid prior to the time they become delinquent. 
(Code 1995, § 106-131; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-234. - Records confidential. 
    The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files concerning the administration of the hotel tax is legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same, the provisions of 68 O.S. § 205, and each subsection thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to administration of the tax as if herein set forth. 
(Code 1995, § 106-132; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-235. - Use of funds. 
    One hundred percent of all taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be set aside and used exclusively for the purpose of encouraging, promoting and fostering economic development, convention, tourism and parks and recreation for the city. The funds may be used for the employment of personnel, purchase or lease of assets, pledge for indebtedness or to fund contracts for services as the city council may deem appropriate in furtherance of the purposes set forth herein. The city council shall determine on a yearly basis the apportionment and distribution of the room tax funds. Each year, a review will be conducted on the prior year's use of funds subsequent to distribution. 
(Code 1995, § 106-133; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-236. - General powers of clerk. 
    In addition to all other powers granted to the clerk, he is hereby authorized and empowered: 
(1)  To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the carrying out of this article for the purposes thereof. 
(2)  To extend for cause shown, the time for filing and return for a period not exceeding 60 days; and for cause shown to waive, remit, or reduce penalties or interest. 
(3)  To delegate his functions hereunder to an assistant or other employee of the city. 
(4)  To assess, reassess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed by this article. 
(5)  To prescribe methods for determining the taxable and nontaxable rents. 
(Code 1995, § 106-134; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-237. - Administration of oaths and compelling testimony. 
    The clerk, or his designated representative, shall have the power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of his powers and duties under this article. The clerk shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of his duties hereunder and all the enforcement of this article and to examine them in relation thereto. 
(Code 1995, § 106-135; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-238. - Proceedings to recover tax. 
(a)  Whenever any taxpayer or other person shall fail to collect and pay over any tax or any tax penalties due and owing, or interest imposed by this article as herein provided, the city attorney shall, upon request of the city clerk, take appropriate action to enforce the payment of same. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority of 68 O.S. § 2701 et seq., all taxes, interest and penalties imposed by this article are hereby declared to constitute a lien in favor of the city, upon all franchises, property and rights to property, whether real or personal, then belonging to or thereafter acquired by the person, firm or corporation owing the tax, whether such property is employed by such person, firm or corporation in the conduct of its business or in the hands of an assignee, trustee, or receiver, for the benefit of a creditor, from the date said taxes are due and payable under provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 106-136; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-239. - Amendments. 
    The citizens of Yukon, by their approval of this article at the election herein provided, hereby authorize the city council by ordinance duly enacted, to make such administrative and technical changes or additions in the method and manner of administration and enforcement of this article as may be necessary or proper for efficiency and fairness; except that the rate of the tax herein provided shall not exceed five percent without approval of the qualified electors of the city as provided by law. 
(Code 1995, § 106-137; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 98-240. - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and all other taxing provisions of the city ordinances. 
(Code 1995, § 106-138; Ord. No. 1224, § 1, 6-3-2008) 
Chapter 110 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic generally, 47 O.S.; powers of local authorities, 47 O.S. § 15-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Adoption by reference. 
    All nonfelony provisions of 47 O.S. are adopted by reference in this section as if fully set out pursuant to 11 O.S. §§ 22-117 and 22-117.1. It shall be unlawful to violate the provisions adopted by reference in this section. 
(Code 1995, § 110-1) 
Sec. 110-2. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street, highway, private property or public property to a garage, storage facility or other place of safety under any of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the vehicle or persons in charge of the vehicle are, by reason of physical injury or otherwise, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; 
(4)  When any vehicle has been parked for more than one hour in excess of the time allowed in any place; 
(5)  When any vehicle which has been involved in two or more violations of this article, for which citations have been issued and not presented as required, is parked in violation of any provision of this article; 
(6)  When any derelict vehicle is discovered by the police department to have been parked upon any street in the city for a period of 48 hours; 
(7)  Where the vehicle has any evidentiary value, has been directly or indirectly involved in the commission of a crime, has been used to transport any person who has committed any offense involving the use of a firearm, or was directly or indirectly associated with a drive-by shooting; 
(8)  When a police officer effects the arrest of the owner or operator of a vehicle out of said vehicle, and no person immediately present can lawfully or reasonably be given custody of such vehicle; 
(9)  When the vehicle bears a license plate which has expired for a period in excess of 90 days, bears a license plate which has been altered or tampered with, or bears a temporary paper tag which had been expired for a period in excess of 90 days, or bears no license plate which would be in conformance with the Oklahoma Vehicle License and Registration Act (47 O.S. § 1101 et seq.); or 
(10)  When a police officer effects the arrest of the operator of the vehicle, out of said vehicle, and the operator is found to have operated the vehicle under any of the following violations: 
a.  Reckless driving, 
b.  Careless driving, 
c.  Actual Physical Control, 
d.  Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, 
e.  Driving while impaired, 
f.  Driving while intoxicated, 
g.  Driving under a suspended, revoked or denied license, 
h.  Driving with no state driver's license or only a set-up number, 
i.  Driving under suspension, revocation, cancellation or denial, 
j.  Eluding or attempting to elude a police officer, 
k.  Failure to give information or render aid, or 
l.  Involved in a hit-and-run accident. 
(b)  A vehicle impounded as provided herein shall be transported to such place as the city may designate. The owner of said vehicle shall be responsible to the city, garage or storage facility for all costs incurred. 
(c)  The owner of the vehicle or other person to whom it may properly be delivered shall obtain written authorization from the city for release of the vehicle. Authorization shall be granted only after such fine and costs as may be properly assessed, or bond in lieu thereof, for the violation for which such vehicle was impounded and any reasonable costs or charges for impounding and storage, shall have been paid. If said vehicle is impounded pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a)(10) of this section, then the owner of the vehicle, or anyone authorized by the owner of the vehicle shall produce: proof of ownership, a valid state driver's license, insurance and current registration and pay an impound fee established by resolution before authorization for release may be granted. The impound fee shall be independent of any fines, costs or fees which may be assessed resulting from any citation issued to any person for violation of traffic laws or other ordinance violations involving the impounded vehicle and in addition to any fees owed to the towing service, garage or storage facility. 
(d)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations consistent with this section. 
(Code 1975, § 24-137; Code 1995, § 110-278; Ord. No. 940, §§ 1, 2, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 1242, § 1, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Removal of illegally stopped vehicles, 47 O.S. § 11-1002. 
Sec. 110-3. - Derelict vehicles. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, and section 110-2, the term "derelict vehicle" means: 
(1)  A vehicle which is in a state of dilapidation; 
(2)  A vehicle upon which a current license plate is not displayed; 
(3)  A vehicle form which tires or wheels have been removed or deflated; 
(4)  A vehicle which has obviously been abandoned and left on any street by the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall park, or cause to be parked, any derelict vehicle upon any street or municipally owned property. 
(Code 1995, § 110-281; Ord. No. 939, §§ 1, 2, 3-5-1996; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 110-4. - State driver's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who does not have a valid driver's license, including never issued a license, expired license, revoked license, suspended license or cancelled license, as required by state law for operation of a motor vehicle upon the state highways, city road, or any other streets governed by the city to operate a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 24-42; Code 1995, § 110-151; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 6-303. 
Sec. 110-5. - Current security verification of liability insurance. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial auto coverage means coverage provided to an insured, regardless of the number of vehicles or entity covered, under a commercial auto, garage or truckers' coverage form or rated from either a commercial manual or rating rule as filed and approved by the state insurance department. Vehicle type and ownership are not necessarily the primary factors in either underwriting the coverage or rating the coverage. 
    Compulsory Insurance Law means the law requiring liability insurance, which provides the minimum vehicle liability limits, in conjunction with the operation of a motor vehicle in the state as found in this 47 O.S. § 7-600 et seq. 
    Operator's policy means a policy of motor vehicle liability insurance which shall insure the named person against loss from the liability imposed upon the named person by law for damages arising out of the operation or use by the named person of any motor vehicle not owned by the named person, subject to the same limits of liability required in an owner's policy. 
    Owner's policy means a policy of motor vehicle liability insurance which: 
(1)  Shall designate by explicit description or by appropriate reference all vehicles with respect to which coverage is thereby to be granted; 
(2)  Shall insure the person named therein and insure any other person, except as provided in subsection (3) of this definition, using an insured vehicle with the express or implied permission of the named insured, against loss from the liability imposed by law for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, operation or use of the vehicle; 
(3)  May provide for exclusions from coverage in accordance with existing laws; and 
(4)  Shall be issued by an authorized insurer providing coverage in accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-204 or in the case of a commercial automobile insurance policy may be issued by an unauthorized insurer as allowed pursuant to 36 O.S. § 1106. 
    Security means: 
(1)  A policy meeting the minimum vehicle liability limits; 
(2)  A deposit of cash or securities as defined in 47 O.S. § 7-330 having the equivalency of the minimum vehicle liability limits; 
(3)  Self-insurance, pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 7-503, having the equivalency of the minimum vehicle liability limits; or 
(4)  For vehicles registered pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 112, a policy meeting or exceeding the minimum vehicle liability limits; provided, the policy may be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of residence or domicile of the member of the Armed Forces and the motor license agent or other registering agency shall accept the security verification form issued by such insurance company. 
    Security verification form means a form, approved by the state insurance commissioner, verifying the existence of security required by this section. 
(b)  Every operator of a motor vehicle registered in the state shall, while operating or using such vehicle, carry either an operator's or an owner's security verification form issued by an insurance carrier or an equivalent form issued by the department of public safety, reflecting liability coverage. An owner's security verification form issued to the owner of a motor vehicle may be used as an operator's security verification form by an operator who is not the owner of the motor vehicle, if the operator is not excluded from coverage on the motor vehicle liability policy for the vehicle. Any exclusions from the policy shall be included on the owner's security verification form. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section. 
(1)  Any person that interferes with a police officer enforcing this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(2)  An owner or operator who fails to comply with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.00 and, in addition thereto, shall be subject to suspension of the driving privilege of the person in accordance with 47 O.S. § 7-605; provided that if a requesting law enforcement officer verifies valid and current security and compliance with this section through the online verification system, there shall be no violation of this section and no citation shall be issued. 
(3)  Upon issuing a citation under this section, the law enforcement officer issuing the citation may: 
a.  Seize the vehicle being operated by the person and cause the vehicle to be towed and stored as provided by 47 O.S. § 955(A), if the officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle is not insured as required by this section, or 
b.  Seize the license plate of the vehicle and issue the citation to the vehicle operator, provided that the vehicle is in a drivable condition at the time of issuing the citation. A copy of the citation retained by the owner or operator of the vehicle shall serve as the temporary license plate of the vehicle for up to ten calendar days after the issuance of the citation. After ten calendar days, the vehicle shall not be used until the vehicle operator or owner completes the requirements to retrieve the license plate. 
(4)  After the issuance of the citation and if charges are to be filed in the municipal court, the police department shall, within three days, deposit the license plate with the city. The police department shall provide the state plan administrator with the seized license plate number. The plan administrator shall maintain a database including all seized license plates and shall submit such information to the state tax commission. 
(5)  The vehicle owner or operator may retrieve the license plate from the police department upon providing verification of compliance with the Compulsory Insurance Law, payment in full of an administrative fee of $125.00 to the police department and payment in full of the citation to the municipal court clerk. The police department shall transfer the administrative fee to the state plan administrator. If, by the end of the second business day immediately following the date of citation, a person produces proof to the police department that issued the citation and is storing the seized license plate that a current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department of public safety reflecting liability coverage for the person was in force at the time of the alleged offense, the person shall not be required to pay the administrative fee required by this division. If no such proof is presented within that time, the person shall pay the full administrative fee required by this section regardless of whether the person had minimum auto liability insurance coverage at the time of citation. 
(6)  The police department may dispose of any unclaimed license plate after 90 days according to applicable state law. After the license plate has been disposed of by the police department, the operator or owner shall be required to obtain a new license plate pursuant to all existing requirements. 
(d)  Dismissal of charges. 
(1)  If the operator of the vehicle produces what appears to be a valid security verification form and the officer is unable to confirm compliance through the online verification system or noncompliance by a subsequent investigation, the police officer shall be prohibited from seizing the license plate or seizing the vehicle and causing such vehicle to be towed and stored. Further, no vehicle shall be seized and towed under the provisions of this subsection if the vehicle is displaying a temporary license plate that has not expired pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. §§ 1137.1 and 1137.3. 
(2)  An owner other than an owner of an antique or a classic automobile as defined by the state tax commission who files an affidavit that a vehicle shall not be driven upon the public highways or public streets, pursuant to 47 O.S. § 7-607, who drives or permits the driving of the vehicle upon the public highways or public streets, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(3)  A sentence imposed for any violation of this section may be suspended or deferred in whole or in part by the municipal court. 
(4)  Any person producing proof in court that a current security verification form or equivalent form which has been issued by the department of public safety reflecting liability coverage for the person was in force at the time of the alleged offense shall be entitled to dismissal of the charge. If proof of security verification is presented to the court by no later than the business day preceding the first scheduled court appearance date, the dismissal shall be without payment of court costs. The court may access information from the online verification system to confirm liability coverage. The court shall not dismiss the fine unless proof that liability coverage for the person was in force at the time of the alleged offense is presented to the court. 
(5)  Upon conviction or a bond forfeiture, the court shall forward an abstract to the department of public safety within five days reflecting the action taken by the court. 
(e)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Every owner of a motor vehicle which is not used upon the public highways or public streets shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if the owner of the vehicle has filed an affidavit with the appropriate motor license agent which states that the vehicle shall not be driven upon the public highways or public streets during the uninsured period. 
(2)  The owner or transporter of a manufactured home, as defined by 47 O.S. § 1102, who is moving or transporting such manufactured home on state roads or federal highways shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a taxicab or taxicabs shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if the person, firm or corporation has complied with the provisions of 47 O.S. § 8-104. 
(Code 1975, § 24-32; Code 1995, § 110-152; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 7-600, 7-602.1, 7-606, 7-607. 
Secs. 110-6-110-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-29. - Citations and arrest for traffic violations. 
(a)  If a resident or nonresident of the city is arrested by a law enforcement officer solely for a misdemeanor violation of a traffic ordinance, other than an ordinance pertaining to a parking or standing traffic violation, and the arrested person is eligible to sign a written promise to appear and be released upon personal recognizance as provided for in 22 O.S. § 1115.1, then the procedures provided for in the State and Municipal Traffic Bail Bond Procedure Act (22 O.S. § 1115 et seq.) as applied to municipalities, shall govern. Absent an ordinance, the municipal court may prescribe a bail bond schedule for traffic offenses. The amount of bail shall not exceed the maximum fine and costs provided by ordinance for each offense, unless the defendant has a previous history of failing to appear according to the terms or conditions of a bond, in which case the amount of bail shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(b)  If the alleged offense is a violation of an ordinance restricting or regulating the parking of vehicles, including any regulations issued under such an ordinance, and the operator is not present, the police officer shall place on the vehicle, at a place reasonably likely to come to the notice of the operator, a citation conforming substantially to that prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, with such variation as the circumstances require. The operator of the vehicle shall be under the same obligation to respond to the citation as if it had been issued to him personally under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 24-30; Code 1995, § 110-72; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 27-117.1. 
Sec. 110-30. - Authority of city manager to promulgate traffic regulations. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this article and other traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(Code 1975, § 24-2; Code 1995, § 110-66) 
Sec. 110-31. - General duties of police department with respect to traffic. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon such department by this chapter and any other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(b)  In addition to the duties listed in subsection (a) of this section, on all roads, streets and highways that form the boundary lines of the city, the police department shall also have the duty and authority to enforce all applicable street regulations of adjoining municipalities and all applicable state vehicle laws on that portion of the road, street or highway forming the boundary lines of the municipality which lies outside of the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 24-3; Code 1995, § 110-67) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate traffic on municipal boundary, 47 O.S. § 108.1. 
Sec. 110-32. - Authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand/or signal in conformance with traffic laws and/ordinances; provided that, upon a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and/ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 24-4; Code 1995, § 110-68) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, 47 O.S. § 15-102(A)(2). 
Sec. 110-33. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct, or assist the police in directing, traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1975, § 24-5; Code 1995, § 110-69) 
Sec. 110-34. - Designation and maintenance of crosswalks and safety zones or islands. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones or islands of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1975, § 24-198; Code 1995, § 110-367) 
Secs. 110-35-110-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 110-57. - Established. 
    There is established the traffic and transportation commission. 
(Code 1975, § 24-221; Code 1995, § 110-86; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 110-58. - Composition. 
    The traffic and transportation commission shall consist of five members nominated and confirmed as provided in section 2-327. Each appointed member of the board shall serve a term of office as provided in section 2-327. 
(Code 1975, § 24-222; Code 1995, § 110-87; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 110-59. - Qualifications, compensation and removal of members. 
    The appointive members of the traffic and transportation commission shall be residents of the city. They shall be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation and shall serve without compensation. Members may be removed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, at any time. 
(Code 1975, § 24-223; Code 1995, § 110-88; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996 
Sec. 110-60. - Meetings. 
    The traffic and transportation commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month unless the commission or its chair dispenses with one or more regular meetings with cause. 
(Code 1975, § 24-224; Code 1995, § 110-89; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 110-61. - Officers. 
    The traffic and transportation commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. Such officers shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are elected. 
(Code 1975, § 24-225; Code 1995, § 110-90; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 110-62. - Secretary. 
    In addition to the appointed members of the traffic and transportation commission, the community enhancement director, or his designee, shall serve as an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary to the commission, but shall have no vote in the matters coming before the commission. 
(Code 1975, § 24-226; Code 1995, § 110-91; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 110-63. - General functions. 
    The traffic and transportation commission shall: 
(1)  Coordinate traffic transportation activities, receive complaints and conduct hearings having to do with traffic and transportation matters. 
(2)  Within the limitations of ordinances and state laws applicable to traffic-control, exercise general supervisory direction over the planning of facilities for improvement of traffic conditions and for the safe and efficient operation of traffic movement over across and along the streets and highways, and the marking and signalizing thereof. 
(3)  Make or cause to be made by or under supervision of the community enhancement director, surveys and engineering studies relating to traffic movement and the safe and efficient control thereof. The community enhancement director shall analyze such surveys and studies and make findings of fact based thereon. The community enhancement director shall relate such findings of fact as to the designed capacity or any traffic way so surveyed or studied or to special conditions set forth in the surveys and studies as being hazardous to traffic movement and shall reach conclusions based thereon as to the kinds of regulation, and kinds of markers, signs, or signals and the locations thereof, shown by the analysis and findings to be necessary for the adequate, efficient and safe control of traffic. 
(4)  Recommend to the city council, the city engineer, the community enhancement director and other city officials, ways and means toward improving traffic, transportation and parking conditions, and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. 
(5)  Carry out any and all further duties which may be imposed upon it by ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 24-227; Code 1995, § 110-92; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 110-64. - Hearings. 
    For the purpose of analyzing and reevaluating the data contained in any traffic engineering survey or study properly before it, the traffic and transportation commission is authorized to conduct hearings and make such investigation as it deems advisable and necessary, but no expense for the hearing or investigation shall be a charge against any funds of the city unless incurred under specific authority of the council. 
(Code 1975, § 24-228; Code 1995, § 110-93; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 110-65. - Recommendations on certain ordinances. 
    All ordinances affecting the movement of traffic, transportation or parking, and all measures for the facilitation of traffic movement shall first be referred to the traffic and transportation commission for recommendations. Any recommendations shall be made to the council in writing and shall be signed by the chairperson of the commission. 
(Code 1975, § 24-229; Code 1995, § 110-94; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Sec. 110-66. - Records. 
    All surveys and studies, analyses, findings and conclusions made by the traffic and transportation commission shall be reduced to writing by the commission, and a copy shall be maintained as a record in the office of the community enhancement director. 
(Code 1975, § 24-230; Code 1995, § 110-95; Ord. No. 946, 5-7-1996) 
Secs. 110-67-110-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS BUREAU, FINE SCHEDULE 

Sec. 110-91. - Established. 
    A traffic violations bureau is established as a division of the office of the clerk of the court, to be administered by the clerk, or by subordinates designated by the clerk for that purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 24-31(a); Code 1995, § 110-101) 
Sec. 110-92. - Schedule of fines. 
    Any person released upon personal recognizance may elect to enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the violation charged at any time before the defendant is required to appear for arraignment by pleading guilty or nolo contendere in the traffic violations bureau and paying the fine according to the following schedule, in addition to court costs, penalty assessments and state mandated fees. Upon arrest, the defendant shall be eligible for release upon the giving of bail according to the following bond schedule, in addition to court costs, penalty assessments and state mandated fees: 
Accidents: Driving too fast in unsafe road conditions with accident. $200.00 Duty to give information and/or render aid with accident. $200.00 Elude officer in a motor vehicle with accident. $500.00 Failure to obey traffic-control device with accident. $200.00 Failure to report accident/leave the scene of accident. $450.00 Failure to stop/yield at signal light with accident (personal injury or property damage). $200.00 Failure to stop/yield from private drive (personal injury or property damage). $200.00 Failure to stop/yield from stop sign (personal injury or property damage). $200.00 Failure to stop/yield from yield sign (personal injury or property damage). $200.00 Failure to yield right-of-way (personal injury or property damage). $200.00 Failure to yield to emergency vehicle (personal injury or property damage). $200.00 Failure to yield to pedestrian (personal injury or property damage). $200.00 Following too close with accident. $200.00 Hit and run accident resulting in bodily injury. $450.00 Improper backing with accident. $200.00 Improper lane change with accident. $200.00 Improper turn with accident. $200.00 Improper use of lane with accident. $200.00 Inattentive driving with accident. $200.00 Leaving scene of accident. $450.00 Operate motor vehicle at unreasonable or excessive speeds with accident. $200.00 Alcohol and/or drug: Actual physical control of motor vehicle under the influence of drug. $750.00 Actual physical control/APC. $750.00 Drive, operate or be in actual physical control of alcohol and under age of 21. $750.00 Drive, operate or be in actual physical control of motor vehicle, under age of 21, alcohol and drug (combined). $750.00 Drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of motor vehicle, by drug. $750.00 Drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of motor vehicle with blood alcohol content of .08 or more. $750.00 Driving while impaired (DWI). $750.00 Driving while under the influence of alcohol. $750.00 Driving while under the influence of drug. $750.00 Personal injury accident while under the influence of alcohol or drug. $750.00 Possession of intoxicating beverage, under age of 21, without a vehicle/first offense. $300.00 Possession of intoxicating beverage, under age of 21, without a vehicle/second offense. $600.00 Possession of intoxicating beverage, under age of 21, without a vehicle/third offense. $900.00 Possession of alcohol and/or low-point beer, under age of 21, without a vehicle/first offense. $300.00 Possession of alcohol and/or low-point beer, under age of 21, without a vehicle/second offense. $600.00 Possession of alcohol and/or low-point beer, under age of 21, without a vehicle/third offense. $900.00 Possession of marijuana not in a vehicle. $750.00 Possession of marijuana in a vehicle. $750.00 Possession of drug paraphernalia not in a vehicle. $650.00 Possession of drug paraphernalia in a vehicle. $650.00 Possession of fake marijuana/chemically synthesized substance to emulate marijuana. $750.00 Public intoxication from alcohol or drug. $100.00 Social host. $500.00 Transporting an open container of alcohol beverage. $500.00 Using motor vehicle during a misdemeanor and possession of controlled dangerous substance. $750.00 Backing: Improper backing. $50.00 Barricade: Drive around and/or move barricade to pass. $200.00 Careless/Negligent/Reckless Driving: Allowing passenger to ride outside passenger compartment. $50.00 Attempting to elude officer in motor vehicle. $500.00 Attempting to elude officer in motor vehicle endangering another person. $500.00 Careless driving. $200.00 Fail to reduce speed when lawfully required. $500.00 Negligent driving. $150.00 Operating motor vehicle at speed greater than reasonable and proper. $70.00 Operating motor vehicle improperly due to disability or medical condition. $200.00 Reckless driving without regard to safety of person. $500.00 Reckless driving without regard to property. $400.00 Construction Zone or Area: A violation in construction area excluding speeding and unless otherwise stated. $200.00 Endangerment of worker in construction zone. $400.00 Failure to observe safety zone. $200.00 Speeding/01-05 mph over limit. $160.00 Speeding/06-10 mph over limit. $180.00 Speeding/11-15 mph over limit. $200.00 Speeding/16-20 mph over limit. $220.00 Speeding/21-25 mph over limit. $240.00 Speeding/26-30 mph over limit. $260.00 Speeding/31-35 mph over limit. $280.00 Speeding/36+ mph over limit. $340.00 Defective Equipment: Driving at night with improper lights. $50.00 Driving at night without lights. $50.00 Illegal front windshield/window tint. $50.00 Operate motor vehicle with unsafe equipment or condition. $50.00 Operating with defective brakes. $50.00 Operating with defective headlights. $50.00 Operating with defective muffler/exhaust. $50.00 Operating without required equipment. $50.00 Using equipment prohibited by law. $50.00 Driver's License Violations: Allowing unlawful operator to drive a motor vehicle. $150.00 Display driver's license, not own, to mislead another. $750.00 Driving subject to restriction. $50.00 Driving while license revoked. $300.00 Driving while license suspended. $300.00 Fail to notify department of public safety of address change. $50.00 False I.D. $200.00 Loan driver's license to another for criminal intent. $750.00 No driver's license in possession while driving. $50.00 Operate motor vehicle contrary to conditions on driver's license. $50.00 Operating motor vehicle without valid driver's license. $300.00 Possession of altered driver's license. $750.00 Emergency: Following emergency vehicle closer than 500 feet. $200.00 Illegal use of 911. $500.00 Improper passing of stationary emergency vehicle. $200.00 Improper use of emergency/hazard lights. $200.00 Improper use of horn and warning devices. $200.00 Following Improperly: Following too closely. $100.00 Improper Lane Change/Center Line: Driving left of center. $100.00 Driving off of roadway when overtaking on right. $200.00 Driving on shoulder, sidewalk or in ditch. $90.00 Driving on wrong side of the road. $90.00 Driving wrong way on one-way street. $90.00 Impeding flow of traffic. $90.00 Improper lane change. $90.00 Improper turn. $90.00 Improper use of lane. $90.00 Littering: Deposit of injurious/harmful substances. $200.00 Littering from motor vehicle. $100.00 Littering where prohibited. $100.00 Throwing burning substances during state burn ban. $750.00 Throwing burning substances from vehicle. $250.00 License Plate: Fail to pay taxes due to the state for registration plate. $80.00 Improper tag display. $50.00 Operate motor vehicle while displaying another state's plate and possess Oklahoma driver's license. $300.00 Operate motor vehicle with altered or changed registration plate. $80.00 Operate motor vehicle with missing registration plate. $80.00 Operate new motor vehicle with expired dealer tag. $80.00 Operating motor vehicle without current tag. $80.00 Miscellaneous: Creating unlawful noise with a motor vehicle or accessory. $100.00 Creating unlawful/excessive noise with a muffler. $100.00 Crossing fire hose with vehicle. $70.00 Disobey lawful order. $200.00 Fail to mark load extension. $200.00 Failure to dim lights while driving at night. $50.00 Failure to display required headlamps at night. $50.00 Failure to obey instructions. $70.00 Illegal use of private drive. $50.00 Leave child or vulnerable adult unattended in motor vehicle. $50.00 Misuse towing trailer/using vehicle improperly. $200.00 No insurance verification. $250.00 Opening vehicle door into traffic. $50.00 Operating golf cart on city streets. $50.00 Operating/loading vehicle to create obstructed view. $50.00 Motorcycles: Adequate brakes required for a motorcycle. $70.00 Carrying passengers unlawfully. $70.00 Fenders required for a motorcycle. $70.00 Lighted headlamp required for a motorcycle. $70.00 No endorsement. $70.00 No headgear for operator/rider. $70.00 No helmet and under age 18/driver or rider. $70.00 No windshield/face shield. $70.00 Off road motorcycle, go-cart or ATV within 1000 feet of residential area. $70.00 Operate motorcycle after 9:00 p.m. and under age of 16. $70.00 Operating dirt bike and/or ATV on city streets. $70.00 Overloading motorcycle with passengers and/or cargo. $70.00 Passing vehicles between lanes. $70.00 Rearview mirrors required for a motorcycle. $70.00 Speed limit, under age of 16 and under 35 mph. $70.00 Speedometer required for a motorcycle.. $70.00 Stop lamp required for a motorcycle $70.00 Parking: 30-foot flashing beacon/traffic-control device on side of road. $30.00 Abandoned vehicle-over 24 hours. $55.00 Allow 10 feet of roadway for traffic. $30.00 Allow 20 feet of crosswalk at an intersection. $30.00 Allow 50 feet of the nearest trail of a railroad crossing. $30.00 Blocking public/private driveway. $35.00 Careless parking/engine running. $35.00 Double parking. $35.00 Failure to set parking brake. $35.00 Improper parking/any place where official sign prohibits stopping. $30.00 Improper parking/no parking zone. $35.00 Inoperable vehicle in front yard. $55.00 Must park within 18 inches of curb. $30.00 No parking but to repair vehicle in an emergency. $30.00 No parking for the purpose of selling a motor vehicle. $30.00 No parking in front of public or private drive. $30.00 No parking on a crosswalk. $30.00 No parking on a sidewalk. $30.00 No parking on or over marked line. $30.00 No parking on private property without permission of property owner. $35.00 Overtime parking. $35.00 Parking 14,500 pounds or more on street. $100.00 Parking in fire lane/zone. $35.00 Parking in handicapped zone. $100.00 Parking on wrong side of the road. $35.00 Parking within 15 feet of fire hydrant. $35.00 Parking within 30 feet of intersection. $35.00 Starting unsafely from a parked position. $200.00 Passing: Failure to signal intention to pass. $50.00 Improper passing. $90.00 Passing in a no passing zone. $90.00 Passing where prohibited $90.00 Passing with insufficient distance allowed for other motor vehicles. $100.00 Passing with obscured view at intersection or railroad crossing. $200.00 Right-of-Way: (no accident with personal injury or property damage) Failure to yield right-of-way. $100.00 Failure to yield for emergency vehicle. $200.00 Failure to yield from stop sign. $100.00 Failure to yield from yield sign. $100.00 Failure to yield for pedestrian. $100.00 Failure to yield from private drive. $100.00 Failure to yield at signal light. $100.00 Railroad crossing: Crossing violation not specifically covered. $200.00 Drive through, around, or under crossing gate. $200.00 Fail to check for train traffic. $200.00 Fail to stop at railroad crossing/tracks not clear. $200.00 Fail to stop at railroad crossing/drive onto crossing. $200.00 Improper stop on railroad crossing. $200.00 Seatbelts/seats: Failure of passenger to wear seat belt/not properly adjusted safety belt. $20.00 Failure to secure child. $50.00 Failure to wear seat belt/not properly adjusted safety belt. $20.00 More than three passengers in front seat. $50.00 School Zone or Area: Fail to stop for school bus. $200.00 Operate motor vehicle not reasonable or proper. $140.00 Pass in a school zone or area. $200.00 Speeding/01-05 mph over limit. $160.00 Speeding/06-10 mph over limit. $180.00 Speeding/11-15 mph over limit. $200.00 Speeding/16-20 mph over limit. $220.00 Speeding/21-25 mph over limit. $240.00 Speeding/26-30 mph over limit. $260.00 Speeding/31-35 mph over limit. $280.00 Speeding/36+ mph over limit. $340.00 Signal: Failure to signal intention. $50.00 Giving improper signal. $50.00 Stopping: Failure to obey traffic-control device. $200.00 Failure to signal stop or reduce speed suddenly. $50.00 Failure to stop at railroad crossing. $250.00 Failure to stop for school bus loading/unloading. $200.00 Failure to stop for signal light/red light. $100.00 Failure to stop for stop sign. $100.00 Failure to stop with explosives. $100.00 Improper stopping on road. $50.00 Obstructing the roadway. $150.00 Opening motor vehicle door into traffic. $70.00 Speeding-Business: Operate a motor vehicle in manner not reasonable and proper. $70.00 Speeding/01-05 mph over limit. $80.00 Speeding/06-10 mph over limit. $90.00 Speeding/11-15 mph over limit. $100.00 Speeding/16-20 mph over limit. $110.00 Speeding/21-25 mph over limit. $120.00 Speeding/26-30 mph over limit. $130.00 Speeding/31-35 mph over limit. $140.00 Speeding/36-40 mph over limit. $170.00 Speeding/41+ mph over limit. $200.00 Speeding-Residential Zone or Area: Speeding/01-05 mph over limit. $100.00 Speeding/06-10 mph over limit. $110.00 Speeding/11-15 mph over limit. $120.00 Speeding/16-20 mph over limit. $130.00 Speeding/21-25 mph over limit. $140.00 Speeding/26-30 mph over limit. $150.00 Speeding/31-35 mph over limit. $160.00 Speeding/36+ mph over limit. $190.00 Turning: Improper left turn. $90.00 Improper turn. $90.00 Improper turn from wrong lane. $90.00 Improper U-turn. $90.00 Turning in front of oncoming traffic. $90.00 Use of private drive to avoid light. $90.00 Wrong Way or Direction: Driving on wrong side of road. $90.00 Driving wrong way on one-way street. $90.00  
(Code 1975, § 24-31(a); Code 1995, § 110-102; Ord. No. 994, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 1021, § 1, 9-15-1998; Ord. No. 1151, § 1, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1179, § 1, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 1211, § 1, 9-18-2007; Ord. No. 1238, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 110-93. - Effect of payment. 
    If the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, such plea shall be accepted by the court and the full payment of the fine, court costs, and state-mandated fees shall constitute a final determination of the cause against the defendant. If the defendant has posted bond and fails to appear for court, the bond shall be forfeited. Failure of the defendant to make a full payment shall result in prosecution under the provisions of chapter 38. 
(Code 1975, § 24-31(b); Code 1995, § 110-103; Ord. No. 1151, § 1, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 1179, § 1, 8-16-2005; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Secs. 110-94-110-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ACCIDENTS AND ACCIDENT REPORT 

Sec. 110-115. - Involving nonfatal injury. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in a nonfatal injury to any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of law. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 24-22; Code 1995, § 110-126) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-102. 
Sec. 110-116. - Duty to give information and render aid. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to and/or death of any person and/or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his correct name, address and registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and shall upon request exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and his security verification form, to the person struck or the driver or occupant of, or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. Any driver who provides information required by this section which is intentionally inaccurate shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-7 or as established by city ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 24-22; Code 1995, § 110-127; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 10-104. 
Secs. 110-117-110-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RULES OF THE ROAD 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-146. - Scope of this article and of article III of this chapter. 
    The provisions of this article relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon the highways except: 
(1)  Where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
(2)  The provisions of article III of this chapter and division 9 of this article shall apply upon highways, and public parking lots throughout the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-101. 
Sec. 110-147. - Obedience to officers directing traffic. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given as authorized in sections 110-32 and 110-33. 
(Code 1975, § 24-6; Code 1995, § 110-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-103. 
Sec. 110-148. - Person owning or in control of vehicle not to authorize or permit violation of article. 
    No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a vehicle owned by him, registered in his name or under his control to be driven, parked or stopped in violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 24-28; Code 1995, § 110-6) 
Sec. 110-149. - Responsibility of parent, guardian. 
    No parent of any child or guardian of any ward shall cause, authorize or knowingly permit such child or ward to violate any provision of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 24-29; Code 1995, § 110-7) 
Sec. 110-150. - Application of article to persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals, etc. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this article applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this article which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1975, § 24-23; Code 1995, § 110-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-104. 
Sec. 110-151. - Application of article to persons and equipment engaged in street or public utility work. 
    Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this article, except sections 110-387 through 110-391, shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment, while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a street, or to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in construction, maintenance or repair of public utilities; provided that, all highway and public utility operations shall be protected by adequate warning signs, signals, devices or flagmen. The provisions of this article shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(Code 1975, § 24-25; Code 1995, § 110-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-105. 
Sec. 110-152. - Exemptions granted drivers of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or ordinance, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this article 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement. 
(5)  Disregard regulations governing turning in specific directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when he is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-218, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red or blue light visible from in front of the vehicle. This subsection shall not be construed as requiring a peace officer operating a police vehicle properly and lawfully in response to a crime in progress to use audible signals. 
(d)  The exemptions in subsections (b)(3) and (b)(5) of this section shall be granted to a law enforcement officer operating an authorized emergency vehicle for law enforcement purposes without using audible and visual signals required by this section as long as the action does not endanger life or property if the officer is following a suspected violator of the law with probable cause to believe that: 
(1)  Knowledge of the presence of the officer will cause the suspect to: 
a.  Destroy or lose evidence of a suspected felony; 
b.  End a suspected continuing felony before the officer has obtained sufficient evidence to establish grounds for arrest; or 
c.  Evade apprehension or identification of the suspect or the vehicle of the suspect; or 
(2)  Because of traffic conditions, vehicles moving in response to the audible or visual signals may increase the potential for a collision. 
The exceptions granted in this subsection (d) shall not apply to an officer who is in actual pursuit of a person who is eluding or attempting to elude the officer in violation of 21 O.S. § 540(A). 
(e)  The foregoing provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1975, § 24-27; Code 1995, § 110-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-106. 
Sec. 110-153. - Exemption for military convoys. 
    The military forces of the United States and/organizations of the National Guard, performing any military duty, shall not be restricted by city traffic regulations that do not mirror state law, and shall have the right-of-way on any street or highway through which they may pass against all, except carriers of the United States mail, fire engines, ambulances and police vehicles in the necessary discharge of their respective duties. Said mounted military moving in convoy shall have lights burning, with lead and trail vehicles prominently marked, and shall travel, while inside the city limits, in compliance with such speeds as are legally posted within the city and shall maintain a closed interval of not more than 75 feet. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-107. 
Sec. 110-154. - Cutting across private property to avoid traffic regulations. 
    No person shall drive upon or through any property such as a service station, parking area, vacant lot, or similar property so as to avoid obedience to traffic regulations, the use of a street, or any traffic-control device. 
(Code 1995, § 110-302.1; Ord. No. 919, 11-7-1995) 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic signs, signals and markings, 47 O.S. § 11-201 et seq.; authority to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control signals, 47 O.S. § 15-102(A)(2). 

Sec. 110-155. - Obedience to devices; when devices required. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this division or state statute, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this division. 
(b)  No provision of this division for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-102, 24-103; Code 1995, §§ 110-301, 110-302; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-201; necessity for signs to enforce city traffic regulations, 47 O.S. § 15-102(C). 
Sec. 110-156. - Conformity with state manual and specifications; uniformity. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state highway commission. All signs and signals required under this division for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected, and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this division, shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1975, § 24-100; Code 1995, § 110-303) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 15-106. 
Sec. 110-157. - General installation and maintenance. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, shall have placed and maintained traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this division and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions thereof, and may have placed and maintained such additional traffic-control signs, signals and devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 24-99; Code 1995, § 110-305) 
Sec. 110-158. - Testing. 
    The city manager may have traffic-control devices tested under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 24-101; Code 1995, § 110-306) 
Sec. 110-159. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
(a)  Use and application of colors for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights or colored lighted arrows successively one at a time, or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal, except when prohibited under section 110-554, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited; 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as provided in section 110-160, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk; 
(2)  Steady yellow indication. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter; and 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 110-160, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway; and 
(3)  Steady red indication. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown except as provided in subsections (3)b. and d. of this section; 
b.  Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street after stopping as required by subsection (3)a. of this section. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; 
c.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the driver of a motorcycle facing any steady red signal may cautiously proceed through the intersection only if: 
1.  The motorcycle has been brought to a complete stop as required by subsection (3)a. of this section; 
2.  The traffic-control signal is programmed or engineered to change to a green signal only after detecting the approach of a motor vehicle and has failed to detect the arrival of the motorcycle because of its size or weight; and 
3.  No motor vehicle or person is approaching on the roadway to be crossed or entered, or the motor vehicle or person is at a distance from the intersection that does not constitute an immediate hazard. The driver of any vehicle approaching the intersection, which lawfully may enter the intersection, shall have the right-of-way over any motorcycle operator proceeding through a red light and, in no event where an accident results from the driver of the motorcycle proceeding into the intersection on a red light, shall such driver of the vehicle be charged with any violation pursuant to sections 110-236 and 110-238 relating to failure to yield right-of-way, section 110-200 relating to following too closely, or section 11-347 relating to driving too fast for conditions; and 
d.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 110-160, pedestrians facing a steady circular red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(b)  Exception to traffic-control signals at other than an intersection. In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1975, § 24-104; Code 1995, § 110-307) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-202. 
Sec. 110-160. - Pedestrian walk and wait signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Wait or don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the wait signal is showing. 
(Code 1975, § 24-106; Code 1995, § 110-309) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-203. 
Sec. 110-161. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever an illuminated red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  When approaching railroad crossings. This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. The conduct of drivers approaching such crossings shall be governed by sections 110-324 and 110-325. 
(Code 1975, § 24-105; Code 1995, § 110-308) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-204. 
Sec. 110-162. - Lane use control signals. 
    When lane use control signals are placed over individual lanes, said signals shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles as follows: 
(1)  Green indication. Vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown; 
(2)  Steady yellow indication. Vehicular traffic is thereby warned that a lane control change is being made; 
(3)  Steady red indication. Vehicular traffic shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown; and 
(4)  Flashing yellow indication. Vehicular traffic may use the lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-204.1. 
Sec. 110-163. - Pedestrian-actuated school crossing signals. 
    Whenever a pedestrian-actuated school crossing signal is provided, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Flashing yellow. 
a.  When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution. 
b.  Pedestrians shall not proceed in conflict with traffic, but may actuate the signal control switch, and shall wait until steady red alone is shown before entering the roadway or intersection controlled by the signal. 
(2)  Steady yellow alone. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection or pass the signal when the red or "stop" signal is exhibited. 
b.  No pedestrian shall enter the roadway or intersection on which the signal controls vehicular traffic until steady red alone is shown. 
(3)  Steady red. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before passing the signal or entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until flashing yellow is shown alone. 
b.  Pedestrians may proceed across the road controlled by the signal, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(4)  Steady red and steady yellow combined. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall remain standing until the flashing yellow signal is shown alone. 
b.  Pedestrians are thereby warned that the flashing yellow signal is about to be shown, and shall not enter the signal-controlled roadway or intersection, or in a direction which conflicts with the movement of vehicular traffic, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing shall proceed to the nearest sidewalk or safety island, and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(Code 1975, § 24-107; Code 1995, § 110-310) 
Sec. 110-164. - Traffic lanes. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is authorized to have traffic lanes marked upon the roadway of any street where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 24-70; Code 1995, § 110-312) 
Sec. 110-165. - No turn signs. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall have placed proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted 
(Code 1975, § 24-51; Code 1995, § 110-315) 
Sec. 110-166. - Unauthorized signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway an unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which projects any flashing or revolving beams of light, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign, signal or device bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection, upon private property adjacent to highways, of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1975, § 24-108; Code 1995, § 110-304) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-206. 
Sec. 110-167. - Traffic signal preemption device; possession, use, interference with, or sale. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "traffic signal preemption device" shall mean a device designed for use by authorized emergency vehicles to improve traffic movement by temporarily controlling signalized intersections. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to possess, use, or interfere with a traffic signal preemption device unless: 
(1)  The person is the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle upon which the device is installed; and 
(2)  The person is responding to an existing or potential emergency and there is a threat of immediate danger to life or property which reasonably requires the use of the device in order to protect the life, safety, health, or property of another person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to advertise, offer for sale, sell, or otherwise distribute any traffic signal preemption device to any individual person in the state. Advertising, offering for sale, selling, and distribution of these devices shall be limited to trade publications and companies whose target market is law enforcement agencies, fire departments, and ambulance service providers of the state or its political subdivisions. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-208. 
Sec. 110-168. - Altering, injuring, etc., devices. 
(a)  No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device, including any nine-one-one (911) emergency telephone service route markers, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(b)  No person, except by proper authority, shall remove any barricade or obstruction placed by authority of the city to keep traffic off of any pavement, street, curb, sidewalk or other area. 
(Code 1975, § 24-109; Code 1995, § 110-311) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-207. 
Secs. 110-169-110-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; OVERTAKING AND PASSING, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Driving on right side of roadway, overtaking and passing, etc., 47 O.S. § 11-301 et seq. 

Sec. 110-190. - Drive on right side of roadway, exceptions. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic; or 
(5)  Upon a roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane when available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway and may be temporarily driven upon the right-hand shoulder for the purpose of permitting other vehicles to pass. This subsection shall not apply when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(c)  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) of this section. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-43(a), (b); Code 1995, § 110-181) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-301. 
Sec. 110-191. - Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1975, § 24-44; Code 1995, § 110-183) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-302. 
Sec. 110-192. - Passing vehicle proceeding in same direction-Generally. 
    The following requirements shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special requirements hereinafter stated: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(1)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(1)  Every driver who intends to pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, which requires moving his vehicle from one lane of traffic to another, shall first see that such movement can be made with safety and shall proceed to pass only after giving a proper signal by hand/or mechanical device. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-45, 24-46; Code 1995, §§ 110-184(a), 110-185) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 11-303. 
Sec. 110-193. - Same-On right side. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-47; Code 1995, § 110-186) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-304. 
Sec. 110-194. - Limitations on overtaking on left. 
    No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within 100 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(Code 1975, § 24-45; Code 1995, § 110-184(a)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-305. 
Sec. 110-195. - Limitations on driving to left of center of roadway. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing unless otherwise indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway; nor under the conditions described in section 110-190, nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-43(c); Code 1995, § 110-182) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-306. 
Sec. 110-196. - No-passing zones. 
    Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set forth in section 110-195(a), no driver shall at any time drive to the left side of the roadway within such no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no-passing zone throughout its length. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-307(B). 
Sec. 110-197. - Vehicles to move only in indicated direction. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys and parts of alleys designated as one-way streets and alleys, as provided for in section 110-198, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 24-67; Code 1995, § 110-202) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-308. 
Sec. 110-198. - One-way streets and alleys. 
    Whenever the city council, by motion or resolution, designates any street or alley or part thereof as a one-way street or alley, the city manager shall have placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 24-66; Code 1995, § 110-314) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to designate one-way streets, 47 O.S. §§ 11-308, 15-102(A)(4). 
Sec. 110-199. - Driving within traffic lanes. 
(a)  Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane, except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or otherwise authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane. 
(2)  A vehicle shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety and then given a signal, not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle, of his intention to change lanes. 
(3)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation. 
(4)  A two-way, left-turn lane is a lane near the center of the highway set aside for use by vehicles making left turns in both directions from or into the roadway. Two-way left-turn lanes shall be designated by distinctive roadway markings consisting of parallel double yellow lines, interior line dashed and exterior line solid, on each side of the lane. A vehicle shall not be driven in a designated two-way left-turn lane except when preparing for or making a left turn from or into a roadway. Vehicles turning left from the roadway shall not be driven in the two-way left-turn lane for more than 200 feet while preparing for and making the turn. A vehicle turning left onto the roadway may utilize the two-way left-turn lane as a staging area by stopping and waiting for traffic proceeding in the same direction to clear before merging into the adjacent lanes of travel. A left turn shall not be made from any other lane where a two-way left-turn lane has been designated; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit driving across a two-way left-turn lane when moving from a service drive onto such marked roadway. 
(5)  Upon a roadway which is divided into four or more lanes, a vehicle shall not impede the normal flow of traffic by driving in the left lane; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit driving in a lane other than the right-hand lane when traffic conditions or flow, or both, or road configuration, such as the potential of merging traffic, require the use of lanes other than the right-hand lane to maintain safe traffic conditions. 
(6)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign. 
(Code 1975, § 24-71; Code 1995, § 110-158) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-309. 
Sec. 110-200. - Following too closely. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the road. 
(b)  The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residential district and which is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or another vehicle. 
(c)  No vehicle which has more than six tires in contact with the road shall approach from the rear of another vehicle which has more than six tires in contact with the road closer than 300 feet except when passing such vehicle. 
(d)  Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residential district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. The distance between such vehicles shall be a minimum of 200 feet under all conditions. This provision shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Code 1975, § 24-77; Code 1995, § 110-164; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-310. 
Sec. 110-201. - Driving on divided highway. 
    Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or peace officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through a permanent opening in the dividing space, barrier or section or at a permanent cross-over or intersection as established unless specifically prohibited by public authority. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any temporary opening in a dividing space, barrier or section or at a temporary cross-over or intersection unless specifically authorized by a public authority or at the direction of a peace officer. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-311. 
Sec. 110-202. - Entering or leaving controlled-access roadway. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Code 1975, § 24-72; Code 1995, § 110-160) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-312. 
Sec. 110-203. - Restrictions on use of controlled-access roadway. 
    No person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs that prohibit the use of a controlled access highway by pedestrians, bicycles or other non-motorized traffic or by any person operating a motor-driven cycle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-313. 
Sec. 110-204. - Approaching stationary authorized vehicles on the roadway. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, a department of transportation maintenance vehicle, a turnpike authority maintenance vehicle, or a licensed Class AA wrecker that is displaying a flashing combination red or blue light or any combination of red or blue lights, shall: 
(1)  If traveling on a highway that consists of two or more lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of travel as that of the driver, the driver shall proceed with due caution and shall, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic conditions, change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to the stationary authorized emergency vehicle, a department of transportation maintenance vehicle, a turnpike authority maintenance vehicle, or licensed Class AA wrecker; or if the driver is not able to change lanes or if to do so would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the motor vehicle to a safe speed for the existing road, weather, and traffic conditions; and 
(2)  If traveling on a highway other than a highway described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the driver shall proceed with due caution and reduce the speed of the motor vehicle to a safe speed for the existing road, weather, and traffic conditions. 
(b)  This section does not relieve the operator of a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, a department of transportation maintenance vehicle, a turnpike authority maintenance vehicle, or licensed Class AA wrecker from the consequences of reckless disregard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-314. 
Sec. 110-205. - Driving in processions. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1975, § 24-80; Code 1995, § 110-167) 
Sec. 110-206. - Driving through processions. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this article. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1975, § 24-81; Code 1995, § 110-168) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-315. 
Secs. 110-207-110-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RIGHT-OF-WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Right-of-way, 47 O.S. § 11-401 et seq. 

Sec. 110-236. - Two or more vehicles facing stop, slow, warning or caution signal. 
(a)  Whether a stop sign or yield sign is present, visible or not, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall not proceed until it is safe to do so, when the driver is: 
(1)  On a county road upon approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway; 
(2)  On a private drive or any road not maintained by the county or state upon approaching an intersection with a state or federal highway or a county road; 
(3)  On an unpaved county road upon approaching an intersection with a paved county road; or 
(4)  On a county road, which ends at, merges with, or does not otherwise continue directly across an intersecting through county road, upon approaching the intersection with the through county road. 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "paved road" means a road improved with a surface of concrete, asphalt, or what is commonly referred to as oil and chip, and the term "unpaved road" means all other roads. 
(b)  When two vehicles enter or approach an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(c)  The right-of-way rules declared in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are modified at through highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 24-59; Code 1995, § 110-159) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-401. 
Sec. 110-237. - Vehicle turning left at intersection. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close thereto when initiating such turn as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-402. 
Sec. 110-238. - Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by section 110-326(e) and after having so stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded, may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary, as required by section 110-326(f) and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver, having so yielded, may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding; provided, however, that if such driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. 
(c)  Where two or more vehicles face stop, slow, warning or caution signs or signals on two or more intersecting cross streets, and are approaching so as to enter the intersection at the same time, where each vehicle is required to stop, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to slow, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where each vehicle is required to take caution, the vehicle coming from the right shall have the right-of-way. Where one vehicle is required to stop and the other to slow or take caution, the one slowing or taking caution shall have the right-of-way. Where one vehicle is required to slow and the other to take caution, the one required to take caution shall have the right-of-way. In any event, a vehicle which has already entered the intersection shall have the right-of-way over one which has not so entered the intersection. 
(Code 1975, § 24-58; Code 1995, § 110-201(a), (b)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-403; authority to designate through street, yield streets, etc., 47 O.S. § 15-102(A)(6). 
Sec. 110-239. - Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway. 
    The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said highway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-404. 
Sec. 110-240. - Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of the state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal or red flashing lights, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-63; Code 1995, § 110-157) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-405. 
Sec. 110-241. - Farm tractors or implements. 
(a)  A farm tractor, or any implement of husbandry, except trailers and semi-trailers when operated in accordance with statutory limits or provisions of 47 O.S. § 14-101, shall not be permitted to travel upon any highway in the state which is a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways without permission of the state department of public safety. Such tractor or implement may be operated on any other roadway if the operator has attached all the safety devices required by law and has taken reasonable steps to reduce the width of the tractor or implement as provided for by the manufacturer. Whenever the width of a farm tractor or implement of husbandry exceeds the width of that portion of a roadway on which the tractor or implement is driven, which is marked as a single lane of traffic, or, if the roadway has not been marked for lanes of traffic and the width of the tractor or implement exceeds more than 50 percent of the width of the roadway, the operator shall move the tractor or implement, as soon as possible, as far to the right-hand side of the roadway as is practicable and safe upon approach of any oncoming or following vehicle and upon approaching the crest of a hill. 
(b)  Upon the immediate approach of a farm tractor or implement of husbandry which cannot be moved by the operator thereof to the far right-hand side of the roadway, as required in subsection (a) of this section, due to the existence of any bridge or guardrail, sign or any other physical impediment which would not safely allow such tractor or implement to travel on the far right-hand side of the road, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately pull over to the far right-hand side of the road and remain in such position until the tractor or implement has passed. 
(c)  This section shall not operate to relieve any operator of a farm tractor or implement of husbandry from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-406. 
Secs. 110-242-110-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrians' rights and duties, 47 O.S. § 11-501 et seq. 

Sec. 110-261. - Application of article. 
    Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in this division, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this division. 
(Code 1975, § 24-197; Code 1995, § 110-366) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-501. 
Sec. 110-262. - Rights and duties of persons operating wheelchair or motorized wheelchair. 
    Every person operating a wheelchair or a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights and all of the duties applicable to a pedestrian contained in this division except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-501.1. 
Sec. 110-263. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway, approaching or within a crosswalk, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. A pedestrian's right-of-way in a crosswalk shall not apply under the conditions stated in section 110-266(b). 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 24-199; Code 1995, § 110-368) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-502. 
Sec. 110-264. - Roadways to be crossed at right angles; exception. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1975, § 24-203; Code 1995, § 110-372) 
Sec. 110-265. - Passing through, around, over or under railroad crossing gate or barrier. 
    No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1975, § 24-204; Code 1995, § 110-373) 
Sec. 110-266. - Duty to yield right-of-way to vehicles. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross a roadway at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-201, 24-202; Code 1995, §§ 110-370, 110-371) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-503. 
Sec. 110-267. - Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-209; Code 1995, § 110-376) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-504. 
Sec. 110-268. - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
    Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Code 1975, § 24-200; Code 1995, § 110-369) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-505. 
Sec. 110-269. - Walking on roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction, and shall yield to approaching vehicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of a bridge for the purpose of diving or jumping therefrom into a lake, river or stream for recreation, and it shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to use a bridge where sidewalks are not provided for the purpose of standing or sightseeing. 
(Code 1975, § 24-205; Code 1995, § 110-374) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-506. 
Sec. 110-270. - Soliciting rides, business, etc. 
(a)  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, donation, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked on a street or highway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-208; Code 1995, § 110-375) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-507. 
Secs. 110-271-110-288. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TURNING AND STARTING AND SIGNALS ON STOPPING AND TURNING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Turning and starting and signals on stopping and turning, 47 O.S. § 11-601 et seq. authority to regulate vehicle turns, 47 O.S. § 15-102(A)(9). 

Sec. 110-289. - Required position and method of turning at intersections. 
(a)  Generally. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at an intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. After entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, when leaving a two-way roadway, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(b)  Drivers to operate vehicle as directed subject to markers, buttons, signs. When markers, buttons or signs are placed by the city manager, subject to any directions that the city council may give by ordinance or resolution, within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Code 1975, § 24-50; Code 1995, § 110-217(b)(c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-601. 
Sec. 110-290. - Limitations on turning around. 
(a)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the driver of a vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within 500 feet. 
(Code 1975, § 24-52; Code 1995, § 110-220) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-602. 
Sec. 110-291. - Starting stopped vehicle. 
    No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked, unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1975, § 24-129; Code 1995, § 110-270) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-603. 
Sec. 110-292. - Passing person attempting a left turn. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection, a public or private road, or a driveway, unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required, or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal as provided in subsection (b) of this section, in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left as required by law shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in subsection (b) of this section to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(d)  When any person is properly preparing for, attempting or executing a left turn, as described in subsection (a) of this section, no other person operating another vehicle immediately following the turning vehicle shall pass or attempt to pass the turning vehicle to the left. Such other person shall come to a complete stop if necessary at a safe distance behind the person preparing for, attempting or executing the turn or may proceed to the right of the turning vehicle as provided by section 110-193. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-50, 24-53; Code 1995, § 110-217(a), 110-218(a)-(c)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-604. 
Sec. 110-293. - Signals by hand and arm or signal lamp. 
(a)  Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles. 
(Code 1975, § 24-53; Code 1995, § 10-218(d)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-605. 
Sec. 110-294. - Same-method of giving with hand and arm. 
    All signals required by section 110-293, when given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1975, § 24-54; Code 1995, § 110-219) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-606. 
Sec. 110-295. - Prohibited turns generally. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall have placed proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event such times shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Code 1975, § 24-51; Code 1995, § 110-216) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit turning at intersections, 47 O.S. § 15-102(A)(9). 
Secs. 110-296-110-323. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SPECIAL STOPS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Special stops, 47 O.S. § 11-701 et seq. 

Sec. 110-324. - Duty to stop at railroad crossing upon approach of train; driving through, around or under crossing gate or barrier prohibited. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet, from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train. 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train. 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard. 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing or fail to obey the directions of a law enforcement officer at the crossing. 
(5)  The tracks at the crossing are not clear. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(c)  The operator of any Class A, B, or C commercial vehicle not required to stop at all railroad crossings, as prescribed in section 110-325, shall slow down and check that the tracks are clear of an approaching train. 
(Code 1975, § 24-61; Code 1995, § 110-223) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-701. 
Sec. 110-325. - Certain vehicles to stop at all railroad crossings. 
(a)  The driver of a bus as defined in 47 O.S. § 1-105, whether the bus is occupied or unoccupied by passengers, shall not cross a railroad track or tracks at grade unless the driver stops the bus within 50 feet of, and not closer than 15 feet to, the tracks, listens and looks in each direction along the tracks for an approaching train, and ascertains that no train is approaching. When it is safe to do so, the driver may drive the bus across the tracks in a gear that permits the bus to complete the crossing without a change of gears. The driver shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks. 
(b)  Any commercial motor vehicle as defined in 49 CFR 390.5, shall comply with the railroad crossing provisions as prescribed in 49 CFR 392.10. 
(Code 1975, § 24-62; Code 1995, § 110-221) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-702. 
Sec. 110-326. - Through streets and stop or yield intersections. 
(a)  The city council, by motion or resolution, may designate any street or part of a street as a through street. Whenever the council so designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the city manager to have placed and maintained a stop sign or, if deemed more appropriate at any intersection, a yield sign on each and every street intersecting such through street, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy-traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets, as may be determined by the city manager, if deemed desirable. 
(b)  The city manager, subject to any directions given by the council by motion or resolution, is authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine: 
(1)  Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required; or 
(2)  Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
(c)  Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the nearest line of the intersecting roadway, however such yield signs shall not be erected upon the approaches of but one of the intersecting streets. 
(d)  Every stop sign shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than eight inches in height. Every yield sign shall bear the word "Yield" in letters not less than seven inches in height. Every stop sign and every yield sign shall, at nighttime, be rendered luminous by internal illumination or by a floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting elements in or on the face of the sign. 
(e)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly-marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(f)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-57, 24-58; Code 1995, §§ 110-201(c), 110-313) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-703. 
Sec. 110-327. - Stop required when emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-60; Code 1995, § 110-222) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-704. 
Sec. 110-328. - Meeting or overtaking and passing school bus; unlawful use of school bus signal. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a school bus that is stopped to take on or discharge school children, and on which the red loading signals are in operation, is to stop the vehicle before it reaches the school bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such school children and other occupants. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00. 
(b)  Visual signals, meeting the requirements of 11 O.S. § 12-228, shall be actuated by the driver of said school bus whenever, but only whenever, such vehicle is stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(d)  If the driver of a school bus witnesses a violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, within 24 hours of the alleged offense, the driver shall report the violation, the vehicle color, license tag number, and the time and place such violation occurred to the police department. The police department shall issue a letter of warning in the form prescribed by the attorney general on the alleged violation to the person in whose name the vehicle is registered. enforcement agency in the exact form provided for by the office of the attorney general. A warning letter issued pursuant to this subsection shall not be recorded on the driving record of the person to whom such letter was issued. Issuance of a warning letter pursuant to this section shall not preclude the imposition of other penalties as provided by law. 
(Code 1975, § 24-64; Code 1995, § 110-187; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-705. 
Sec. 110-329. - Church buses; meeting and overtaking stopped bus; signs and signals. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking a church bus that is stopped to take on or discharge passengers, and on which the red loading signals are in operation, is to stop the vehicle before it reaches the church bus and not proceed until the loading signals are deactivated and then proceed past such bus at a speed which is reasonable and with due caution for the safety of such occupants. 
(b)  If the church bus is equipped with visual signals meeting the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-228, the signals shall be actuated by the driver of said church bus whenever, but only whenever, such vehicle is stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a church bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the church bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-705.1. 
Secs. 110-330-110-346. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SPEED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Speed, 47 O.S. § 11-801 et seq. 

Sec. 110-347. - Basic rules; maximum and minimum limits. 
(a)  Any person driving a vehicle on a highway shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the highway and any other conditions then existing. No person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than will permit the driver to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(b)  Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this section, the limits specified by law or established as hereinafter authorized shall be maximum lawful speeds, and no person shall drive a vehicle on a highway at a speed in excess of the following maximum limits. The council, by motion or resolution, may reduce or increase this speed limit, and when it does so, appropriate signs shall be placed on such streets or parts of streets indicating the lower or higher speed limit: 
(1)  25 miles per hour on any street adjacent to any school between the hours of 7:15 a.m. to 8:50 a.m., 10:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., and 2:30 p.m. to 3:50 p.m. when school is in session. Said times shall apply differently to the various levels of school. When school zone lights are flashing or other signs posted warning drivers of the reduced speed, may or may not include the presence of children or juveniles, violation of the posted speed limit in a school zone shall result in the doubling of appropriate fine as allowed by state statute. This shall not apply if schools are closed for a holiday or summer break. 
(2)  25 miles per hour on other streets. 
(3)  70 miles per hour in locations which are: 
a.  Four-lane divided highways including, but not limited to, the interstate highway system, and 
b.  Super two-lane highways. As used in this section, a super two-lane highway shall mean any two-lane highway with designated passing lanes, and consisting of paved shoulders not less than eight feet in width. 
(4)  For a school bus, 55 miles per hour on paved two-lane highway roads except on multilane divided highways, turnpikes, and the state highway system, the interstate highway system and the turnpike system where the maximum shall be 65 miles per hour. 
(5)  For any vehicle or combination of vehicles with solid rubber or metal tires, ten miles per hour. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when driving upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or highway conditions. The state department of transportation and the state turnpike authority may post, by changeable message sign or other appropriate sign, a temporary reduced speed limit for maintenance operations or when special hazards with respect to pedestrians, other traffic, an accident, by reason of weather or when other hazardous highway conditions exist. 
(Code 1975, § 24-49; Code 1995, § 110-236, 110-237) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-801. 
Sec. 110-348. - Minimum speed. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-804. 
Sec. 110-349. - Speed limitation on motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, and motorized scooters. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motorcycle at a speed greater than the legally posted speed limit; provided, in no event nor at any time shall an operator under the age of 16 years drive a motorcycle on a highway which has a minimum speed limit established and posted. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motor-driven cycle at a speed greater than the legally posted speed limit; provided, in no event nor at any time shall any operator drive a motor-driven cycle at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motorized scooter at a speed greater than the legally posted speed limit; provided, in no event nor at any time shall any operator drive a motorized scooter: 
(1)  At a speed greater than 25 miles per hour; and 
(2)  On any roadway with a posted speed limit of greater than 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1975, § 24-161; Code 1995, § 110-344) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-805. 
Sec. 110-350. - Low-speed electrical vehicles; restrictions on operation. 
(a)  No person shall operate any low-speed electrical vehicle on any street or highway with a posted speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not prohibit a low-speed vehicle from crossing a street or highway with a posted speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-805.1. 
Sec. 110-351. - Electric-assisted bicycle operators. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, operators of electric-assisted bicycles shall: 
(1)  Possess a Class A, B, C or D license, but shall be exempt from a motorcycle endorsement; 
(2)  Not be subject to motor vehicle liability insurance requirements only as they pertain to the operation of electric-assisted bicycles; 
(3)  Be authorized to operate an electric-assisted bicycle wherever bicycles are authorized to be operated; 
(4)  Be prohibited from operating an electric-assisted bicycle wherever bicycles are prohibited from operating; and 
(5)  Wear a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation Standards for protective headgear for use in bicycling, provided such operator is 18 years of age or less. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-805.2. 
Sec. 110-352. - Electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, an electric personal assistive mobility device shall not be: 
(1)  Registered pursuant to the Oklahoma Vehicle License and Registration Act (47 O.S. § 1101 et seq.); or 
(2)  Operated on the highways or turnpikes except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  An electric personal assistive mobility device may be operated upon the sidewalks, walking trails, bikeways, and municipal streets. 
(c)  A person operating an electric personal assistive mobility device shall: 
(1)  Not be required to have an Oklahoma driver license to operate the device; 
(2)  Obey all speed limits; 
(3)  Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and human powered devices at all times; 
(4)  Give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian; and 
(5)  Wear or equip the electric personal assistive mobility device with reflectors and a headlight when operating at night. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to manufacture, assemble, sell, offer to sell, or distribute an electric personal assistive mobility device in the state unless the device is accompanied by a warning notice. The warning notice shall be substantially similar to the following: 
"REDUCE THE RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY AND ONLY USE WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE GEAR, WHICH SHALL INCLUDE HELMET, WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS" 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-805.3. 
Sec. 110-353. - Electric gopeds. 
    Electric gopeds shall be operated as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of section 110-352. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-805.4. 
Sec. 110-354. - Special speed limitations. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to the bridge or structure, when the structure is signposted as provided in this section. 
(b)  Where any state or federal highway or turnpike shall be under construction, maintenance, or repair or when a detour shall have been designated by reason of construction, maintenance, or repairs in progress and a maximum safe, careful, and prudent speed shall have been determined by the state department of transportation on the highway or highway detour or by the state transportation authority on the turnpike or turnpike detour during the period of the construction, maintenance, or repairs and shall have plainly posted by changeable message or other appropriate sign at each terminus thereof and at not less than each half mile along the route thereof the determined maximum speed, no person shall drive any vehicle upon the portion of the highway or the highway detour or upon the portion of the turnpike or the turnpike detour at a speed in excess of the speed so determined and posted. Violation of the posted speed limit in the repair, maintenance, or construction zone shall result in the doubling of the appropriate fine. For purposes of this section, the term "repair, maintenance, or construction zone" means any location where repair, maintenance, or construction work is actually in progress and workers are present. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-806. 
Sec. 110-355. - School zones. 
    Where any portion of a road, street, or highway is a properly marked school zone, as indicated with appropriate warning signs placed in accordance with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic-control Devices, and a reduced speed limit as properly posted, shall be in effect during certain times due to the presence or potential presence of school children, no person shall drive any vehicle upon that portion of the highway which is the school zone in excess of the reduced speed limit so posted when the reduced speed limit is in effect. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-806.1. 
Sec. 110-356. - Jammers, speed devices and radar detectors. 
(a)  Jammers and speed measuring devices; use, possession, manufacture, sale or distribution prohibited. 
(1)  As used in this subsection: 
a.  The term "jammer" means any instrument, device, or equipment designed or intended for use with a vehicle or otherwise to jam or interfere with in any manner a speed measuring device operated by a law enforcement officer in the vicinity. 
b.  The term "speed measuring device" shall include, but is not limited to, devices commonly known as radar speed meters or laser speed meters. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess a jammer. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to manufacture, advertise or offer for sale, sell or otherwise distribute any jammer in the state. 
(4)  This section shall not apply to any person who lawfully possesses a license issued by the Federal Communications Commission for the use of a jammer. 
(b)  Radar detector. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Possess, operate or use a radar detector while operating or as a passenger in a commercial motor vehicle; 
(2)  Operate a commercial motor vehicle in which a radar detector is installed or present; 
(3)  Install or have installed a radar detector in a commercial motor vehicle. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any receiver of radio waves of any frequency lawfully licensed by any state or federal agency; 
(2)  Any citizens band radio; 
(3)  Any such device owned or operated by the federal or state government or any political subdivision used by employees thereof in their official duties, or the sale of any such device to law enforcement agencies for use in their official duties. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 11-808, 11-808.1, 11-809. 
Secs. 110-357-110-385. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - RECKLESS DRIVING, DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED AND NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Reckless driving, driving while intoxicated and negligent homicide, 47 O.S. § 11-901 et seq. 

Sec. 110-386. - Reckless driving. 
    Any person who drives any vehicle in a careless or wanton manner without regard for the safety of a person or property or in violation of the conditions in division 5 of this article is guilty of reckless driving. 
(Code 1975, § 24-83; Code 1995, § 110-155; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-901. 
Sec. 110-387. - Negligent driving, stopping or parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park, cause to be parked or stop any vehicle in a negligent manner, or in such a manner as to endanger life, limb, person, or property, or as to interfere with the lawful movement of traffic or use of the streets. 
(Code 1975, § 24-84; Code 1995, § 110-156; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 110-388. - Full time and attention to driving. 
    The operator of every vehicle, while driving, shall devote their full time and attention to such driving. No law enforcement officer shall issue a citation under this section unless the law enforcement officer observes that the operator of the vehicle is involved in an accident or observes the operator of the vehicle driving in such a manner that poses an articulable danger to other persons on the roadway that is not otherwise specified in statute. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-901(B). 
Sec. 110-389. - Unlawful use of a cellular telephone. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial motor vehicle or for a public transit driver to operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway within the state while: 
(1)  Using a cellular telephone or electronic communication device to write, send, or read a text-based communication; or 
(2)  Using a hand-held mobile telephone while operating a commercial motor vehicle. 
For the purposes of subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section, using a hand-held mobile telephone is permissible by drivers of a commercial motor vehicle when necessary to communicate with law enforcement officials or other emergency service. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cellular telephone means an analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth reserved for cellular telephones. 
    Electronic communication device means an electronic device that permits the user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than through an oral transfer or wire communication. The term "electronic communication device" does not include a voice-activated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a motor vehicle. 
    Operate means operating on a street or highway, including while temporarily stationary because of traffic, a traffic-control device or other momentary delays. The term "operate" does not include when the driver of a commercial motor vehicle has moved the vehicle to the side of or off a street or highway and has halted in a location where the vehicle can safely remain stationary. 
    Public transit driver means: 
(1)  Any operator of a public transit vehicle owned and operated by the state, any public trust authority, county, municipality, town or city within the state; 
(2)  Any operator of a school bus or multi-passenger motor vehicle owned and approved to operate by the state department of education or any school district within the state; or 
(3)  Any operator, conductor or driver of a locomotive engine, railway car or train of cars. 
    Write, send, or read a text-based communication, also known as texting, means manually entering alphanumeric text into, sending text, or reading text from, an electronic device, and includes, but is not limited to, short message service (SMS), e-mailing, instant messaging (IM), a command/or request to access a world wide web page, or engaging in any other form of electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication. As used in this subsection, the term "texting" does not include: 
(1)  Using voice commands to select or enter a telephone number, an extension number, or voicemail retrieval codes and commands into an electronic device for the purpose of initiating or receiving a phone call; 
(2)  Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global positioning system or navigation system; or 
(3)  Using a device capable of performing multiple functions for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited in this part, including, but not limited to, fleet management systems, dispatching devices, smart phones, citizens band radios, and music players. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to railroads and railroad operating employees regulated by the Federal Railroad Administration. 
(Ord. No. 1330, § 1(110-173), 11-3-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-901(C). 
Sec. 110-390. - Text messaging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway within the state while using a hand-held electronic communication device to manually compose, send or read an electronic text message while the motor vehicle is in motion. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, excluding costs, fees and assessments. 
(c)  The department of public safety shall not record or assess points for violations of this section on any license holder's traffic record maintained by the department. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply if the person is using the cellular telephone or electronic communication device for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an imminent emergency situation: 
(1)  An emergency response operator; 
(2)  A hospital, physician's office or health clinic; 
(3)  A provider of ambulance services; 
(4)  A provider of firefighting services; or 
(5)  A law enforcement agency. 
(e)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cellular telephone means an analog or digital wireless telephone authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to operate in the frequency bandwidth reserved for cellular telephones. 
    Compose, send or read with respect to a text message means the manual entry, sending or retrieval of a text message to communicate with any person or device. 
    Electronic communication device means an electronic device that permits the user to manually transmit a communication of written text by means other than through an oral transfer or wire communication. The term "electronic communication device" does not include a device that is physically or electronically integrated into a motor vehicle or a voice-operated global positioning or navigation system that is affixed to a motor vehicle, or a hands-free device that allows the user to write, send or read a text message without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate or initiate a feature or function. 
    Text message includes a text-based message, instant message, electronic message, photo, video or electronic mail. 
(Ord. No. 1329, § 1 (110-172), 10-20-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-901(D). 
Sec. 110-391. - Driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. 
(a)  It is unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to drive, operate, or be in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within the state, whether upon public roads, highways, streets, turnpikes, other public places or upon any private road, street, alley or lane which provides access to one or more single or multi-family dwellings, who: 
(1)  Has a blood or breath alcohol concentration, as defined in 47 O.S. § 756, of eight-hundredths (0.08) or more at the time of a test of such person's blood or breath administered within two hours after the arrest of such person; 
(2)  Is under the influence of alcohol; 
(3)  Has any amount of a Schedule I chemical or controlled substance, as defined in 63 O.S. § 2-204, or one of its metabolites or analogs in the person's blood, saliva, urine or any other bodily fluid at the time of a test of such person's blood, saliva, urine or any other bodily fluid administered within two hours after the arrest of such person; 
(4)  Is under the influence of any intoxicating substance other than alcohol which may render such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor vehicle; or 
(5)  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any other intoxicating substance which may render such person incapable of safely driving or operating a motor vehicle. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with a violation of this section is or has been lawfully entitled to use alcohol or a controlled dangerous substance or any other intoxicating substance shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. 
(Code 1975, § 24-85; Code 1995, § 110-154) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-902. 
Sec. 110-392. - Negligent homicide. 
    When the death of any person ensues within one year as a proximate result of injury received by the driving of any vehicle by any person in reckless disregard of the safety of others, the person so operating such vehicle shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-903. 
Secs. 110-393-110-412. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, 47 O.S. § 11-1001 et seq.; authority of city to regulate parking and standing of vehicles, 47 O.S. § 15-102(A)(1). 

Sec. 110-413. - Exemption for authorized emergency vehicles and vehicles used in construction or maintenance of highways. 
    Provisions of this division shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or to vehicles or machinery used in the construction or maintenance of highways, and such vehicles or machinery may be operated on any part of the road, whether same is open to traffic or closed, when such operation is necessary in the maintenance or construction of said highway; provided, that the department of highways shall protect all such operations with adequate warnings, signs, signals, lights, devices, or flagmen. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1005. 
Sec. 110-414. - Presumption. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking or standing, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(b)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure of giving a citation, as prescribed in this division, has been followed. 
(Code 1975, § 24-136; Code 1995, § 110-277) 
Sec. 110-415. - Stopping, standing or parking outside of business or residence district. 
(a)  Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the highway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of said highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of 400 feet in each direction upon such highway. As used in this section and section 110-416, the term "highway" means any public road, street, or turnpike used for vehicular travel. 
(b)  The owner or operator of a vehicle or its cargo which obstructs the regular flow of traffic shall make every reasonable effort to remove the obstructing vehicle or cargo from the roadway so the regular flow of traffic is not blocked. This subsection shall not apply to collisions resulting in the injury or death of any person. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles transporting "hazardous materials" as defined in 47 O.S. § 230.3(5). Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relieve any person from complying with 47 O.S. § 10-103. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1001. 
Sec. 110-416. - Unattended vehicles. 
    The person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the street. 
(Code 1975, § 24-120; Code 1995, § 110-261) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1002. 
Sec. 110-417. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid a conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or ordinance or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, except in a parking space officially marked. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of such entrance, when properly signposted. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway underpass. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  No person engaging in the collection and disposal of solid waste or recycling material or both as a business, pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Solid Waste Management Act (27A O.S. § 2-10-101 et seq.), shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  Within an intersection; 
(3)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(4)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway underpass; or 
(5)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(c)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1975, § 24-121; Code 1995, § 110-262) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1003. 
Sec. 110-418. - Method of stopping or parking generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the right-hand curb; provided that, every vehicle stopped or parked upon the left-hand side of a one-way street where there are adjacent curbs shall be parked or stopped with the left-hand wheels parallel to and within 18 inches of the left-hand curb. 
(b)  If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand/or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs or marks are placed to permit such standing or parking. The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to place signs or marks giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 24-123; Code 1995, § 110-264) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1004(A), (B). 
Sec. 110-419. - Angle parking. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, shall determine upon what streets and parts of streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall have such streets marked or signed; provided, however, that angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid or state highway, unless the state department of highways has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(b)  On those streets which have been so signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1975, § 24-124; Code 1995, § 110-265) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1004(C). 
Sec. 110-420. - Parking of vehicles on posted private property. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or park a motor vehicle or a trailer upon the posted private property of another, without first obtaining permission from the landowner or the person in charge of such property, except where said placing or parking is casual or involuntary. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1006. 
Sec. 110-421. - Parking areas for physically disabled persons. 
    Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle in any parking space that is designated and posted as a reserved area for the parking of a motor vehicle operated by or transporting a physically disabled person unless such person has applied for and been issued a detachable placard indicating physical disability under the provisions of 47 O.S. § 15-112 and such placard is displayed as provided in 47 O.S. § 15-112 or in rules adopted pursuant thereto, or has applied for and been issued a physically disabled license plate pursuant to the provisions of 47 O.S. § 1135.1 or 1135.2 , and such license plate is displayed pursuant to the provisions of the Oklahoma Vehicle License and Registration Act (47 O.S. § 1101 et seq.). 
(2)  It shall also be unlawful for any person to place or park a motor vehicle, whether with or without a physically disabled placard or plate, in any disabled parking space access aisle, wheelchair ramp, wheelchair loading/unloading area or any portion thereof. 
(3)  Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. Any person cited for a first offense of a violation of this section who has displayed a placard which has expired pursuant to 47 O.S. § 15-112(D)(4) or (D)(5) shall be entitled to dismissal of such charge and shall not be required to pay the fine or court costs if the person presents to the court within 30 days of the issuance of the citation a notice from the department of public safety that the person has obtained a valid placard pursuant to the provisions of law. In addition, vehicles unlawfully parked in violation of these provisions shall be subject to immediate tow by a licensed tow truck operator at the request of the landowner or a duly appointed agent of the landowner, at the request of any person unable to lawfully gain access to or move their vehicle, at the request of any person unable to lawfully gain access to the area blocked by the unlawfully parked vehicle, or at the request of appropriate law enforcement personnel. The owner of any vehicle unlawfully parked in violation of these provisions shall pay any and all reasonable and necessary costs associated with towing and storage of the vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 24-139; Code 1995, § 110-279; Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 1-20-1998) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1007. 
Sec. 110-422. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1975, § 24-122; Code 1995, § 110-263) 
Sec. 110-423. - Parking within marked space. 
    In an area where parking spaces have been marked off on the surface of the street, a driver parking a vehicle shall park it within a parking space as thus marked off, and not on or over a line delimiting a space. 
(Code 1975, § 24-125; Code 1995, § 110-266) 
Sec. 110-424. - Parking so as to block traffic. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within a street or alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 24-126; Code 1995, § 110-267) 
Sec. 110-425. - Parking more than 24 hours. 
    No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than 24 hours. This section shall not affect parking limits established for shorter periods. 
(Code 1975, § 24-127; Code 1995, § 110-268) 
Sec. 110-426. - Limited or prohibited parking on specific streets. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to establish parking time limits, or to prohibit parking, on designated streets and parts of streets, by having appropriate signs placed thereon. When such signs are in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 24-128; Code 1995, § 110-269) 
Sec. 110-427. - Permit to back to curb for loading or unloading. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials, subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein. The city manager may revoke such permits at any time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1975, § 24-130; Code 1995, § 110-271) 
Sec. 110-428. - Designation, marking and use of loading zones. 
(a)  The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones, and shall have placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. By the same authority, such loading zones may be changed or discontinued. When such a loading zone is established on request of any person, the city manager shall not have signs placed until the applicant has paid to the city an amount of money estimated by the city manager to be adequate to reimburse the city for all costs of establishing and signing the same. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, no person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(d)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1975, § 24-131; Code 1995, § 110-272) 
Sec. 110-429. - Designation, marking of bus stops and stands for taxicabs and other common carriers. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand/or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. By the same authority, such stops and stands may be changed or discontinued. 
(Code 1975, § 24-132; Code 1995, § 110-273) 
Sec. 110-430. - Restrictions on standing, stopping or parking of buses. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand/or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand designated in accord with this article. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand/or passenger loading zone designated in accord with this article, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand/or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb, so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 24-133; Code 1995, § 110-274) 
Sec. 110-431. - Restriction on standing or parking of taxicabs. 
    The operator of a taxicab shall not stand/or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand designated in accord with this division. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Code 1975, § 24-134; Code 1995, § 110-275) 
State Law reference- Authority to restrict the loading of taxicabs to specified zones or localities, 11 O.S. § 22-118. 
Sec. 110-432. - Unlawful use of bus stop or taxicab stand. 
    No person shall stop, stand/or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1975, § 24-135; Code 1995, § 110-276) 
Sec. 110-433. - Storage and parking in residential districts. 
(a)  Commercial vehicles, motor homes, boats, boat and trailer, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, and travel trailers shall not be parked, stored, or occupied on any public street, or any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following conditions and provisions: 
(1)  Inside parking shall be permitted. 
(2)  Outside parking in the side yard, as defined in the zoning ordinance, behind the front building line shall be permitted. 
(3)  Outside parking in the rear yard shall be permitted. 
(4)  Front yard parking shall be permitted so long as it is on a hard surface area, being continuous asphalt or concrete. 
(5)  Commercial vehicles, motor homes, boats, boat and trailer, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, travel trailers, camping, and mobile homes shall not be greater than 102 inches in width. The body, including the bumper and tongue of motor homes and travel trailers, and all of the vehicle including the bumper and tongue shall be at least 12 feet from the face of the curb, or if there is no curb, then 12 feet from the edge of the pavement. 
(6)  No part of the commercial vehicle, motor home, boat, boat and trailer, boat trailer, camper shell not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, travel trailer, camping, and mobile home shall extend over the public sidewalk or street. 
(7)  No sight triangle as required by ordinance shall be violated. 
(8)  Parking is permitted only if the motor home or travel trailer, while parked in this zone, is: 
a.  Not used for dwelling purposes except one motor home or travel trailer may be used by the owner or tenant of the premises, friends, relatives or guests for dwelling purposes for a maximum of 21 days in any calendar year, and a maximum of 14 days at any one time on any given lot, provided that said motor home or travel trailer shall not be connected to any utility, other than temporary electrical hookups, and provided further that the host person shall receive no compensation for such occupancy or use; provided no such motor home or travel trailer shall discharge any litter, sewage, effluent or other matter, except into sanitary facilities designed to dispose of such material; 
b.  Not permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines, or electricity. The motor home or travel trailer may only be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries. Hookup facilities shall comply with applicable state law and the National Electrical Code; and 
c.  Not used for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the motor home or travel trailer or essential for its immediate use. 
(b)  No commercial vehicle which exceeds 14,500 pounds gross vehicle weight and in no case a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquefied petroleum products shall be parked or stored on any street or lot in any residential district. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles not otherwise prohibited, motor homes, boats, boat and trailer, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, and travel trailers may be parked anywhere on the premises during active loading or unloading for a period not to exceed 72 hours, provided: 
(1)  No electricity or propane fuel is used, except when necessary to prepare the commercial vehicle, motor home, boats, boat and trailer, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, and travel trailer for use; 
(2)  No part of the commercial vehicle, motor home, boats, boat and trailer, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, and travel trailer extends over the public sidewalk or within six feet of the face of the curb or, if there is no curb, then six feet from the edge of the pavement; and 
(3)  No sight triangle as required by ordinance is violated. 
(d)  Prior to a motor home or travel trailer being used for temporary dwelling purposes as permitted in subsection (a)(8)a. of this section, a permit shall be obtained from the city police department. A permit fee in the amount established by resolution shall be paid by the person making application for the permit. Payment of the required fee and compliance with all the provisions of this division shall entitle the applicant to a permit. The police department shall establish procedures to identify vehicles for which a permit has been obtained. 
(Code 1975, § 13-7; Code 1995, § 110-280; Ord. No. 996, 8-5-1997) 
Secs. 110-434-110-464. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Miscellaneous rules, 47 O.S. § 11-1101 et seq. 

Sec. 110-465. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
    The person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall not permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1101. 
Sec. 110-466. - Limitations on backing. 
    No vehicle shall be backed upon any street or highway except for such distance as may be necessary to permit the vehicle to enter the proper driving lane from a parked position. Such backing shall be done only after the driver of said vehicle has ascertained that such movement can be made without endangering other traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 24-65; Code 1995, § 110-170) 
State Law reference- Limitations on backing generally, 47 O.S. § 11-1102. 
Sec. 110-467. - Motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized scooters, motorized bicycles, or electric-assisted bicycles; restrictions on transporting other persons and on operation. 
(a)  No person under the age of 16 years shall drive a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized scooter, motorized bicycle, or an electric-assisted bicycle on any highway of the state while transporting any other person. 
(b)  The operator of a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized scooter, motorized bicycle, or electric-assisted bicycle who has attained the age of 16 years or older may carry a passenger if the vehicle has a wheel diameter of 12 inches or greater and is factory-designed and equipped with either: 
(1)  A double seating device with double foot rests; or 
(2)  A sidecar attachment providing a separate seat space within such sidecar attachment for each person riding therein so that such person shall be seated entirely within the body of said sidecar. 
(c)  No rider of a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized scooter, motorized bicycle, or electric-assisted bicycle shall hold to any moving vehicle for the purpose of being propelled. 
(d)  No driver of a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized scooter, motorized bicycle, or electric-assisted bicycle shall pass other vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. This subsection shall not apply to the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-148, 24-149, 24-159 24-160; Code 1995, §§ 110-331, 110-332, 110-342, 110-343) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1103. 
Sec. 110-468. - Obstructions to driver's view or control over driving mechanism; overloading school bus. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(c)  No school bus shall be operated on the streets or highways in the state when loaded with passengers in excess of the number for which such bus is designed to carry. The number of passengers determined by the local school board which the bus is designed to carry shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the bus. 
(Code 1975, § 24-82; Code 1995, § 110-169) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1104. 
Sec. 110-469. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Code 1975, § 24-16; Code 1995, § 110-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1105. 
Sec. 110-470. - Coasting prohibited. 
(a)  The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
(b)  The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall not coast with the clutch disengaged. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1107. 
Sec. 110-471. - Following fire apparatus or driving near scene of fire. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(b)  The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any emergency vehicle or shall not purposely drive to any location on a highway where an emergency exists which would interfere with the free movement of authorized emergency vehicles or any other traffic using the highway at that location. For the purpose of this section the definition of emergency shall include traffic accidents, airplane accidents, disasters, explosions, civil disturbances and (without limitation by the foregoing) any other related circumstances which tend to cause traffic congestion. 
(c)  The purpose of this section is to eliminate sightseers and other persons who do not have official business at the scene of an emergency, and whose presence would tend to cause traffic congestion. 
(Code 1975, § 24-78; Code 1995, § 110-165) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1108. 
Sec. 110-472. - Driving over fire hose. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1975, § 24-79; Code 1995, § 110-166) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1109. 
Sec. 110-473. - Putting glass, etc. on highway. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substances likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such highway. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway, highway right-of-way or any other location as the result of an accident shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway or highway right-of-way or other location from such vehicle. The owner or insurer of the owner of the vehicle if the owner's insurance policy provides coverage for such expense, shall be responsible for the cost of removal of the vehicle and the glass or other injurious substance and any vehicle storage fees. The cost of the removal of the vehicle and any storage fees shall be the same as established by the corporation commission for nonconsensual tows. 
(d)  No person shall throw any substance at a standing vehicle or any occupant thereof, nor shall any person throw any substance at a person on or adjacent to a highway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-21; Code 1995, § 110-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1110. 
Sec. 110-474. - Child passenger restraint system. 
(a)  Every driver, when transporting a child under eight years of age in a motor vehicle operated on the roadways, streets, or highways, shall provide for the protection of said child by properly using a child passenger restraint system as follows: 
(1)  A child under four years of age shall be properly secured in a child passenger restraint system. The child passenger restraint system shall be rear-facing until the child reaches two years of age or until the child reaches the weight or height limit of the rear-facing child passenger restraint system as allowed by the manufacturer of the child passenger restraint system, whichever occurs first; and 
(2)  A child at least four years of age but younger than eight years of age, if not taller than four feet nine inches in height, shall be properly secured in either a child passenger restraint system or child booster seat. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the term "child passenger restraint system" means an infant or child passenger restraint system which meets the federal standards as set by 49 CFR 571.213. 
(b)  If a child is eight years of age or is taller than 4 feet 9 inches in height, a seat belt properly secured to the vehicle shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The driver of a school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts pursuant to state or federal laws; 
(2)  The driver of an ambulance or emergency vehicle; 
(3)  The driver of a vehicle in which all of the seat belts are in use; 
(4)  The transportation of children who for medical reasons are unable to be placed in such devices, provided there is written documentation from a physician of such medical reason; or 
(5)  The transportation of a child who weighs more than 40 pounds and who is being transported in the back seat of a vehicle while wearing only a lap safety belt when the back seat of the vehicle is not equipped with combination lap and shoulder safety belts, or when the combination lap and shoulder safety belts in the back seat are being used by other children who weigh more than 40 pounds; provided, however, for purposes of this subsection, back seat shall include all seats located behind the front seat of a vehicle operated by a licensed child care facility or church; provided further, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a child has met the weight requirements of this section if at the request of any law enforcement officer, the licensed child care facility or church provides the officer with a written statement verified by the parent or legal guardian that the child weighs more than 40 pounds. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine of $50.00 and shall pay all court costs thereof. This fine shall be suspended and the court costs limited to a maximum of $15.00 in the case of the first offense upon proof of purchase or acquisition by loan of a child passenger restraint system. 
(Code 1975, § 24-89; Code 1995, § 110-153; Ord. No. 1181, § 1, 3-1-2005; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1112. 
Sec. 110-475. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1975, § 24-17; Code 1995, § 110-10) 
Sec. 110-476. - Allowing passenger to ride outside passenger compartment. 
(a)  No operator of a motor vehicle shall allow a passenger to ride outside the passenger compartment of the vehicle on the streets, highways or turnpikes of the state; provided, this section shall not apply to persons so riding on private property or for parades or special events nor shall this section apply to passengers riding on the bed of a pickup truck. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine of $10.00 and shall pay court costs of $15.00. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1114. 
Sec. 110-477. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1975, § 24-19; Code 1995, § 110-11) 
Sec. 110-478. - Railroad-highway grade crossings; Class A, B or C commercial vehicles; when crossing prohibited. 
    At a railroad-highway grade crossing, a person operating a Class A, B or C commercial motor vehicle shall not negotiate the crossing if there is: 
(1)  Insufficient space to drive completely through the crossing without stopping; or 
(2)  Insufficient clearance for the undercarriage of the vehicle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1115. 
Sec. 110-479. - Self-propelled or motor-driven and operated vehicles; golf carts, all-terrain, and utility vehicles. 
(a)  The self-propelled or motor-driven and operated vehicles described in this section shall be prohibited from operating or shall be limited in operation on the streets and highways. 
(b)  Self-propelled or motor-driven cycles, known and commonly referred to as "minibikes" and other similar trade names, shall be prohibited from operating on the streets and highways, except: 
(1)  When used in a parade; or 
(2)  When registered, as required by 47 O.S. § 1151(E) and operated in the state by food vendor services upon streets having a speed limit of 30 miles per hour or less. 
All minibikes offered for sale in the state shall bear the following notice to the customer: "This machine is not manufactured or sold for operation on the public streets or highways. Since it is not provided with equipment required by law for street or highway use, all persons are cautioned that any operation of this vehicle upon a public street or highway will be in violation of the motor vehicle laws of the state and will subject the violator to arrest." 
(c)  Golf carts and utility vehicles, as defined by 47 O.S. § 1102, shall not be operated on the streets and highways except as authorized by ordinance. 
(d)  All-terrain vehicles shall not be operated on the streets and highways, except: 
(1)  On public streets and highways if: 
a.  The vehicle needs to make a direct crossing of the street or highway while the vehicle is traveling upon a regularly traveled trail and needs to continue travel from one area of the trail to another and, if the vehicle comes to a complete stop, yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate hazard, and crosses the street or highway at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street or highway. This exception shall not apply to divided highways or streets or highways with a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour in the area of the crossing; 
b.  The vehicle needs to travel on a public street or highway in order to cross a railroad track. In that event, the all-terrain vehicle may travel for not more than 300 feet on a public street or highway to cross a railroad track; 
c.  The operator of the all-terrain vehicle making the crossing at a street or highway has a valid driver license; and 
d.  The operator of the vehicle makes a crossing on a street or highway during daylight hours only. 
(2)  On streets and highways within the city as authorized by ordinance. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1116. 
Sec. 110-480. - All-terrain vehicle passenger restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person less than 18 years of age to operate or to be carried as a passenger upon an all-terrain vehicle unless the person wears a crash helmet of a type which complies with standards established by 49 CFR 571.218. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of an all-terrain vehicle to carry a passenger unless that all-terrain vehicle has been specifically designed by the manufacturer to carry passengers in addition to the operator. 
(c)  Fine and court costs for violating the provisions of this section shall not exceed $25.00. 
(d)  Any parent, legal guardian or person having actual responsibility for a person under 18 years of age, or who is the owner of the all-terrain vehicle operated by a person under 18 years of age, who knows, or should have known, that the person operating the all-terrain vehicle is not in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall be punishable according to the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  As used in this section, the term "all-terrain vehicle" means a vehicle manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway use, traveling on four or more non-highway tires, having a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, and which is steered by the use of handlebars 
(f)  The term "recreational off-highway vehicle" means a vehicle manufactured and used exclusively for off-highway use, traveling on four or more non-highway tires, having non-straddle seating and which is steered by a steering wheel. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall apply only to persons operating all-terrain vehicles on public lands. 
(h)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons operating an all-terrain vehicle on privately owned property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1117. 
Sec. 110-481. - Unattended child or vulnerable adult in motor vehicle. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person responsible for a child means a custodial parent or legal guardian of a child, or a person who has been directed or authorized to supervise a child by that child's custodial parent or legal guardian 
    Unattended means beyond a person's direct ability to care for or come to the aid of the unaccompanied person. 
(b)  A person responsible for a child who is six years of age or younger, or a caretaker of a vulnerable adult as defined by 43 O.S. § 10-103 shall not leave that child or vulnerable adult unattended in a motor vehicle if the conditions, including, but not limited to, extreme weather, inadequate ventilation, or hazardous or malfunctioning components within the vehicle present a risk to the health or safety of the unattended child or vulnerable adult. 
(c)  It shall not be considered a violation of this section if the child or vulnerable adult is accompanied in the motor vehicle by a person at least 12 years of age who is not mentally incompetent as defined by 43 O.S. § 10-103. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1119. 
Sec. 110-482. - Identification of vehicles in funeral procession. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display, upon the outside of each vehicle, of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the police department. 
(Code 1975, § 24-15; Code 1995, § 110-16) 
Sec. 110-483. - Loud sound amplification systems prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate or occupy a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or driveway and operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Plainly audible means any sound produced by a sound amplification system from within the vehicle which clearly can be heard at a distance of 50 feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory senses, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases may not be discernible and base reverberations are included. The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked, or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway. 
    Sound amplification system means any radio, tape player, compact disk player, loud speaker, or other electric device used for the amplification of the human voice. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The emission of sound to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition; 
(2)  The emission of sound from an emergency or public safety vehicle; 
(3)  The emission of sound from a vehicle owned and operated by the city, or public or private utility company; 
(4)  The emission of sound from a vehicle used in an authorized public activity, such as parades, fireworks, sporting events or other activities, which have been approved by the city council or city manager. 
(5)  Any person who violates any provision of this section, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100.00. 
(Code 1995, § 110-17; Ord. No. 937, 2-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-484. - Driving on sidewalks. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-75; Code 1995, § 110-162) 
Sec. 110-485. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1975, § 24-76; Code 1995, § 110-163) 
Sec. 110-486. - Play streets, designation and marking. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may give by motion or resolution, shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to have placed appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-68, 24-69; Code 1995, §§ 110-13, 110-203) 
Sec. 110-487. - Operation of motor-driven two- and three-wheeled recreational machines. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motorcycle, minibike, motor scooter, moped, go-cart, ATV or other motor-driven two- or three-wheeled recreational machines upon, over or across any city park, public school ground, drainage facility, or upon any other public right-of-way or property owned by the city, other than the public streets where permitted to do so by law. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motorcycle, minibike, motor scooter, moped, go-cart, ATV or other motor-driven two- or three-wheeled recreational machines within 1,000 feet of property zoned and occupied for residential usage, except in the following situations: 
(1)  Upon roadways as defined by law. 
(2)  Upon a parking lot or driveway where the operation involves ingress, egress, parking or storage of the vehicle. 
(3)  Upon property properly zoned for the usage of such vehicles. 
(4)  Upon property owned by the rider or a member of his family 
(c)  No person shall operate any motorcycle, minibike, motor scooter, moped, go-cart, ATV or other motor-driven two- or three-wheeled recreational machines on private property, except on his own property or when he has in his possession the written permission from the owner of such property. 
(Code 1975, § 24-162; Code 1995, § 110-345) 
Secs. 110-488-110-512. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles and play vehicles, 47 O.S. § 11-1201 et seq. 

Sec. 110-513. - Parental responsibility; territorial applicability. 
(a)  The parent or legal guardian of any child or the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this division shall apply whenever a bicycle or motorized scooter is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorized scooters. 
(Code 1975, § 24-172; Code 1995, § 110-421) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1201. 
Sec. 110-514. - Application of traffic regulations to riders. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this division and except as to those provisions of laws and/ordinances which, by their nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1975, § 24-173; Code 1995, § 110-422) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1202. 
Sec. 110-515. - Use of permanent seat required; carrying excess persons. 
(a)  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle or motorized scooter shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1975, § 24-175; Code 1995, § 110-424) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1203. 
Sec. 110-516. - Riders to obey traffic-control devices. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1975, § 24-174; Code 1995, § 110-423) 
Sec. 110-517. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-18; Code 1995, § 110-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1204. 
Sec. 110-518. - Driving on highway; required use of paths. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall ride as close as is safe to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except under any of the following situations: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions and while exercising due care, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fixed or moving objects; 
b.  Parked or moving vehicles; 
c.  Pedestrians or animal; 
d.  Surface hazards; 
e.  Any time it is unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway; and 
(4)  When riding in the right-turn-only lane. 
(b)  Any person riding a bicycle or motorized scooter upon a one-way street or highway with two or more marked lanes of travel may ride as close as is safe to the left-hand curb or edge of the street or highway. 
(c)  No person operating a bicycle or motorized scooter shall pass other vehicles between lanes of traffic traveling in the same direction. 
(d)  Persons riding bicycles or motorized scooters upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorized scooters. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-180, 24-181; Code 1995, §§ 110-428, 110-429) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1205. 
Sec. 110-519. - Riders carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1975, § 24-176; Code 1995, § 110-425) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1206. 
Sec. 110-520. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1975, § 24-182; Code 1995, § 110-430) 
Sec. 110-521. - Overtaking and passing bicycle. 
    When overtaking and passing a bicycle proceeding in the same direction, a person driving a motor vehicle shall exercise due care by leaving a safe distance between the motor vehicle and the bicycle of not less than three feet until the motor vehicle is safely past the overtaken bicycle. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1208. 
Sec. 110-522. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1975, § 24-183; Code 1995, § 110-431) 
Sec. 110-523. - Riding on sidewalks generally. 
(a)  No person, except law enforcement officers, shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the business district. 
(b)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1975, § 24-184; Code 1995, § 110-432; Ord. No. 914, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-1995) 
Sec. 110-524. - Sign prohibiting riding on sidewalks or roadways. 
    The city manager is authorized to have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same. 
(Code 1975, § 24-185; Code 1995, § 110-433) 
Sec. 110-525. - Parking. 
    No person, except law enforcement officers, shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 24-186; Code 1995, § 110-434; Ord. No. 915, § 1, 8-1-1995) 
Sec. 110-526. - Helmets. 
    Every person under the age of 18 years shall wear a helmet at all times when operating or riding a bicycle. Helmets shall have been approved by Snell or ANSI. 
(Code 1995, § 110-435; Ord. No. 1289, § 1, 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 110-527. - Light and reflector. 
(a)  Every bicycle in use at the times described in 47 O.S. § 12-201(B) shall be equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a distance of at least 1,000 feet to the front. This section shall not apply to a street or highway with a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less. 
(b)  Every bicycle in use at the times described in 47 O.S. § 12-201(B) shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear emitting a red light visible from a distance of at least 1,000 feet to the rear. This section shall not apply to a street or highway with a speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less. 
(c)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a red reflector which shall be visible for 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. 
(d)  Every bicycle when in use at the times described in 47 O.S. § 12-201(B) shall be equipped with reflective material of sufficient size and reflectivity to be visible from both sides for 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. 
(e)  A bicycle or its rider may be equipped with lights or reflectors in addition to those required by the foregoing sections; provided, such lights or reflectors shall comply with the provisions and limitations of state law. 
(Code 1975, § 24-177; Code 1995, § 110-426) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 12-702-12-704, 12-706, 12-707. 
Sec. 110-528. - Brake. 
    Every bicycle shall be equipped with brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle within 25 feet from a speed of ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1975, § 24-179; Code 1995, § 110-427) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 12-708. 
Sec. 110-529. - Use of coasters, roller skates, etc., on roadways. 
    No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk; and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 24-20; Code 1995, § 110-14) 
Secs. 110-530-110-551. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - MAINTENANCE, CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY ZONES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Maintenance, construction and safety zones, 47 O.S. § 11-1301 et seq. 

Sec. 110-552. - Fines for traffic violations in construction or maintenance areas. 
    Where any street shall be under construction or repair or a detour shall have been designated by reason of construction or repairs in progress and a speed limit has been posted, no person shall drive any vehicle upon that portion of the road or upon the detour at a speed in excess of the speed so determined and posted. Violation of the posted speed limit in the maintenance or construction zone shall result in the doubling of the appropriate fine as allowed by state statute. For the purposes of this section, the term "maintenance or construction zone" means any location where maintenance or construction work is actually in progress. 
(Code 1995, § 110-238; Ord. No. 995, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 1314, § 1, 3-17-2015) 
Sec. 110-553. - Driving through safety zone prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone or island. 
(Code 1975, § 24-73; Code 1995, § 110-161) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1301. 
Sec. 110-554. - Maintenance and construction zones. 
(a)  City personnel or contractors, while repairing or improving the streets of the city, and city personnel and utility companies, when installing, improving or repairing lines or other public facilities in the streets, are hereby authorized as necessary, subject to control by the city manager, to close any street or section thereof to traffic during such repair, maintenance or construction, and in exercising such authority, shall erect or cause to be erected proper control devices and barricades to warn and notify the public that the street has been closed to traffic. Whenever construction, repair or maintenance of any street or utility line or facility is being performed and the street is not closed to traffic in accord with this section, the city personnel, contractor or utility company concerned shall erect, or cause to be erected, traffic-control devices to warn and guide the public, and every person using such street shall obey all signs, signals, markings, flagmen or other traffic-control devices which are placed to regulate, control and guide traffic through the construction or maintenance area. 
(b)  When any highway has been closed to traffic while the highway is flooded or under repair, maintenance or construction and traffic-control devices or barricades have been erected, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle through, under, over, or around the traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons while engaged in the construction, maintenance and repair of the highway or to persons entering therein for the protection of lives or property; provided, that persons having their places of residence or places of business within the closed area may travel, when possible to do so, through the area at their own risk. 
(c)  Whenever any traffic-control device requires traffic to merge due to the closure of a section or lane of highway, the merge shall be completed: 
(1)  As soon as practicable after passing the traffic-control device; and 
(2)  Without passing any other traffic proceeding in the same direction. 
(d)  No person shall remove, change, modify, deface or alter any traffic-control device or barricade which has been erected on any highway under the provisions of this section. 
(e)  When any section of a highway, turnpike, county road or city street has been closed to traffic due to flooding that is ongoing and traffic-control devices or barricades have been erected by law enforcement or other government officials with authority over traffic-control, it shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, damage or remove any traffic-control devices or barricades or drive any vehicle through, under, over or around the traffic-control devices or barricades, or otherwise to enter the closed area. 
(Code 1975, § 24-26; Code 1995, § 110-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. § 11-1302. 
Secs. 110-555-110-571. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT; VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Vehicle equipment, 47 O.S. § 12-101 et seq.; vehicle size, weight and load, 47 O.S. § 14-101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-572. - Vehicles injurious to streets. 
    No vehicle or object which injures or is likely to injure the surface of a street shall be driven or moved on any street. 
(Code 1975, § 24-12; Code 1995, § 110-8) 
Sec. 110-573. - Prohibition on the use of dynamic braking devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged within the city limits except for the purpose of avoiding imminent danger or in case of wheel brake failure. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a dynamic braking device (commonly referred to as Jake brakes, Jacobs brake, engine brake, or compression brake) means a device on a motor vehicle, primarily on trucks, for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1995, § 110-171; Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 110-574. - Truck routes. 
    The city manager, subject to any directions which the council may make by motion or resolution, may prescribe routes through the city for the use of trucks in general or trucks of particular kinds and/or other vehicles which are not ordinary private passenger vehicles, passing through the city. The city manager shall see that appropriate and adequate signs are placed along such routes so that drivers of such vehicles may follow the routes. When such signs are so erected and in place, the driver of a truck or other vehicle for which a route has been prescribed as herein provided, while passing through the city, shall keep on such route and shall not deviate therefrom except in case of emergency. Drivers of such vehicles shall follow such routes so far as practicable also when driving within the city and not merely through the city. 
(Code 1975, § 24-88; Code 1995, § 110-316) 
Sec. 110-575. - Unlawful to operate motor vehicle passing through city with laden weight in excess of 40,000 pounds on Cornwell Avenue between Tenth Street and Main Street. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in excess of 40,000 pounds laden weight while passing through the city on Cornwell Avenue between Tenth Street and Main Street except in the case of an emergency. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate subsection (a) of this section, shall be guilty of an offense and the city shall assess such person a fine within the limits prescribed by section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 110-317; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 4-6-1999) 
Secs. 110-576-110-598. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOTORCYCLES 

Sec. 110-599. - Required equipment. 
(a)  In addition to other requirements, all motorcycles, except when operated on actual trail rides conducted outside of public roads and highways, shall be equipped with: 
(1)  Two rearview mirrors, containing a reflection surface of not less than three inches in diameter, mounted one on each side of the motorcycle and positioned so as to enable the operator to clearly view the roadway to the rear of the vehicle 
(2)  A windshield of sufficient quality, size and thickness to protect the operator from foreign objects, except that in lieu of such windshield, the operator shall wear goggles or other protective eyewear which meets American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard Z87.1 and provides positive retention, or a face shield of material and design to protect the operator from foreign objects; 
(3)  A properly operating speedometer capable of registering at least the maximum legal speed limit for that motorcycle; 
(4)  A fender over each wheel. All fenders shall be of the type provided by the manufacturer; 
(5)  A horn which shall comply with the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-401; and 
(6)  A muffler or other effective noise-suppressing system which shall comply with the requirements of 47 O.S. § 12-402. 
(b)  No person under 18 years of age shall operate or ride upon any motorcycle unless such person is properly wearing a crash helmet of a type which complies with standards established by 49 CFR 571.218. 
(c)  Handlebars on motorcycles shall not be higher than eye level of the operator. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-150-24-153, 24-157, 24-158; Code 1995, §§ 110-333-110-336, 110-340, 110-341) 
State Law reference- 11 O.S. § 12-609. 
Sec. 110-600. - Brakes on motorcycles. 
    The brake system on any motorcycle shall comply with performance ability standard set forth in 49 CFR 571.121, and shall be adequate to control the movement of the motorcycle and to stop and hold the motorcycle, including two separate means of applying the brakes. One means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the front wheel, and one means shall be effective to apply the brakes to the rear wheels. 
(Code 1975, § 24-154; Code 1995, § 110-337) 
State Law reference- 11 O.S. § 12-608. 
Sec. 110-601. - Lights and reflectors. 
(a)  Older motorcycles and definitions. 
(1)  Every motorcycle of the model year 1978 or later operating upon a highway within the state shall display at all times: 
a.  A lighted headlamp; and 
b.  Any other illuminating devices, if manufactured to be displayed at all times. 
This subsection (a)(1) shall not apply to motorcycles used in official law enforcement capacities. 
(2)  The provisions 47 O.S. § 12-201(A), (C) and (D) shall apply to motorcycles; provided, however, notwithstanding the provisions of 47 O.S. § 12-201, a motorcycle may be equipped with a motorcycle headlamp modulation system as authorized by 49 CFR 571.108, S7.9.4. 
(3)  As used in provisions in this chapter pertaining to motorcycles, the term "motorcycle" shall include, unless otherwise specifically indicated, motorcycles and motor-driven cycles as those terms are defined by law. 
(b)  Headlights required. 
(1)  Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one headlamp emitting a white light which shall comply with the applicable requirements and limitations of subsection (c) of this section and 47 O.S. §§ 12-203, 12-224, 12-225, 12-227 and 12-228. 
(2)  Every headlamp upon every motorcycle shall be located at a height of not more than 54 inches nor less than 22 inches to be measured as set forth in 47 O.S. § 12-202(B). 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection (b): 
a.  The term "headlamp" shall not include passing lamp. 
b.  The term "passing lamp" shall mean an auxiliary front low-beam lamp which emits a white light. 
(c)  Minimum headlight requirements. Every headlamp upon every motorcycle shall meet the requirements set forth in 47 O.S. § 12-203(C). 
(d)  Tail lamps. 
(1)  Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one tail lamp mounted on the rear on the vertical center line of the motorcycle which shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 1,000 feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a combination of vehicles only the tail lamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified. 
(2)  Every tail lamp shall be located at a height of not more than 60 inches nor less than 15 inches. 
(3)  Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp with a white light shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate the rear license plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail lamp, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear license plate, shall be lighted whenever the headlamp or driving lamp is lighted. The operation of a motorcycle upon which the license plate is surrounded or framed, partially or in whole, by any additional lamps or otherwise lighted by any additional lamps, shall be a violation of this subsection. 
(e)  Reflectors. Every motorcycle shall be equipped with and display at least one reflector meeting the requirements of this subsection. Every such reflector shall be mounted on the motorcycle at a height not less than 15 inches nor more than 60 inches measured as set forth in 47 O.S. § 12-202(B), and shall be of such size and characteristics and so mounted as to be visible at night from all distances within 600 feet to 100 feet from the motorcycle when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps. 
(f)  Stop lamps. Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one stop lamp meeting the requirements of this subsection. The stop lamp required by this subsection: 
(1)  Shall be mounted on the rear of the motorcycle; 
(2)  Shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear in normal sunlight; and 
(3)  Shall be actuated upon application of the brakes. 
(g)  Turn signal lamps. Every motorcycle of model year 2005 and later shall be equipped with electric flashing turn signal lamps meeting the requirements of this subsection. The flashing turn signal lamps required by this subsection: 
(1)  Shall show to the front and rear of the motorcycle; 
(2)  Shall be located on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable on the front of the motorcycle and when in use shall display a white or amber light, or any shade of color between white and amber, visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the front in normal sunlight; 
(3)  Shall be located at the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable on the rear of the motorcycle and when in use shall display a red or amber light, or any shade of color between red and amber, visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear in normal sunlight; and 
(4)  Shall indicate when actuated the intended direction of turning by flashing the lights showing to the front and rear on the side toward which the turn is made. 
(Code 1975, §§ 24-155, 24-156; Code 1995, §§ 110-338, 110-339) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 47 O.S. §§ 12-601-12-606. 
Chapter 114 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to acquire, maintain, etc., utilities generally, 11 O.S. §§ 22-104, 35-101 et seq.; authority to enter lands for the purpose of establishing, constructing, etc., public utilities or works, 11 O.S. § 22-114. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Utility means any person who is engaged in the sale, generation, distribution or delivery of electricity, water, gas, sewer, telephone or other public services. 
    Utility service means the furnishing, sale, generation, distribution or delivery of electricity, water, gas, sewer, telephone or other public service by a utility. 
(Code 1975, § 12-60(a); Code 1995, § 114-1) 
Sec. 114-2. - Damaging, defacing, etc., property. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of any utility operating in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 26-6; Code 1995, § 114-2) 
Sec. 114-3. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Alter, tamper with, injure or knowingly allow the altering, tampering with or injuring of any pipeline, line, wire, conduit, conductor, meter, meter seal or lock, transformer or other equipment used by a utility to deliver or register service. 
(2)  Prevent any installed metering device from registering correctly the quantity of service passing through such metering device. 
(3)  Make or cause to be made any connection between any pipeline, lines, wires, conduits, conductors, meters, transformers or other equipment in such manner as to prevent the correct registration of service by any metering device, or to otherwise use the utility service without the consent of the utility. 
(4)  Supply or cause to be supplied any utility service to any person without such service first passing through the metering device provided by the utility for measuring and registering the quantity of service. 
(5)  Knowingly use any utility meter or utility service that has been cut off, locked or disconnected by the utility. 
(6)  Evade payment for utility service in any other way. 
(b)  Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than the maximum set forth in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 12-60(b); Code 1995, § 114-3; Ord. No. 1161, § 1, 1-3-2005) 
Sec. 114-4. - Maintenance bond for contractors. 
    All general contractors who lay and install water and sewer lines in the city shall be required to furnish a two-year maintenance bond to the city. Each year of such bond shall provide for 100 percent coverage of such contract. 
(Code 1975, § 26-2(a); Code 1995, § 114-4) 
Sec. 114-5. - Technical code requirements for connections. 
    No new connection to or extension of either the water or sanitary sewer system of the city shall be made within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of furnishing water or sewer service to any building or premises located outside the city limits, but within one-half mile thereof, unless the buildings or structures intended to be furnished with such service have been constructed in accordance with all of the provisions of the building code and all other ordinances of the city. No such connection or extension hereafter made shall be further connected to or further extended unless the buildings and structures intended to be served by such further connection or extension shall be so constructed. All of the permits, plans, inspections and fees applicable to construction within the city limits shall be applicable to such buildings and structures, and no permit to connect such buildings or structures to either the water or sewer system of the city, or extension thereof, shall be issued until there has been compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 26-2(b); Code 1995, § 114-5) 
State Law reference- Authority outside corporate limits, 11 O.S. § 35-101. 
Sec. 114-6. - Telephone towers. 
    A conditional use permit shall be obtained from the city for the construction or erection of any telephone tower. 
(Code 1995, § 114-6; Ord. No. 989, 7-1-1997) 
Secs. 114-7-114-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement of water charges authorized, 11 O.S. § 37-109; utility deposits generally, 11 O.S. § 35-107. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-31. - Deposit required. 
(a)  Before water use is permitted or water service is initiated, the city clerk shall collect a deposit for each separate dwelling unit in single-family and multifamily units or trailer parks using a master meter. Such deposit shall be carried in a special fund, and unless applied to the payment of a water bill or other sum due the city, shall be refunded by the city clerk to the depositor when the service is canceled or otherwise discontinued. All such deposit fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(b)  A deposit made under this section to guarantee payment of water bills may also be applied to any delinquent or defaulting sewer or garbage service charges of the user who made the deposit. 
(Code 1975, § 26-100; Code 1995, § 114-31; Ord. No. 903, 11-1-1994; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 114-32. - Connection fees; service transfers; deposit transfers. 
(a)  For any new utility service, there shall be a connection fee of $25.00 added to the account to initiate the service and establish the account. 
(b)  There shall be a $25.00 charge whenever service is transferred from one residence or business location to another address. 
(c)  There shall be a $20.00 charge when a new account is established by transferring the deposit of an existing account to that of a new account. 
(d)  Effective March 31, 2016, there shall be a $15.00 per month charge for each meter to help compensate for the purchase of water from Oklahoma City, and effective March 31, 2017, the charge for each meter to help compensate for the purchase of water from Oklahoma City shall be $20.00 per month. 
(Code 1975, § 26-103(d), (e); Code 1995, § 114-32; Ord. No. 1184, § 1, 11-1-2005; Ord. No. 1215, § 1, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 1241, § 1, 12-19-2009; Ord. No. 1334, § 1, 3-15-2016) 
Sec. 114-33. - Unpaid previous bills to be paid prior to commencing new service. 
    Should any water or sewer customer cease to be a customer by reason of moving or leaving the district where the city has jurisdiction, or service is transferred from one residence to another residence within the city, and be indebted to the city for water or sewer service in any amount, such customer may not receive service again, should he so apply, until all amounts due the city for previous service are paid. 
(Code 1975, § 26-104; Code 1995, § 114-33; Ord. No. 1072, § 1, 3-21-2001) 
Sec. 114-34. - Rates established for water service. 
(a)  The city shall furnish water to private consumers who have installed connections with the water mains, as in this chapter provided, at a meter rate payable monthly on the 15th day of each month, as follows: 
(1)  For 0 to 2,000 gallons per month: $14.45 
(2)  Next 10,000 gallons per month, per 1,000 gallons: $4.05 
(3)  All over 12,000 gallons per month, per 1,000 gallons: $4.77 
(b)  Provided, however, that the above rates shall not apply if the city, in the interest of public service, shall determine to enter into any special contract with any consumer. 
(Code 1975, § 26-98; Code 1995, § 114-34; Ord. No. 1016, § 1, 8-4-1998; Ord. No. 1116, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 1216, § 1, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 1280, § 1, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 1335, § 1, 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 1367 , § 1, 10-16-2018) 
Sec. 114-35. - Sewer use charge and industrial cost recovery system. 
(a)  User and sewer service charge. For the purpose of providing funds for the maintenance of the sanitary sewage system of the city and for other purposes, there is hereby fixed and established a monthly charge for each connection to the sanitary sewage system of the city for the use of such system to be levied against each user thereof within and without the city. For the purpose of providing funds for the operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewage system of the city and for other purposes, there are hereby fixed and established minimum charges for the use of the sanitary sewage system to be levied against each respective user thereof within the city at a meter rate payable monthly on the first day of each month, as follows. Beginning the first billing period after April 1, 2016: 
(1)  For the first 4,000 gallons per month of metered water usage, the rate shall be $10.00. 
(2)  For 4,001 to 12,000 gallons per month in metered water usage, the rate shall be $4.50 per each 1,000 gallons. 
(3)  For 12,001 to 20,000 gallons per month in metered water usage, the rate shall be $4.75 per each 1,000 gallons. 
(4)  For 20,001 to 50,000 gallons per month in metered water usage, the rate shall be $5.00 per each 1,000 gallons. 
(5)  For over 50,001 gallons per month in metered water usage, the rate shall be $5.25 per each 1,000 gallons. 
(6)  Each living unit in each multiple unit dwelling shall be charged: 
a.  For the first 4,000 gallons of metered water usage per unit, per month; $10.00. 
b.  The balance of the meter reading, if any, after the 4,000 gallons per living unit is deducted shall be divided equally among the number of living units in such dwelling, and each living unit in such dwelling shall be charged at the same rate as a single-family residence using more than 4,000 gallons of metered water usage per month. 
(b)  Industrial cost recovery system. There shall be no industrial waste discharged into the city's sewerage system until an industrial user charge is adopted in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations published pursuant to title 11 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-500, 33 USC 1251 et seq.) or later revisions. 
(Code 1975, § 26-99; Code 1995, § 114-35; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 8-4-1998; Ord. No. 1117, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 1214, § 1, 11-6-2007; Ord. No. 1279, § 1, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 1328, § 1, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1336, § 1, 3-29-2016) 
Sec. 114-36. - Charge for water when meter fails to register. 
    If a water meter fails to register during any period, the customer shall be charged for that period on an estimate made by the city clerk based upon the average bill for the preceding three months that the meter was registering properly, or from any other information available which would provide a more equitable basis for such charge. 
(Code 1975, § 26-101; Code 1995, § 114-36) 
Sec. 114-37. - Refunding or prorating sewer charge. 
    Where sewer service is terminated during the month and after the payment of the service charge for such month, there shall be no refund, but the successor user of the sanitary sewerage system shall not be billed for the sewer service until the first day of the month following the termination of the service by his predecessor. Where sewer service is commenced prior to the 15th day of any month, the regular sewer service charge shall be made for that month, and no charge shall be made for the month if the service is commenced after the 15th day thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 26-105; Code 1995, § 114-37) 
Sec. 114-38. - Adjustment to water and sewer bill in event of water leakage. 
(a)  Any customer who has experienced an increase in water usage due to a water leak occurring in the piping, connections or other property belonging to the customer shall be entitled to an adjustment to their water and sewer bill. The amount of adjustment shall be a credit of 100 percent of the water and sewer bill in excess of the customer's average monthly water and sewer bill for the preceding three months, or from any other information available which would provide a more equitable basis for such charge. 
(b)  In order to qualify for the adjustment, the customer must provide the city with a plumber's statement or other proof that the necessary repairs have been made. The city may also request an inspection of the repairs and the customer's premises. Any customer who refuses to allow the inspection shall not be entitled to an adjustment. In addition, no adjustments shall be made until the following or a subsequent water and sewer bill is received which indicates that water consumption has returned to normal levels. In no event shall the adjustment be for a period of more than 90 days. 
(Code 1975, § 26-106; Code 1995, § 114-38; Ord. No. 916, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-1995; Ord. No. 1070, § 1, 11-7-2000) 
Secs. 114-39-114-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BILLS, TERMINATION OF SERVICE 

Sec. 114-65. - Billing generally. 
    Charges for water, sewer and garbage service shall be rendered on the same bill and shall be due and payable, at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 26-102; Code 1995, § 114-51) 
Sec. 114-66. - When due, delinquency. 
(a)  Payment for services must be received in the office of the city clerk by the 15th day of the month following the month that the service was provided, or the next business day following the 15th if the 15th falls on a weekend or holiday. If the bill is not paid when due and has a balance of at least $5.00, it shall become delinquent and subject to a delinquent charge for residential service of $10.00 and, for commercial service, an amount equal to ten percent of the outstanding balance. 
(b)  The clerk shall not accept payment for one service to the exclusion of any other utility service charged on the same bill. 
(Code 1975, § 26-103(a); Code 1995, § 114-52; Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 114-67. - Termination of services. 
(a)  The city may terminate utility services of customers for nonpayment of such services. 
(b)  If utility bills are delinquent on the 16th day of each month, a notice shall be sent to any delinquent customer on the 18th of the month or the nearest workday to that date. The notice shall state that the bill is due and that such delinquent customer has until the 25th of the month in which to respond by paying the bill in full or requesting a hearing. The notice shall include the balance due, including any late charges, the cutoff date if the bill is not paid and a notice that the customer has a right to a hearing. The notice shall state that the utility representative conducting the hearing shall have the authority to resolve any dispute or adjust the bill. 
(c)  A written record shall be made of the final result of all hearings and signed by the customer and the utility representative. 
(d)  In cases of extreme hardship, the city manager or his designee may enter into a written agreement with the person responsible for payment for services providing for an equitable resolution. If payment for utility services is not made or agreed upon, the utility services will be cut off immediately following the 25th day of the month. A reading at the time of cut off will be recorded. The meter will be removed if someone other than a city employee tampers with the meter. Use of any utility meter or utility service that has been turned off, locked or disconnected by the city is prohibited, as set forth in section 114-3(a)(5). 
(e)  Utility cutoff will be made during regular business hours between 10:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Such cutoff will be made Monday through Thursday, but not on the day before a holiday. 
(f)  Service shall not be terminated unless the owner or occupant liable for the bill has been given notice that the service will be terminated. A notice shall be placed on the door of the address where utility service is terminated and will include information about service restoration. 
(Code 1975, § 26-9; Code 1995, § 114-53; Ord. No. 1110, § 2, 12-17-2002) 
Sec. 114-68. - Service restoration. 
(a)  Utility service will be restored only during regular working hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, and only after full payment of the delinquent amount, plus fees, is received. A turn off fee of $25.00 will be added to a customer's bill when service is terminated for the first time due to nonpayment. A $50.00 turn off fee shall be added to the customer's bill for each subsequent time service is interrupted for nonpayment. In addition, any consumer not maintaining a security deposit whose utility service is terminated for nonpayment shall be required to make and maintain a security deposit in the amount required by section 114-31 before service shall be re-established. 
(b)  There shall be no charge for restoring utility service if service was disconnected due to city error. 
(c)  An additional $10.00 fee will be added to the customer's bill if the meter had been pulled for the first time at the address. A fee of $20.00 will be added to the customer's bill for each subsequent time the meter is pulled due to nonpayment. 
(Code 1975, § 26-103(b), (c); Code 1995, § 114-54; Ord. No. 1110, § 3, 12-17-2002) 
Secs. 114-69-114-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal waterworks systems generally, 11 O.S. § 37-101 et seq. 

Sec. 114-95. - Application and contract for service. 
(a)  All applications for water service must be made in writing on forms furnished by the city clerk before service will be provided. Such application shall contain a description of the premises where such water is to be used and such other reasonable information as the city clerk may require. 
(b)  The application form for water service shall constitute a contract on the part of the person making the application. Such contract shall provide for the use of water in accordance with the ordinances, rules and requirements of the city and as a guarantee for the return in good condition of the water meter set and in use at the premises, and as a guarantee for payment of all required bills. 
(Code 1975, § 26-17; Code 1995, § 114-76) 
Sec. 114-96. - Setting and connecting meters. 
(a)  The purchase price for water meters of all sizes shall be established from time to time at actual cost by the city manager, and a schedule of such charges shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  All water meters up to and including two inches shall be set and connected to the city mains by the city's water distribution department. 
(c)  All water meters over two inches shall be purchased from the city by an approved contractor who shall then make all necessary service line connections and set the meter. 
(d)  All water services must conform to the city design criteria, standards and requirements for construction of water services, including any boring or the removal and replacement of pavement. 
(e)  No meter will be set in a location other than a designated public easement abutting the property to be serviced; provided, however, in residential, office, commercial and industrial condominium developments, common areas may be used for utility service lines when so designated by easement with said easement being filed in the office of the county clerk. The city engineer shall have the right to the location of easements requiring abutment to the property. At no time shall a meter be set in a driveway, street or parking lot. If a service line has already been connected to the water main prior to the building construction, the city shall not be responsible if the building waterline is installed in another location. 
(f)  If water service has been connected to the city water main to service a particular lot and there are subsequent lot splits and the installed service pipe does not meet the requirements of the new lot boundary, the developer for the lot or lots shall be responsible for providing proper service line connections to the designated lot or lots. 
(g)  Prior to any connection to the city water system, the city shall inspect the meter setup and installation. All inspection fees shall be paid prior to inspection. 
(h)  The inspection fee for all water meter installations over two inches in size shall be $20.00. 
(Code 1975, § 26-18; Code 1995, § 114-77; Ord. No. 1071, § 1, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 114-97. - Meters and services become property of city. 
    All water meters and services connected to the city water system shall become the property of the city and shall remain in place at the premises where set, unless the department of public works shall deem it necessary to remove the meter, if the premises becomes abandoned. 
(Code 1975, § 26-19; Code 1995, § 114-78) 
Sec. 114-98. - Separate service required; exception. 
    Every building and every portion of a block or row of buildings that is capable of independent ownership shall have its own separate water service line and meter connected directly to the city main. Apartment houses, flats, office buildings, and similar structures under a single roof may be served by a single service line and meter, or the different portions of such buildings separately metered, provided a separate service stop valve is provided for each separate portion of the building. 
(Code 1975, § 26-20; Code 1995, § 114-79) 
Sec. 114-99. - Stop and waste valve required on customer's service. 
    Every customer's water service installed or changed, remodeled or renewed shall have installed, between the meter and the service hydrants for the premises, at a suitable and convenient location, a stop and waste valve for the customer's use in making repairs to piping on the customer's property. 
(Code 1975, § 26-21; Code 1995, § 114-80) 
Sec. 114-100. - Turn on, off at curb stop valve by authorized persons only. 
    Only the authorized employees of the department of public works shall turn off or turn on the water to any premises at the curb stop valve. For the purpose of testing or repairing pipes, valves and fittings, or a customer's piping and plumbing, licensed plumbers may secure permission from the department of public works to turn off and turn on water; but in each such instance, the curb stop must be left in the same position as it was found. 
(Code 1975, § 26-22; Code 1995, § 114-81) 
Sec. 114-101. - Service line maintenance and specifications. 
    All water service lines between the city main and the water meter shall be maintained by and at the expense of the city. The balance of any such lines shall be maintained by and at the expense of the consumer or owner of the property being served. All persons connecting to a city service or laying their own private water lines shall be required to use only type K soft copper pipe or PVC (polyvinyl chloride) pipe conforming to Schedule 40 (ASTM D-1785) or PV-200 (SDR 21) (ASTM D-2241), latest revised edition; provided all pipe has a minimum pressure rating of 200 psi. The pipe shall be so marked at five-foot intervals and shall also be marked with the NSF seal of approval. Joints shall be solvent weld and fittings shall be of a quality not less than that of the pipe; and further provided that type K copper pipe is used for the gooseneck at the main and at least three feet of slack loop at the meter. 
(Code 1975, § 26-23; Code 1995, § 114-82) 
Sec. 114-102. - Reading, inspecting and testing meters. 
(a)  The department of public works, by its authorized personnel, shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to read, inspect, remove or test any water meter, and temporarily disconnect water service for such purpose. If any customer doubts the accuracy or correctness of the meter measuring his service, he may, upon application, have the meter tested. The meter shall be tested in the shops of the department by means of apparatus there provided, in the presence of the customer, if he desires to be present. If the test discloses an error against the customer of more than three percent in the meter's registry, the excess of the consumption in the three previous months' readings shall be credited to the customer's account, and the city shall bear the cost of the test. If no such error in registry is found, the person who has requested the test shall pay a charge fixed for such test. Before making the test of any meter, the person requesting the test shall make a deposit with the city clerk of the amount charged for such test as follows: 
(1)  Five-eighths by three-fourths-inch meter, $50.00. 
(2)  One inch or larger, $100.00 or the actual cost, as charged by an independent testing company, whichever is larger. 
Provided, however, that the city manager may, if he sees fit or has reason to believe that a meter is out of order, cause such meter to be tested by the department of public works at the expense of the city. 
(b)  After having been read, at the written request of a customer, a water meter shall be read a second or subsequent time. The amount charged for each such second or subsequent reading shall be $10.00 and shall be paid to the city at the time the request is made. 
(Code 1975, § 26-26; Code 1995, § 114-83; Ord. No. 1229, § 1, 9-16-2008) 
Sec. 114-103. - Customer's liability for expense of repairing or replacing damaged, lost, etc., property of system. 
    In all cases where meters, boxes, curb stop valves or other appurtenances of the city's water system are lost, injured or destroyed by willful action or as a result of carelessness or negligence on the part of owner or occupant of the premises, they shall be replaced or repaired at the expense of the owner or occupant. In case of nonpayment of such charge, the water shall be cut off, and will not be turned on until such charges are paid. 
(Code 1975, § 26-26; Code 1995, § 114-84) 
Sec. 114-104. - Use restrictions during water shortage; penalty. 
(a)  In case of emergency caused by a shortage of water in the city water system, it shall be the duty of the city manager to immediately give notice, by publication, to the water customers not to use water from the system for any purpose other than for strictly domestic use and such other use as he may designate, so long as the water shortage lasts. Until the city manager proclaims the emergency at an end, it shall be unlawful for any person to use water obtained from the city water system for the purpose of watering or sprinkling a lawn, flowerbed, park, hedge or garden, or to use such water for any purpose other than domestic use or such other uses as the city manager may have designated. 
(b)  Any person who engages in any activity prohibited by this section is guilty of an offense against the city, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than the maximum set forth in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 26-27; Code 1995, § 114-85; Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 7-21-1998) 
Sec. 114-105. - City's right to interrupt service. 
    The city reserves the right, at any time and without notice, to shut off the water supply for any emergencies, repairs, extensions or maintenance on city water lines. The city shall not be responsible for any damages which might result from stopping or interrupting water service. 
(Code 1975, § 26-28; Code 1995, § 114-86) 
Sec. 114-106. - Sale of surplus water. 
(a)  Sale of water in discretion of city. The city may sell, in its sole discretion, surplus water, so long as the same is available, to applicants outside the city limits under the terms and conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Application; required information. Each applicant shall make a written application to the chief inspector setting forth the following information and whatever additional information the city may require from time to time hereafter: 
(1)  The description of the type of residence, business or institution making the application for surplus water. 
(2)  A sworn affidavit that the use will be for potable water and for no other use and that the applicant understands that the sale of water may be curtailed or completely eliminated upon 24 hours' verbal notice in the sole discretion of the city manager that there is no longer surplus water available for sale for use outside the city limits. 
(3)  That the sale of surplus water will be for one year only and at the end of such year the application must be renewed and is again dependent upon surplus water being available for sale by the city. 
(4)  The application must show the number and type of taps and fixtures to be used by the applicant. 
(5)  The application must include an estimate of the total gallonage to be used on a yearly basis. 
(6)  The application must show the size of meter needed to service the applicant. 
(7)  The application is subject to written approval of the City of Oklahoma City being received by the City of Yukon that Oklahoma City concurs in the sale of surplus water to the applicant. 
(8)  The application will bear an initial fee in the sum established by resolution and such fee shall not be refunded if the application is denied; and a yearly renewal fee of established by resolution will be charged which shall also not be refunded if the application is denied. 
(9)  The application must state that all expense of installation to furnish water, including any street boring, shall be the sole expense of the applicant. 
(10)  The application shall show that the rate to be charged to the applicant will be twice the rate charged to residents of the city for similar usage. 
(11)  The application shall state that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and regulations of the city pertaining to plumbing, water lines and the use of water. 
(c)  Approval by city council. All applications, upon receiving staff approval, will be brought before the city council for approval or denial in the sole discretion of the city council. 
(d)  Tap fee and meter charge. The applicant shall pay tap fees in the sum of $100.00 and a meter charge in the sum of $175.00 for a three-quarter-inch meter or the cost of a larger meter. 
(Code 1975, § 26-29; Code 1995, § 114-87) 
Sec. 114-107. - Mandatory water connections. 
(a)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public water line, is required to install water lines tying in to the city water supply, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided such public line is within 250 feet of the property line. 
(b)  All costs and expenses incident of the installation and connection of a building water line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building water line. 
(Code 1995, § 114-88; Ord. No. 977, 3-4-1997) 
Sec. 114-108. - Hydrant flush meter/construction meter. 
(a)  Issuance of meter with permit. Upon issuance of a permit issued by the city, each permit holder will be issued a hydrant flush meter/construction meter to measure the amount of water taken through the hydrant connection. All such meters shall be owned exclusively by the city. No person issued such a permit shall take or use water from the hydrant without properly connecting and engaging the meter. 
(b)  Reading meters. The meter issued to a permit holder shall be returned to the city on or before the expiration date of the permit. Upon return to the city, the meter shall be read and the permit holder shall pay for the water used at the rates previously set out. However, as one of the conditions of the permit, the city may require the permit holder to periodically present the meter issued to him during the life of his permit to the city for inspection and reading. Billings for the water used shall be rendered at the time the meter is read and shall become due as provided for regular water bills elsewhere in this chapter. The permit holder may be required to phone in meter readings periodically. 
(c)  Security deposit. In order to guarantee payment of water used, and in order to insure return of meters and the timely reading of said meters, each permit holder shall be required to make a cash deposit in the amount of $1,500.00. A written receipt shall be issued as evidence of the deposit. The deposit will be applied, without interest, to the final bill upon return of the meter in good condition and the payment of all charges for water used. Any credit balance will be refunded to the permit holder. 
(d)  Failure to return meter. In the event the holder of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section fails to return the hydrant flush meter within ten days after the expiration date of his permit, the security deposit shall be deemed forfeited to the city, and shall be applied to pay the cost of replacing said meter and to satisfy nonpayment of city water used. In addition, a penalty charge equal to the charge for 100,000 gallons of water shall be assessed if the meter remains in the permit holder's possession after the expiration date. No subsequent permit shall be issued and all existing permits shall be canceled to any person who has violated any other provisions of this section, or its indebtedness to the city for water use or damage to hydrants or flush meters is delinquent. 
(e)  Usage regulation. Every person authorized by permit to open fire hydrants at the location specified on said permit shall replace the caps on the outlets when such are not in use and shall keep hose connections in good repair. Failure to perform these duties shall be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of hydrants and sufficient grounds to deny subsequent permits. 
(Code 1995, § 114-89; Ord. No. 1095, § 1, 2-6-2002) 
Sec. 114-109. - Installation and use of individual water wells. 
(a)  Where an approved water supply is not available as described in Section 114-107, the subdivision, institution, commercial or industrial structure or single-family dwelling may be served by individual water wells upon the express approval of the city engineer, the planning commission and the city council. Individual water wells must meet federal and state drinking water standards. 
(b)  Water wells shall be located on the premises where the well is intended to be used and there shall be no interconnection of any kind between such well with any other water source. 
(c)  No person shall drill or enlarge any domestic water well or subsequently use from such well, except upon making application on forms provided by development services and paying such fees as approved by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Individual water wells shall meet all state health design standards and construction specifications and shall provide adequate capacity to meet the domestic demand. 
(e)  Individual water wells shall have a minimum capacity of five gallons per minute. If soil and geological data indicates a possible groundwater deficiency, the applicant must demonstrate, at his expense that the water is available in adequate quantity and quality and will not overly reduce or damage the aquifer. The owner shall provide water samples to the Oklahoma Department of Health for monthly testing to assure proper water quality. 
(f)  Wells may be located anywhere on the property; however, any well located outside of the rear yard of the property may have only the wellhead exposed with no other accompanying structure, pursuant to the zoning code of the city. No well may be drilled on any easement or right-of-way. 
(g)  All drilling mud must be removed manually and under no circumstance may the drilling mud escape the property. 
(h)  As a fire protection measure, a minimum distance of 50 feet separation between residential structures shall be maintained in any residential district utilizing private water wells as the main source of water. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 4, 7-21-2015; Ord. No. 1379 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 114-110. - Drilling commercial water wells. 
(a)  Any person or organization wanting to drill a commercial water well inside the corporate city limits shall file an application with the director of community developmental services and pay the approved fee for the expense of inspections and monitoring. Said fees to be established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  The applicant shall comply with all federal and state laws as well as the rules and regulations of the Oklahoma Water Resources Board and the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
(c)  The application shall contain the name and address of the requesting party, the purpose of the well, the location of the well and a study prepared by a licensed, bonded hydrologist reflecting the volume and availability of fresh water. The study shall show the area the water will be drawn from and the size of the aquifer. The study shall have detail maps as to the location and surrounding property, the depth of the well, the water bearing sand including thickness, the casing type, casing thickness and depth, the geography area of the water bearing sands, the maximum rate of flow, the maximum rate of usage that would cause no damage or reduction in levels of the water bearing sands, description of material used to secure the casing, pumping devise and power source. The applicate shall provide monthly samples of the water to the Oklahoma Department of Heath to assure the safety of the water. 
(d)  This section shall apply to all proposed water wells and there shall be no distinction made as to the proposed use of the water. 
(e)  Notice shall be given to adjacent property owners within 1,000 feet of the proposed well location. 
(f)  Should there be any objections filed within 30 days, the mater shall be heard by the Yukon city council. 
(g)  If the permit is approved, the permit will issue upon the posting of a $5,000.00 bond. 
(Ord. No. 1379 , § 2, 12-4-2018) 
Secs. 114-111-114-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SERVICE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority regarding sewers generally, 11 O.S. § 37-201 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Best management practices means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, installation of equipment, and other management practices to control and limit the introduction of prohibited or objectionable discharges, including FOG, into sewer facilities. 
    Fats, oils, and grease or FOG means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a by-product of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
    Food service establishment or FSE means: 
(1)  Facilities within the boundaries of the city, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members, or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwelling where more than ten units utilize the same service connection to the sewer system. 
    Grease interceptor or interceptor means a multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the International Plumbing Code, underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices shall have at least one accessible inspection hatch and must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to ensure effective and efficient operation. 
    Manifest means that receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required by the city. 
    Sanitary sewer overflow (SSO ) means anytime that raw or untreated sewage is spilled outside the sewer system. 
    Sewer facility or system means any property belonging to the city or other public agency used in the treatment, reclamation, reuse, transportation, or disposal of wastewater. 
(Code 1995, § 114-110; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 2-7-2010) 
Sec. 114-133. - Mandatory sewer connections. 
(a)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is required to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided such public sewer is within 150 feet of the property line. 
(b)  All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1975, §§ 26-4, 26-40; Code 1995, § 114-111) 
Sec. 114-134. - Every building to have separate sewer; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that, where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building. 
(Code 1975, § 26-41; Code 1995, § 114-112) 
Sec. 114-135. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director of public works, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 26-42; Code 1995, § 114-113) 
Sec. 114-136. - Barricades and lights at excavations; restoration of public property. 
    All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1975, § 26-48; Code 1995, § 114-114) 
Secs. 114-137-114-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 114-156. - Construction of new sewerage facilities. 
(a)  No person shall let a contract for, or commence the construction of, any sanitary sewerage system, extensions or sewage facilities, either in whole or in part, or place or permit to be placed or discharged or permit to flow into the existing city sanitary system any sewage, unless such person has first obtained a written permit signed by the director. The application for permission to connect to the city sewerage facilities shall be made by written request to the director and shall be supplemented by complete plans, specifications, engineering reports and other information as deemed necessary by the director and the state department of health. Two or more copies of the plans, specifications, engineering reports and other pertinent information shall be forwarded by the city to the state department of health for review, approval and the issuance of a permit for construction as required by state law. 
(b)  Plans and specifications forwarded to the state department of health shall be accompanied by an application for a permit to construct (state health department for number 534), properly executed and signed by the responsible city official, where the city plans to accept the new sewerage facilities upon completion of construction. In the event the city does not plan to accept responsibility for the facilities after construction has been completed, the application for a permit to construct must be signed by the party who will be responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the proposed sewerage facilities. 
(c)  A permit to connect any new sanitary sewerage system, extensions or sewerage facilities to existing city sewerage facilities shall not become effective until the new installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city, and is in accordance with the requirements of the state department of health. The director shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
(Code 1975, § 26-3; Code 1995, § 114-126) 
Sec. 114-157. - Specifications for PVC sewer pipe. 
(a)  Polyvinyl chloride pipe, referred to hereinafter as PVC plastic, shall conform to the requirements of ASTM Standard 3034-7a and any subsequent revisions thereof, together with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  These specifications cover PVC plastic sewer pipe intended to be used for the conveyance of sewage, industrial wastes and stormwater. 
(c)  PVC plastic sewer pipe shall be embedded in accordance with the provisions of the standard recommended practice for underground installation of flexible thermoplastic pipe. To assure compliance, all PVC plastic pipe shall be inspected for deflection by pulling a sphere, cylinder or other acceptable measuring device through the pipe. The maximum allowable pipe deflection for completely backfilled nonrigid sewer pipe shall not exceed five percent of the nominal internal diameter. 
(Code 1975, § 26-7; Code 1995, § 114-127) 
Sec. 114-158. - Video inspection of sanitary sewer lines and systems. 
    Any contractor who constructs and installs sanitary sewer lines and systems shall perform a video inspection of such lines in accordance with the technical specifications adopted by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 26-8; Code 1995, § 114-128) 
Secs. 114-159-114-184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 114-185. - General specifications. 
(a)  The building sewer shall consist of all sewer lines of a structure up to the connection with the public sewer and shall be centrifugally spun cast-iron soil pipe ASTM Specification A-74-1966; vitrified clay sewer pipe ASTM Specification C13-44T; or Schedule 40 DWV-PVC or Schedule 40 DWV-ABS plastic pipe and fittings. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of either cast-iron soil pipe or Schedule 40 DWV-PVC or Schedule 40 DWV-ABS. Schedule 40 DWV-PVC and Schedule 40 DWV-ABS pipe shall be sand bedded. If installed in filled or unstable ground, however, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe or Schedule 40 DWV-PVC or Schedule 40 DWV-ABS and laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle approved by the public works superintendent. 
(b)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Cast-iron pipe joints shall be flexible rubber gaskets. All joints in vitrified clay pipe shall be equivalent to ASTM Specification C-425 or between such pipe and cast-iron or Schedule 40 DWV-PVC or Schedule 40 DWV-ABS joints shall be made with approved adaptors and flexible rubber gaskets. Joints for Schedule 40 DWV-PVC or Schedule 40 DWV-ABS used as underground piping under a building structure or used under or within concrete or other slab floors which are in contact with earth shall be no hub pipe. Only solvent cements and epoxy adhesives supplied by the pipe manufacturer and approved by the National Sanitation Foundation may be used in making joints. The label on the container of the solvent or adhesive shall have the manufacturer's name and address, type of plastic, such as PE, PVC, ABS, etc., the solvent or adhesive may be used to join. The manufacturer's recommendations shall be specifically followed in the use of these cements and adhesives. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the public works superintendent. 
(Code 1975, § 26-43; Code 1995, § 114-141) 
Sec. 114-186. - Size and slope. 
    The size and slope of a building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Code 1975, § 26-44; Code 1995, § 114-142) 
Sec. 114-187. - Location; depth; grade; changes in direction. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment, insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. All buildings three stories or more in height shall have appropriate restraining fittings or expansion joints used at each floor level. 
(Code 1975, § 26-45; Code 1995, § 114-143) 
Sec. 114-188. - Lifting devices. 
    In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1975, § 26-46; Code 1995, § 114-144) 
Sec. 114-189. - Excavations and pipe laying generally. 
    All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the director of public works. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification (012-19), except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(Code 1975, § 26-47; Code 1995, § 114-145) 
Sec. 114-190. - Inspection and connection to public sewer. 
(a)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the public works superintendent or his representative when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the public works superintendent or his representative. 
(b)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch if such branch is available at a suitable location. Where no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction by means of Romac (or like) sewer saddle to the satisfaction of the plumbing inspector. The city shall provide appropriate sewer saddles, the cost of which shall be borne by the contractor and shall be the actual cost thereof, plus ten percent administrative fees not less than: 
(1)  Four-inch tap for six-inch-12-inch nominal pipe size, $60.00. 
(2)  Six-inch tap for six-inch-12-inch nominal pipe size, $80.00. 
Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1975, § 26-49; Code 1995, § 114-146; Ord. No. 1061, § 2, 7-18-2000) 
Sec. 114-191. - Food service establishment or FSE. 
    Food service establishments shall maintain grease interceptors. The food service establishment shall be required to install a grease interceptor upon occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  All new construction of any FSE. 
(2)  At any time the service lateral contains FOG or solids accumulation that indicates unpermitted discharge into the sewer system and installation is deemed necessary by the public works director in order to protect the sewer system. 
(3)  At any time plumbing improvements or a remodel greater than ten percent of the facility is made to the FSE. 
(4)  Change of occupancy use of the structure. 
(Code 1995, § 114-147; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 2-7-2010) 
Sec. 114-192. - Drawing submittal requirements. 
(a)  Operators of food service establishments shall submit to the development services director and/or his designee two copies of facility site plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewer locations and connections, and a schematic drawing of the FOG control device, grease interceptor or other pretreatment equipment, piping, and instrumentation diagram, and wastewater characterization report. 
(b)  The submittal shall be in a form and content acceptable to the development services director or his designee for review of the existing or proposed grease control device, grease interceptor, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and operating procedures. The review of the plans and procedures shall in no way relieve the food service establishments of the responsibility of modifying the facilities or procedures in the future, as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge, and to meet the requirements of this chapter or any requirements of other regulatory agencies. The plans for the grease interceptor shall be prepared by an Oklahoma Professional Engineer and be signed and sealed. 
(Code 1995, § 114-148; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 2-7-2010) 
Sec. 114-193. - Grease interceptor requirements. 
(a)  Food service establishment operators shall provide wastewater acceptable to the city, under the requirements and standards established herein, before discharge to any sewer facility. Any food service establishment required to pretreat wastewater shall install, operate, and maintain an adequately sized grease interceptor, approved by the development services director or his designee, necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter. 
(b)  Grease interceptor sizing, type, and capacity and installation shall conform to the adopted edition of the International Plumbing Code as amended by ordinance and be approved by the development services director or his designee. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design approved by the development services director and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention and a sample box. The following are required minimum standards: 
(1)  The grease interceptor shall be installed at an exterior location where it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease, unless permitted otherwise in writing by the development services director. 
(2)  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall be constructed to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(c)  Food service establishments are required to register the grease interceptors with the city and submit the required documentation for approval by the development services director or his designee. 
(1)  New grease interceptors installed after January 1, 2011, will be required to pay an annual registration fee as established by resolution. 
(2)  Existing grease interceptors FSE installed before January 1, 2011 will be required to pay an annual renewal fee of $5.00 as established by resolution. 
(3)  All grease interceptor registrations will expire on April 30 after the same are issued and shall expire at the expiration of the term for which the fee is paid. 
(4)  The annual renewal applications, appropriate documentation and fees must be received by the city on or before May 1 and shall be considered surrendered if the registration is not renewed within 15 days. After May 1, the applicant will then be required to proceed in the manner required for a new or initial applicant. 
(d)  Food service establishment operators with grease interceptors shall maintain and produce to the development services director or his designee upon request data and information necessary to establish the maintenance and frequency of grease interceptor maintenance. Data and information shall include records to establish that: 
(1)  A written best management practice (BMP) is in place. 
(2)  All grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge and solids. 
(3)  FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor has not been allowed to pass into any building sewer/sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right-of-way. 
(4)  All food service establishments with a grease interceptor shall maintain its grease interceptor a minimum of every six months or on a more frequent basis as may be deemed necessary by any of the following circumstances: 
a.  Food service establishments shall determine a maintenance frequency based on the demand of the establishment. Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the total liquid depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system. 
b.  Grease interceptors shall be inspected periodically to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation of the baffles and flow-regulating device. Grease interceptors and their baffles shall be maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process. 
c.  If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG or solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements described in subsection (d)(4)a. of this section, the operator shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the development services director or his designee may also increase the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor from the current frequency. 
(Code 1995, § 114-149; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 2-7-2010) 
Secs. 114-194-114-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATIONS 

Sec. 114-225. - Best management practice requirements. 
(a)  Implement practices established. All food service establishments shall implement best management practices in accordance with the requirements and guidelines established in this chapter and as may be established by the development services director in an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. 
(b)  Compliance required with BMPs. All food service establishments shall be required, at a minimum, to comply with the following best management practices: 
(1)  Installation of drain screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas. 
(2)  Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure that they do not leak. Food service establishments shall use licensed waste haulers and proper recycling facilities to dispose of waste cooking oil. Practices to be followed include: 
a.  All food waste shall be disposed of directly into the trash or garbage, and not in sinks. 
b.  Never pour fats, oils, or grease into drains. 
c.  Don't use the disposal, all garbage to be placed in the trash. 
d.  Wipe off plates, trays, cooking utensils, pots and pans before washing. 
e.  Monitor usage of soaps and degreasers and conserve if possible. 
f.  Check hot water temperature and make sure the discharge temperature is below 140 degrees Fahrenheit. 
g.  Place screens over floor drains to stop debris from entering the floor drains. 
h.  Sweep floors before washing them down and mopping. 
i.  Inspect grease interceptors and solids interceptors daily for need of service may be required. 
j.  Maintain a manifest of maintenance performed on grease interceptors. 
k.  Personally verify interceptor is being serviced often enough and keep it free of floating debris and solids on the bottom. 
l.  Sample kitchen effluent semi-annually for oil and grease and have the sample analyzed by a certified laboratory to ensure the effluent is not greater than 100 mg/l oil and grease. 
m.  Keep all sampling and analysis records on-site and easily accessible for a period of three years. 
(3)  Employee training. Employees of food service establishments shall be trained by ownership/management, upon commencement of employment and at least annually thereafter, on the following subjects: 
a.  How to "dry wipe" pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove grease. 
b.  How to properly dispose of food waste and solids in enclosed plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors. 
c.  Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the development services director or his designee. 
(4)  Kitchen signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. Signage must include: 
a.  The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped. 
b.  How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling. 
(5)  Odors. Grease interceptor devices shall be installed and maintained so as to prevent odors, cross-contamination, sewer back-ups, or SSOs. 
(6)  Containers. Grease rendering containers shall be installed and properly maintained. 
(7)  Record keeping. Document record keeping shall be maintained and shall include: 
a.  Employee training records. 
b.  Grease control device (trap or interceptor) maintenance and cleaning records. 
c.  SSO records to be located on-site. 
d.  Plumbing maintenance records. 
e.  Rendering grease disposal records. 
f.  Name and contact information of waste hauler. 
g.  Name and contact information of disposal site. 
Documents consist of, but are not limited to logs, records, letters, blue prints, equipment specification and operation, receipts, and manifests. Such records are deemed to be environmental records and shall be retained for a minimum of three years. 
(Code 1995, § 114-150; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 2-7-2010) 
Sec. 114-226. - Grease waste haulers certificate. 
(a)  Certificate required. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove waste from food service establishments within the city limits without first obtaining a grease waste hauler's certificate from the city development services department. Prior to removing of waste from a food service establishment required by this chapter, the applicant for the permit shall have a valid grease waste hauler's certificate. 
(b)  Method of application. 
(1)  Any person who is required by this article to possess a grease waste hauler's certificate shall make an application to the city on application forms provided for that purpose by the city. 
(2)  The lending of any certificate and/or the person obtaining of other permits thereunder for any other person shall be deemed cause for revocation. A grease waste hauler's certificate issued by the city is not transferable, and violation of this provision is a cause for revocation in addition to other penalties in this Code. 
(3)  The city council may revoke the grease waste hauler's certificate for just cause. The development services director may suspend such certificate if, in his opinion, the certificate holder violates any provision of this article. In such case, the development services director shall give notice of the suspension to the contractor, and such suspension shall be effective until the city council determines whether the certificate shall be revoked. The contractor whose certificate has been suspended shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten days of the notice and be heard before the certificate is permanently revoked and shall be given adequate notice of the time and place of such hearing and of the charges against the certificate holder. Such a cause must be disposed of by the city council within 30 days of the time of the suspension. 
(c)  Certification fee, annual renewal fee. 
(1)  Before such certificate is issued a fee established by resolution shall be paid to the development services department for a grease waste hauler's registration certificate. 
(2)  Each certificate issued shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(3)  The annual renewal application, appropriate documentation and fees must be received by the city on or before July 1 and shall be considered surrendered if the certificate is not renewed within 15 days. After July 15, the applicant must proceed in the manner required for a new or initial applicant. 
(d)  Workers' compensation insurance requirements. 
(1)  Each contractor who is defined in the Workers' Compensation Act, title 85, Oklahoma Statutes, section 1 et seq. (the "Act")(85 O.S. § 1 et seq.) as an employer of employees as defined in the Act and not exempt, which contractor is registered under this article shall be required to document to the city and to keep in force during the life of its registration, a workers' compensation insurance policy to protect the contractor's employees against occupational hazards and diseases as regulated and defined in the Act. 
(2)  A certificate of insurance for workers' compensation with the city named as a certificate holder from an insurance company duly licensed to do business in the state or proof of exemption or own risk status shall be submitted with the application for registration to the city. Persons who are self-employed and do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Workers' Compensation Act are not required to submit a certificate of insurance. However, in lieu of the certificate of insurance requirement, the applicant must execute an affidavit certifying he is wholly self-employed and does not fall under the jurisdiction of the Workers' Compensation Act with proof of exemption. The city attorney will establish acceptable criteria for proof of exemption. 
(3)  The contractor shall be required to notify the city within ten working days upon termination of an insurance policy. This will cause the city to invalidate the certificate. 
(e)  Insurance. Each contractor shall procure and maintain a general liability policy of insurance with limits per occurrence of not less than $500,000.00. Proof of certificate of insurance shall be provided at the time application is made for a contractor's certificate. The contractor shall notify the city within ten days of termination of the policy. The city shall be named a certificate holder. Failure to maintain general liability insurance in the specified limits shall cause the contractor's certificate to be deemed revoked. 
(f)  Violation and penalties. Any person violating any provision of this article is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 114-151; Ord. No. 1272, § 1, 2-7-2010) 
Secs. 114-227-114-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-246. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and/organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these wastes with water or normal wastewater, as distinct from normal wastewater. 
    Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio. The milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater, excluding industrial wastewater, discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    pH means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    Public sewer means a pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes, or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
    Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil. 
(2)  No acids or alkalis. 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water. 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution. 
(5)  No noxious or other obnoxious or odorous gases. 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the state health department. 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as is specified in Standard Methods. 
    Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for the collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1975, § 26-60; Code 1995, § 114-166) 
Sec. 114-247. - Prohibited discharges to public sewers-Generally. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 26-61; Code 1995, § 114-167) 
Sec. 114-248. - Same-Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than one mg/l. 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply. 
(3)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or any other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron, pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (one and 65 degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 114-249(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater or other substances containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide or other taste- and odor-producing substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Code 1975, § 26-62; Code 1995, § 114-168) 
Sec. 114-249. - Same-Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods, are: 
mg/l Arsenic 0.05 Barium 5.0 Boron 1.0 Cadmium 0.02 Chromium (total) 5.0 Copper 1.0 Lead 0.1 Manganese 1.0 Mercury 0.005 Nickel 1.0 Selenium 0.02 Silver 0.1 Zinc 5.0  
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony. 
(2)  Beryllium. 
(3)  Bismuth. 
(4)  Cobalt. 
(5)  Molybdenum. 
(6)  Uranylion. 
(7)  Thenlum. 
(8)  Strontium. 
(9)  Tellurium. 
(10)  Herbicides. 
(11)  Fungicides. 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(Code 1975, § 26-63; Code 1995, § 114-169) 
Sec. 114-250. - Same-Garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1975, § 26-64; Code 1995, § 114-70) 
Sec. 114-251. - Same-Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the state health department and statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 1975, § 26-65; Code 1995, § 114-171) 
Sec. 114-252. - Same-Temperature of discharge. 
    No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1975, § 26-66; Code 1995, § 114-172) 
Sec. 114-253. - Same-Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1975, § 26-67; Code 1995, § 114-173) 
Sec. 114-254. - Same-Substances causing impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l including, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease-handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper products (either whole or ground by garbage grinders), slops, chemical residues, paint residues or bulk solids. 
(Code 1975, § 26-68; Code 1995, § 114-174) 
Sec. 114-255. - Use of public sewer required; discharge of wastes on public or private property prohibited; pretreatment prior to discharge. 
(a)  Unless an exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging wastewater, industrial waste or polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the state health department, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property into or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; or 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and/orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 1975, § 26-69; Code 1995, § 114-174) 
Sec. 114-256. - Preconditions on acceptance of wastes into system. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 26-70; Code 1995, § 114-176) 
Sec. 114-257. - Pretreatment or control standards. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve the design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Code 1975, § 26-71; Code 1995, § 114-177) 
Sec. 114-258. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts, oil, sand, flammable wastes, and other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in an effective operating condition. 
(Code 1975, § 26-72; Code 1995, § 114-178) 
Sec. 114-259. - Control manholes in building sewers. 
    Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1975, § 26-73; Code 1995, § 114-179) 
Sec. 114-260. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property. (Note: The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period samples may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH.) 
(b)  Examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD and suspended solids. 
(e)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Code 1975, § 26-74; Code 1995, § 114-180) 
Sec. 114-261. - Payment and agreement required for collection and treatment of industrial wastes. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(Code 1975, § 26-75; Code 1995, § 114-181) 
Sec. 114-262. - Power to enter property for purpose of enforcing article. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purpose of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1975, § 26-76; Code 1995, § 114-182) 
Sec. 114-263. - Authority to disconnect service to industrial customer for violations, failure to pay, etc. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with the proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all other pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Code 1975, § 26-77; Code 1995, § 114-183) 
Sec. 114-264. - Notice of violation of article. 
    The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Code 1975, § 26-78; Code 1995, § 114-184) 
Sec. 114-265. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
    No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1975, § 26-79; Code 1995, § 114-185) 
Sec. 114-266. - Penalty for continuing prohibited discharges. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Code 1975, § 26-80; Code 1995, § 114-186) 
Sec. 114-267. - Additional sanctions for failure to pay charges. 
    In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1975, § 26-80.1; Code 1995, § 114-187) 
Secs. 114-268-114-297. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 114-298. - When required and permitted. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 114-133, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Except as above provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1975, § 26-81; Code 1995, § 114-201; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 114-299. - Permit to construct. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall obtain a written permit signed by the public works director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the director. A permit and inspection fee shall be set by the city council by resolution and shall be paid to the development services department at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1975, § 26-82; Code 1995, § 114-202; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 114-300. - Inspection. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the public works director and/or his designee. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any state of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
(Code 1975, § 26-83; Code 1995, § 114-203; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 114-301. - Type, capacity, location, etc. 
    The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of environmental quality. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1975, § 26-84; Code 1995, § 114-204; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 114-302. - Operation and maintenance. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1975, § 26-85; Code 1995, § 114-205) 
Sec. 114-303. - Abandonment when public sewer becomes available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 114-133, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with such section, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, removed or filled with suitable material and shall be abandoned within 90 days. 
(Code 1975, § 26-86; Code 1995, § 114-206; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Chapter 118 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 118-1-118-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of taxicabs generally, 11 O.S. § 22-118. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Taxicab means and includes any motor vehicle for hire, designed to carry ten persons or less, operated upon any street or highway, or on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for transportation for hire between such points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported. This classification shall not include: 
(1)  Motor vehicles of ten-passenger capacity or less operated by the owner where the cost of operation is shared by fellow workmen between their homes and the place of regular daily employment, when not operated for more than two trips per day; 
(2)  Motor vehicles operated by the owner where the cost of operation is shared by the passengers on a share the expense plan; or 
(3)  Motor vehicles transporting students from the public school system when such motor vehicle is so transporting under contract with a public, private, or parochial school board or the council. 
(Code 1975, § 25-1; Code 1995, § 118-26) 
Sec. 118-20. - Chauffeur's license required. 
(a)  No person who does not have a valid state chauffeur's license shall drive a taxicab or other vehicle hauling passengers for hire. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize or permit any unlicensed driver to drive a taxicab or other vehicle hauling passengers for hire. 
(Code 1975, §§ 25-29, 25-30; Code 1995, § 118-27) 
Secs. 118-21-118-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require license for operation of taxicabs, 11 O.S. § 22-118(5). 

Sec. 118-44. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or permit to be operated any taxicab in the city, unless a proper license has been issued to the owner thereof, and such license is in full force and effect. 
(Code 1975, § 25-12; Code 1995, § 118-41) 
Sec. 118-45. - Certificate of convenience and necessity prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this division, until a certificate of convenience and necessity has been issued in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Before any certificate shall be issued under this section, the applicant shall file his application with the city clerk, together with a deposit established by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 25-15; Code 1995, § 118-42; Ord. No. 1170, § 1, 5-17-2005) 
State Law reference- Authority to require certificate of convenience and necessity as prerequisite to issuance of taxicab license, 11 O.S. § 22-118(5), (6) 
Sec. 118-46. - Application. 
    An application for a license under this division shall be in writing and verified by the applicant or his duly authorized representative. Such application shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant and, if a partnership, the names and addresses of all the partners; if a corporation, the state of incorporation and the names and addresses of the officers and directors thereof. 
(2)  The address of the principal place of business of the applicant. 
(3)  The number of taxicabs used, with a description showing the make, model and seating capacity of each. 
(Code 1975, § 25-13; Code 1995, § 118-43) 
Sec. 118-47. - Fee. 
    An annual license fee as established by resolution shall be paid to the city clerk in advance. Such fee shall be in addition to any fee required by the laws of the state. No fee required by this section shall be prorated. 
(Code 1975, § 25-16; Code 1995, § 118-44) 
State Law reference- Authority to impose annual license fee for taxicabs, 11 O.S. § 22-118(5). 
Sec. 118-48. - Applicant's insurance. 
(a)  Before any license is issued under this division, the applicant shall file with the city clerk proof that a policy of insurance has been issued, by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, providing liability insurance for each taxicab to be operated by the applicant, with coverage of not less than $100,000.00 liability coverage. Such insurance coverage shall be effective whether the taxicab was, at the time of any accident, being driven by the owner, his agent, servant or employee, lessee or licensee. Such policy shall contain a provision that it cannot be cancelled until ten days' written notice of such cancellation shall have been filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  If for any reason the policy of insurance filed pursuant to this section shall terminate, lapse or become void, the applicant shall advise the city clerk upon obtaining a new policy and provide the city clerk with a copy of such policy, and the license of such vehicle shall be reinstated. 
(Code 1975, § 25-14; Code 1995, § 118-45) 
State Law reference- Authority to require insurance for taxicabs, 11 O.S. § 22-118(1). 
Sec. 118-49. - Expiration. 
    Every license issued under this division shall expire on April 30 next following the date of issuance. 
(Code 1975, § 25-17; Code 1995, § 118-46) 
Sec. 118-50. - Revocation. 
    Whenever it shall appear, upon investigation, that a license was issued under this division as a result of misrepresentation or fraud, or that the holder of the license fails to maintain proper insurance, the city manager may fine, suspend or revoke such license. 
(Code 1975, § 25-18; Code 1995, § 118-47) 
Chapter 201 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 201-1. - Chapter 1 applies. 
    The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 201-2. - Preparation of impact statements. 
(a)  Generally. The city staff shall prepare and submit an impact statement on all future plats; commercial, multiple-family and industrial zoning applications; and commercial, multiple-family and industrial building permits. Such impact statement shall concern itself with, but not be limited to, water distribution mains and supply facilities, sanitary sewer lines and treatment facilities, and paving facts as follows: 
(1)  Water facilities. The facts as to new distribution mains; the facts as to how the new mains will complement existing distribution lines; the estimated amount of water required by the proposed development; and how this affects the existing supply facility as to the amount of new water required, the present actual usage and the present estimated capacity of the system. 
(2)  Sewer lines. The facts as to new mains; capacity of the outfall; estimated new sewage produced; and the ability of treatment facilities to treat additional sewage based upon capacity of plant. 
(3)  Paving facts. To ascertain the facts as to collector, arterial and residential paving; the manner in which the new or proposed paving complements existing street systems; and the effect of such paving upon drainage within the city as a whole. 
(b)  Statement of proposed use of services furnished. A statement detailing the impact of the proposed use upon the services of the city shall be prepared and furnished to the planning commission and the city council prior to said uses being considered by such bodies for the purpose of allowing the city to determine the effect that new development will have upon existing services. 
(c)  Contents of statement. The impact statement shall contain a statement as to whether the proposed use will require additional facilities to serve the use and a recommendation as to how such facilities are to be financed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11; Code 1995, § 90-1) 
Secs. 201-3-201-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to create planning commission and composition thereof, 11 O.S. § 45-101. 

Sec. 201-23. - Created; composition; appointment of members. 
    There is hereby created a planning commission of the city composed of five members nominated and confirmed as provided for in section 2-327. The mayor or appointed representative of the city council and the city engineer shall be ex officio members of the commission, without vote. 
(Code 1975, § 2-114; Code 1995, § 90-26) 
Sec. 201-24. - Terms of members. 
    Each appointed member of the planning commission shall serve a term of office as provided for in section 2-327. 
(Code 1975, § 2-115; Code 1995, § 90-27) 
State Law reference- Term, compensation, etc., of commission, 11 O.S. § 45-102. 
Sec. 201-25. - Qualifications, compensation and removal of members. 
    The appointive members of the planning commission shall be residents of the city. They shall be nominated and appointed solely with reference to their fitness and without reference to party affiliation and shall serve without compensation. Members may be removed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, at any time. 
(Code 1975, § 2-116; Code 1995, § 90-28) 
State Law reference- Members of planning commission to be residents of city and to serve without pay, 11 O.S. § 45-102. 
Sec. 201-26. - Election and terms of officers. 
    The planning commission shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a secretary, and may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary. The secretary need not be a member of the commission. The term of the chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. 
(Code 1975, § 2-117; Code 1995, § 90-29) 
Sec. 201-27. - Employment and compensation of staff. 
    The planning commission shall have the power and authority to employ planners, engineers, attorneys, clerks and other help deemed necessary within the limits of the appropriation fixed by the city council. The salary and compensation of such employees shall be fixed by the city council and shall be paid out of the city treasury in the same manner as the salary or compensation of other officers and employees. 
(Code 1975, § 2-118; Code 1995, § 90-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 45-103. 
Sec. 201-28. - Meetings generally; adoption of rules; records to be kept. 
    The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month unless the commission or its chairperson dispenses with one or more regular meetings for cause. The chairperson or any three members may call special meetings of the commission. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its regulations, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1975, § 2-119; Code 1995, § 90-31) 
Sec. 201-29. - Quorum; required vote for binding action. 
    Three members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No action shall be binding upon the planning commission, unless concurred upon by a majority of all the planning commission members. 
(Code 1975, § 2-120; Code 1995, § 90-32; Ord. No. 953, 7-2-1996) 
Sec. 201-30. - General powers. 
    In conducting its work, the planning commission may consider and investigate any subject matter tending to the development and betterment of the city and may make such recommendations as it may deem advisable to the city council. The planning commission may make or cause to be made surveys, studies, maps and plans in the conduct of its activities. 
(Code 1975, § 2-121; Code 1995, § 90-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 45-103. 
Sec. 201-31. - Powers granted by state law. 
    In addition to the powers conferred by this article, the planning commission shall have all other powers conferred upon a city planning commission by state statutes. 
(Code 1975, § 2-122; Code 1995, § 90-34) 
Sec. 201-32. - Powers and duties with respect to comprehensive plan. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have the power and the duty to prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city. In the preparation of such plan, the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, including, among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, and wise and efficient expenditure of public funds. 
(b)  In the preparation of the comprehensive plan, the planning commission may, from time to time, prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption a part or parts thereof, which parts shall cover one or more major geographical divisions of the city or one or more major elements of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  The planning commission may, from time to time, recommend extending, amending or changing any portion of the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1975, § 2-123; Code 1995, § 90-35) 
State Law reference- Comprehensive plan, 11 O.S. § 43-103. 
Sec. 201-33. - Investigation and report on proposed public improvements. 
    Before final action is taken by the city council on the location or design of any public building, statue, memorial, park, boulevard, street, alley, playground, public grounds or bridge, or change in any location of any street or alley, such question shall be submitted to the planning commission for investigation and report. 
(Code 1975, § 2-124; Code 1995, § 90-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 45-104. 
Sec. 201-34. - Powers and duties with respect to subdivisions. 
    The planning commission may prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city. All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in two or more lots, plats or parcels, or streets, alleys or other ways intended to be dedicated to public use within the corporate limits of the city shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its recommendations. The planning commission shall, with the help of appropriate municipal officials, check the proposed dedications or subdivision of land to ensure compliance with the rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land and with other elements of the comprehensive plan for the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-125; Code 1995, § 90-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, 11 O.S. § 45-104. 
Sec. 201-35. - Powers and duties as zoning commission; general requirements for zoning regulations. 
(a)  The planning commission shall also act as and have the powers and duties of a zoning commission. It shall have the power to prepare and to recommend to the city council for adoption a zoning plan to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residences and other purposes. The planning commission shall also have all other powers conferred upon zoning commissions by state law. 
(b)  The planning commission may recommend the division of the city into districts of such number, size and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the zoning plan. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
(c)  Zoning regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-126; Code 1995, § 90-38) 
State Law reference- Zoning generally, 11 O.S. § 43-101 et seq.; planning commission to be appointed as zoning commission, 11 O.S. § 43-109. 
Chapter 204 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, 11 O.S. § 14-107; authority to regulate buildings generally, 11 O.S. §§ 22-113, 43-102; authority to require more stringent building standards than technical codes, 74 O.S. § 324.8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 204-1. - Office of building inspector created; appointment and general powers and duties. 
    The office of building inspector for the city is hereby created within the development services department. The building inspector may hold another position in the city government. The building inspector shall have the powers, duties and functions prescribed for the "code official" by the building code adopted by section 204-27, provided that such powers, duties and functions may be performed by authorized representatives of the building inspector and under his supervision and control. 
(Code 1975, § 6-1; Code 1995, § 18-1) 
Sec. 204-2. - Construction of concrete retaining walls in residentially zoned areas. 
(a)  A concrete retaining wall extending six inches above the finished grade shall be constructed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  For new construction when the approved grading plan indicates that the slope of the grade from any point on an exterior wall facing the property line to the property line is equal to or more than one foot of rise for each five feet of run; or 
(2)  When an application has been made for a building permit which would change the distance from a structure to the side yard property line and there is any indication that the slope of the grade from any point on an exterior wall facing the property line meets or exceeds the slope set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  The concrete retaining wall shall: 
(1)  Be constructed as near the property line as practical; 
(2)  Extend not less than the length of the exterior wall nearest the side yard; 
(3)  Be constructed of materials approved by the city inspector; 
(4)  Direct the drainage of water to the street or other manmade or natural drainage path; and 
(5)  Be constructed in such a manner as to prevent the flow of water or flooding of other residential structures. 
(Code 1995, § 18-3) 
Sec. 204-3. - General provisions. 
(a)  Certificate required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, improve, enlarge, repair, move, demolish, or alter any premises, building or other structure within the city limits without first obtaining a contractor's certificate from the city. Prior to issuance of any building permits required by this chapter or the adopted building codes of the city, the applicant for the permit shall have a valid contractor's certificate. 
(2)  A contractor's certificate is not required of persons who have a valid certificate for other specialized trades required by this Code and provided the work performed is within the authority granted therein. 
(3)  Resident owners of the property are not required to obtain a contractor certificate when performing work on their own property provided work is performed by the owner; nothing herein shall relieve any person from obtaining other licenses, permits or certificates required by this Code. 
(b)  Method of application. 
(1)  Any person who is required by this chapter to possess a contractor's certificate shall make an application to the city on application forms provided for that purpose by the city. 
(2)  The lending of any contractor's certificate and/or the person to whom the certificate is issued obtaining other permits thereunder for any other person shall be deemed cause for revocation. A contractor's certificate issued by the city is not transferable, and violation of this provision is a cause for revocation in addition to other penalties in this Code. 
(3)  The city council may revoke the contractor's certificate for just cause. The development services director may suspend such certificate if, in his opinion, the certificate holder violates any provision of the Code. In such case, the development services director shall give notice of the suspension to the contractor, and such suspension shall be effective until the city council determines whether the certificate shall be revoked. The contractor whose certificate has been suspended shall have the right to appear before the council and be heard before the certificate is permanently revoked and shall be given adequate notice of the time and place of such hearing and of the charges against the certificate holder. Such cause must be disposed of by the city council within 30 days of the time of the suspension. 
(c)  Certification fee; annual renewal fee. 
(1)  Any such fee shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(2)  Each certificate issued shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(3)  The annual renewal application, appropriate documentation and fees must be received by the city on or before July 1 and shall be considered surrendered if the certificate is not renewed within 15 days. After July 15, the applicant must proceed in the manner required for a new or initial applicant. 
(d)  Workers compensation insurance requirements. 
(1)  Each building contractor who is defined in the Workers' Compensation Act, 85 O.S. § 1 et seq. (the "Act") as an employer of employees as defined in the Act and not exempt, which contractor is registered under this chapter shall be required to document to the City of Yukon and to keep in force during the life of its registration, a workers' compensation insurance policy to protect the contractor's employees against occupational hazards and diseases as regulated and defined in the Act. 
(2)  A certificate of insurance for workers' compensation with the city named as a certificate holder from an insurance company duly licensed to do business in the State of Oklahoma or proof of exemption or own risk status shall be submitted with the application for registration to the city. Persons who are self-employed and do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Workers' Compensation Act are not required to submit a certificate of insurance. However, in lieu of the certificate of insurance requirement, the applicant must execute an affidavit certifying he is wholly self-employed and does not fall under the jurisdiction of the Workers' Compensation Act with proof of exemption. The city attorney will establish acceptable criteria for proof of exemption. 
(3)  The contractor shall be required to notify the city within ten working days upon termination of an insurance policy. This will cause the city to invalidate the certificate. 
(e)  Insurance. Each contractor shall procure and maintain a general liability policy of insurance with limits per occurrence of not less than $500,000.00. A certificate of insurance shall be provided at the time application is made for a contractor's certificate. The contractor shall notify the city within ten days of termination of the policy. City shall be named a certificate holder. Failure to maintain general liability insurance in the specified limits shall cause the contractor's certificate to be deemed revoked. 
(f)  Violation and penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 18-4; Ord. No. 1124, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 204-4. - Landscaping required in certain commercially zoned districts. 
(a)  Generally. All new development and redevelopment areas located within commercial zoning districts when fewer than 140 parking spaces are required by the zoning regulations, without variances, shall be landscaped to enhance the beautification of the city, safeguard and enhance property values, protect public and private investment, and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Required landscaping. 
(1)  A base landscaping of two trees is required. In addition, one tree is required for every seven parking spaces required by the zoning regulations, without variances. The first seven parking spaces are excluded from this requirement. 
(2)  Any tree found by the development services director or his designee to be dead or in declin 
ing condition shall be replaced within 30 days of written notice thereof by regular or certified mail to the owner or owner's address or, if unknown, to owner at the property address or as shown on the rolls of the county assessor or other county officials. The property owner has the responsibility of maintaining all trees. 
(3)  Required sizes for trees at time of installation are: 
a.  Deciduous trees shall be two inches caliper at time of planting, and shall be of a species having an average minimum mature crown spread of greater than nine feet. 
b.  Evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of four feet at time of planting. 
(c)  Suggested trees. The following is a suggested list of suitable trees for planting to meet the requirements of this section. Those tree types listed were selected due to their ability to respond to the environmental conditions within the city. Those factors considered in tree selection were soil conditions in relation to growth, the tree's ability to cope with the climate, and its survival rate as an urban tree. Low maintenance, a moderate growth rate and aesthetic quality were also considered. 
Suggested Street Trees Bradford Pear Goldenrain Tree Hackberry Sycamore London Planetree Red Oak Shumard Oak Water Oak Honey Locust (thornless and seedless) Caddo Maple Sweet Gum Scotch Pine Japanese Black Pine Slash Pine Loblolly Pine Carvert Juniper Eastern Red Cedar  
This table is not an all-inclusive list of trees which may be planted; however, other selections must be approved by the director prior to planting. 
(d)  Landscaping plan. A landscaping plan shall be required as part of the site plan submitted for all commercial building permits. This plan shall show detailed location and type of trees to be planted. 
(e)  Completion of installation. A certificate of occupancy for any use shall not be issued until the trees have been installed in accordance with the plan, and it shall be illegal for any person to occupy or operate a business in any new structure for which trees, as shown by the plan, are not provided; except that, if a structure and all site improvements are complete except for these landscaping requirements and the season of the year will not permit the planting and growing of trees, temporary occupancy may be permitted by the director until a date certain in the growing season. If the landscaping has not been completed by the date, the property owner shall be in violation of this division. A temporary extension may be approved by the director for a period not to exceed one 30-day period. 
(f)  Responsibility for maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in good condition all of the trees required by this division. Any tree which dies shall be replaced no later than the following planting season (spring or fall). 
(g)  Enforcement of maintenance requirements. When it is determined by the director, or person officially designated, that trees required by this section are not being maintained, it shall be his duty to give notice in writing to the property owner. Such notice shall specify in what manner the trees are in need of maintenance and a date for compliance. The property owner shall have not less than 30 days to comply with the notice; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by any such order or disagreeing with any of the requirements of the notice may file an appeal within the 30-day period to the board of adjustment. 
(h)  Failure to provide or maintain landscaping. Failure to provide the trees required by this section or failure to maintain required trees in the manner prescribed by this section shall constitute an offense and violation of this Code punishable pursuant to section 1-7. 
(Code 1995, § 18-5; Ord. No. 1196, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 204-5. - Oklahoma Uniform Building Code commission fee for issuance or renewal of building permit. 
    In addition to the building permit fee provided in section 204-30, each applicant shall pay an state uniform building code commission fee for the issuance or renewal of any building permit in the amount established by the commission as set forth in 59 O.S. § 1000.25. In addition to the fee amount, there is hereby levied a fee amount established by resolution which shall be deposited into the city's general fund. The remaining fee amount shall be deposited by the city into a separate account created for that purpose, to be held and remitted to the state treasury for deposit in the state uniform building code commission revolving fund as required by applicable law. 
(Code 1995, § 18-6; Ord. No. 1255, § 1, 3-16-2010) 
Secs. 204-6-204-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 204-27. - Adoption of building code. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2009 edition, as amended and modified by the uniform building code commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23 and subsequent amendments, as listed below, of the city Code of Ordinances; including appendix chapters: appendix H signs, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. as it may from time to time be amended, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article with additions, insertions, deletions and changes. 
(Code 1975, § 6-14; Code 1995, § 18-26; Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1121, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1303, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-28. - Amendments. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1975, § 6-16; Code 1995, § 18-28; Ord. No. 1121, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 204-29. - Building permit; application and issuance. 
    In addition to all other documents and information necessary for an application for a building permit the applicant shall also provide a copy of the recorded plat. 
(Code 1975, § 6-18; Code 1995, § 18-29; Ord. No. 1121, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 204-30. - Additions, insertions, changes and fees to International Building Code. 
    The following sections of the International Building Code are hereby revised as follows: 
101.1_is amended to insert the following: 
101.1 City of Yukon, State of Oklahoma 
105.2 is amended as follows: 
105.2 Work exempt from permit: 
Subparagraphs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 are hereby deleted from the list of exemptions. Permits shall be required for all work referenced in subparagraphs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6. 
107.1(1) is amended to read as follows: 
107.1(1) A registered design professional shall be required for the design of a building, within the classification of the Utility and Miscellaneous Group U which contains a structural component with a clear span of more than 30 feet or with an aggregate of 1,000 square feet or more. 
109.2 All such fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
109.6 is amended to read as follows: 
109.6 Fee Refunds: The Code Official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
2. Not more than 80 percent of permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permit not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
114.4 is amended to read as follows: 
114.4 Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS 
    Definitions are amended to modify the definition of repair: 
    The definition of the word "Repair" shall include repair to any building or structure regardless of the classification of the building as a new or existing building or the reconstruction or renewal (restoration to good or sound condition) of any part of any building for the purpose of its maintenance. (OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 3 USE AND OCCUPANCY 
CLASSIFICATION 
    310.1 is amended to read as follows: 
310.1 
R-1 Residential occupancies containing sleeping units where the occupants are primarily transient in nature including: Boarding houses (transient), hotels (transient), motels (transient), congregate living facilities (transient) with ten or fewer occupants are permitted to comply with the construction requirements for Group R-3, except as otherwise provided for in this Code, or shall comply with the International Residential Code, provided the building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.2.8. 
R-2 Residential occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature including: Apartment houses, Boarding houses (non-transient), convents, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, hotels (non-transient), live/work units, monasteries, motels (non-transient), vacation time share properties and congregate living facilities with 16 or fewer occupants are permitted to comply with the construction requirements for Group R-3, except as provided for in this Code, or shall comply with the International Residential Code, provided the building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.2.8. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 4 SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY 
423.1 is amended to read as follows: 
423.1 General. In addition to other applicable requirements in this Code, storm shelters shall be constructed in accordance with ICC-500, FEMA 320, FEMA 361 or other equivalent approved engineered system. 
423.2 is amended to read as follows: 
423.2 Storm Shelter. A building, structure, or portions thereof, constructed in accordance with the standards listed in section 423.1 and designated for use during a severe wind storm event, such as a hurricane or tornado. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 8 INTERIOR FINISHES 
    803.1.4 is amended to read as follows: 
803.1.4. Interior Finishes. Acceptance criteria for textile and expanded vinyl wall or ceiling coverings tested to ASTM E 84 or UL 723. Textile wall and ceiling covering and expanded vinyl wall and ceiling covering shall have a Class A flame spread index in accordance with either ASTM E 84 or UL 723 and be protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 3.3.1.2. Test specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E 2404. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 9 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
903.2.7 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  A Group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1,115 square meters). 
(2)  A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
(3)  The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2,230 square meters). 
(4)  A Group M occupancy where the cumulative area used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 square meters). 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
903.6 is amended to read as follows: 
903.6 Pump and Riser Room Size. Fire pump and automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be designed with adequate space for all equipment necessary for the installation, as defined by the manufacturer with sufficient working room around the stationary equipment. Clearances around equipment to elements of permanent construction, including other installed equipment and appliances shall be sufficient to allow inspection, service, repair, or replacement without removing such elements of permanent construction or disabling the function of a required fire resistance-rated assembly. Fire pump and automatic sprinkler riser room shall be provided with a door(s) and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest piece of equipment. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
911.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
911.1.3 Size. The room shall be a minimum of 200 square feet (19 square meters) with a minimum dimension of ten feet (3,048 mm). Exception: When approved by the fire code official the fire command center can be reduced in size to not less than a minimum of 96 square feet (nine square meters) with a minimum dimension of eight feet (2,438 mm). 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 10 MEANS OF EGRESS 
1005.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1005.1 Minimum Required Egress Width. The means of egress width shall not be less than required by this section. The total width of means of egress in inches (mm) shall not be less than the total occupant load served by the means of egress multiplied by 0.3 inch (7.62 mm) per occupant for stairways and by 0.2 inch (5.08 mm) per occupant for other egress components. The width shall not be less than specified elsewhere in this Code. Multiple means of egress shall be sized such that the loss of any one means of egress shall not reduce the available capacity to less than 50 percent of the required capacity. The maximum capacity required from any story of a building shall be maintained to the termination of the means of egress. Exceptions: 
(1) Means of egress complying with section 1028; 
(2) For other than H and I-2 occupancies, the capacity, in inches, of means of egress stairways shall be calculated multiplying the occupant load served by such stairway by a means of egress capacity factor of 0.2 inches (5.1 mm) per occupant in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with sections 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with section 907.5.2.2. 
(3) For other than H and I-2 occupancies, the capacity, in inches, of means of egress components other than stairways shall be calculated multiplying the occupant load served by such component by a means of egress capacity factor of 0.15 inches (3.8 mm) per occupant in building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with section 907.5.2.2. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
1022.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1022.1 Enclosures Required. Interior exit stairways and interior exit ramps shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with section 712, or both. Exit enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours where connecting four stories or more and not less than one hour when connecting less than four stories. The number of stories connected by the exit enclosure shall include any basements but not any mezzanines. Exit enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than the floor assembly penetrated, but need not exceed two hours. Exit enclosures shall lead directly to the exterior of the building or shall be extended to the exterior of the building with an exit passageway conforming to the requirements of section 1023, except as permitted in section 1027.1. An exit enclosure shall not be used for any purpose other than means of egress. Exceptions: 
(1) In all occupancies, other than Group H and I occupancies, a stairway is not required to be enclosed when the stairway serves an occupant load of less than ten and the stairway complies with either Item 1.1 or 1.2. In all cases, the maximum number of connecting opening stories shall not exceed two. 
(a) 1.1. The stairway is open to not more than one story above its level of exit discharge; or 
(b) 1.2. The stairway is open to not more than one story below its level of exit discharge 
(2) Exits in buildings of Group A-5 where all portions of the means of egress are essentially open to the outside need not be enclosed. 
(3) Stairways serving and contained within a single residential dwelling unit or sleeping unit in Group R-1, R-2 or R-3 occupancies are not required to be enclosed. 
(4) Stairways in open parking structures that serve only the parking structure are not required to be enclosed. 
(5) Stairways in Group I-3 occupancies, as provided for in section 408.3.8, are not required to be enclosed. 
(6) Means of egress stairways as required by sections 410.5.3 and 1015.6.1 are not required to be enclosed. 
(7) Means of egress stairways from balconies, galleries or press boxes as provided for in section 1028.5.1 are not required to be enclosed. 
(8) Stairways complying with exception 3 or 4 of section 1016.1 are not required to be enclosed. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 16 STRUCTURAL DESIGN 
1611.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1611.1 Design Rain Loads. Each portion of a roof shall be designed to sustain the load of rainwater that will accumulate on it if the primary drainage system for that portion is blocked plus the uniform load caused by water that rises above the inlet of the secondary drainage system at its design flow. The design rainfall shall be based on two conditions: 
a. The 100-year hourly rainfall rate indicated in Figure 1611.1; and 
b. The 100-year, five-minute duration rainfall rate of 10.2 inches per hour. Alternately, the 100-year, one-hour and 100-year, five-minute duration rainfall rates may be determined from approved local weather data. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
1805.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1805.4.1 Design: On footings that are not designed by a design professional the presumptive load bearing values of foundation materials is between 2,000 and 3,000 pounds per square foot. The following requirements are minimum standards for the city: 
Types Dimension Material Reinforcement 1 Story (no brick) 12" x 18" Concrete Two- 5/8 " Rebar or Four-1/2" Rebar 1 Story (w/brick) 15" x 20" Concrete Two- 5/8 " Rebar or Four-1/2" Rebar  
All other types of foundations such as pier and grade beam footings require that an engineer sign and seal the footing details. (Exception: accessory structures that are 200 square feet or less are exempt from this requirement.) 
(Code 1975, § 6-19; Code 1995, § 18-30; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 1048, § 3, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 1121, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 1303, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-31. - Revocation of permit. 
    If the work in or about any building or structure shall be conducted in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the building code adopted by this article, the permit issued under this article shall be revoked. It shall be unlawful to continue the work until such violations have been corrected to the satisfaction of the building inspector. 
(Code 1975, § 6-20; Code 1995, § 18-31) 
Sec. 204-32. - Design and review criteria. 
    All such fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. In considering applications before it, the city staff, planning commission and/or city council shall be guided by the following criteria and these elements shall be described on the documents provided to the city: 
(1)  Concrete and metal walls. In all applicable zoning districts of this section, exposed exterior metal walls or untreated concrete block, including painted concrete block and unfinished or untreated concrete panels, shall not be permitted unless the adjacent buildings on two sides have been previously constructed with exposed metal walls, untreated concrete block, including painted concrete block or unfinished concrete panels or are in subdivisions wherein at least five structures have been erected using the exposed metal wall construction or untreated concrete block, including painted concrete block or unfinished, untreated concrete panels. 
(2)  Metal buildings. Any metal building permitted under this section shall have its sides facing any street contain at least 75 percent brick, glass, rock, wood or material other than metal. In the case of a building on a corner (facing an intersection of two streets), the building must meet the 75 percent requirement on the two sides of the building facing the streets. In computing the 75 percent area for each wall, the portion of the wall containing the windows, window frames, doors and signs shall be excluded. 
(3)  Roofs. In all applicable zoning districts, where any portion of any roof is visible to an observer standing on ground level at any place along the property lines of the subject property, then in that event, no roofs of metal construction shall be permitted unless the same is of standing seam construction or a functional and architectural equivalent thereof. Any new construction incorporating flat roof shall make use of a mansard or other architectural treatment on all sides of the new building to achieve compatibility with the surrounding area. 
(4)  Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment and devices located on, or adjacent to structures shall be screened by the height of the building wall or by a wall or enclosure of sufficient height that mechanical equipment is screened from view by an observer standing on ground level at any place along the property lines of the subject property. The mechanical equipment or wall shall provide a minimum separation as defined by the manufacturer's requirements for the particular mechanical equipment to be screened. The top of the enclosure may be left open. Window air conditioning units or wall-mounted air conditioners used must be screened through landscaping or other appropriate architectural treatment. 
(5)  Utility meters. Whenever possible, utility meters shall be installed in the rear or side yards of the building site in order to minimize the visibility from the adjoining streets. 
(6)  Location of refuse facility. The objective of locating the refuse facility is that the facility is not visible from adjacent streets, or in direct view when the enclosure is clearly visible from locations other than the adjacent streets. 
a.  Access to the enclosure shall utilize the appropriate turning radius to accommodate the refuse vehicle. All refuse containers, whether recyclable or disposable, shall be screened. 
b.  The following standards shall apply: 
1.  A concrete approach loading pad shall be constructed in front of each refuse enclosure at least 12 feet wide by 12 feet long, and a minimum of six inches thickness of concrete at a standard of 3,500 psi (pounds per square inch). 
2.  Minimum of eight feet by eight feet and a minimum of six inches thickness of concrete pad for the containers enclosure at a standard of 3,500 psi. 
3.  Minimum inside dimension of eight feet by eight feet of enclosure is required to accommodate largest size refuse containers. 
4.  Minimum inside dimension of eight feet for the enclosure gates opening is required. 
5.  Keeper latches are required to hold gates in the fully opened position while the refuse containers is being serviced. 
6.  Four-inch diameter pipe bollards are required inside each enclosure to protect the gates and the enclosure walls from damages by the refuse containers movement. 
7.  Minimum of 50 feet unobstructed approach path is required for the 35-foot collection truck to access the containers enclosure. 
8.  Turn around area must be provided to allow the collection truck to exit without backing onto public thoroughfares or streets. 
c.  Each refuse facility shall be screened with an enclosure of the same veneer as the principal building or the wall of the building such enclosure is adjacent to, from view on all sides by a person standing at ground level on the site, or on immediately adjoining property, by a fence or wall not less than six feet in height, but tall enough to fully screen the type of refuse containers used, or by enclosure within a building. 
d.  Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy local public health and sanitary regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 18-33; Ord. No. 1142, § 1, 4-6-2004; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Secs. 204-33-204-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS CODE 

Sec. 204-51. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
    A certain document three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition, excluding the Appendixes, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code for the city for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms, as amended and modified by the Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23 and subsequent amendments as listed below on file in the office in the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as fully set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-52. - Additions, deletions, etc., to International Fuel Gas Code. 
101.1 is amended to insert the jurisdiction: 
101.1 City of Yukon, State of Oklahoma. 
106.6.2 is amended to insert: 
106.6.2 Fee Schedule. Any mechanical and plumbing contractor who intends to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert any fuel gas system and/or gas-fired appliance, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit and shall pay all such required permit fees and any additional fees. All such fees shall be set by resolution by the city council. 
106.6.3.2 is amended to insert: 
106.6.3.2 80 percent 
106.6.3.3 is amended to insert: 
106.6.3.3 100 percent 
108.4 is amended to insert: 
108.4 Violations, penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall erect, construct, alter, repair or remove any fuel gas system and/or gas appliance in violation of detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued hereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances. 
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REGULATIONS 
307.2.1 is added to read as follows: 
307.2.1 Condensate drains. Where condensing appliances are in locations subject to freezing conditions, the condensate drain line must be protected from freezing in an approved manner and in accordance with manufacturer installation instructions. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
308.1 is amended to read as follows: 
308.1 Scope. This section shall govern the reduction in required clearances to combustible materials, including gypsum board, and combustible assemblies for chimneys, vents, appliances, devices and equipment. Clearance requirements for air conditioning equipment and central heating boilers and furnaces shall comply with Section 308.3. and 308.4. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
310.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
310.1.1 CSST. Exception: Special corrugated stainless steel gas systems that have been designed, manufactured and listed for installation without direct bonding shall be permitted to be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 4 GAS PIPING INSTALLATIONS 
404.8.1 is added to read as follows: 
404.8.1 Insulated union on building riser. All underground gas piping systems shall have an insulated union installed above ground level before the service enters the building. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
404.10 is amended to read as follows: 
404.10 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade, except as provided for in section 404.10.1. 
Exception: Where a minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) cannot be achieved, the pipe shall be installed in conduit or bridged (shielded). 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
404.10.2 is added to read as follows; 
404.10.2 Separation of gas piping from other piping systems. Gas pipe and any other piping systems shall be separated by 18 inches (457 mm) of undisturbed or compacted earth. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
404.16 is amended to delete the "Exception" and replace it with the following: 
404.16 Prohibited devices. Exception: An approved fitting or device where the gas piping system has been sized to accommodate the pressure drop of the fitting or device. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
406.7.1 is amended to read as follows: 
406.7.1 Piping systems required to be purged outdoors. The purging of piping systems shall be in accordance with the provisions of sections 406.7.1.1 through 406.7.1.3 where the piping system meets either of the following: 
1. The design operating gas pressure is greater than two psig (13.79 kPa). 
2. The piping being purged contains one or more sections of pipe or tubing meeting the size and length criteria of Table 406.7.1. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
406.7.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
406.7.1.1 Removal from service. Where existing gas piping is opened, the section that is opened shall be isolated from the gas supply and line pressure vented in accordance with Section 406.7.1.2. Where gas piping meeting the criteria of Table 406.7.1. is removed from service, the residual fuel gas in the piping shall be displaced with an inert gas. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
406.7.1.2 is added as follows: 
406.7.1.2 Outdoor discharge of purged gases. The open end of a piping system being pressure vented or purged shall discharge directly to an outdoor location. Purging operations shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
1. The point of discharge shall be controlled with a shutoff valve. 
2. The point of discharge shall be located at least ten feet (3,048 mm) from sources of ignition, at least ten feet (3,048 mm) from building openings and at least 25 feet (7,620 mm) from mechanical air intake openings. 
3. During discharge, the open point of discharge shall be continuously attended and monitored with a combustion gas indicator that complies with section 406.7.1.3. 
4. Purging operations introducing fuel gas shall be stopped when 90 percent fuel gas by volume is detected within the pipe. 
5. Persons not involved in the purging operations shall be evacuated from all areas within ten feet (3,048 mm) of point of discharge. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
406.7.1.3 is added to read as follows: 
406.7.1.3 Combustion gas indicator. Combustion gas indicators shall be listed and shall be calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Combustion gas indicators shall numerically display a volume scale from 0 percent to 100 percent in one percent or smaller increments. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
406.7.2 is amended to read as follows; 
406.7.2 Piping systems allowed to be purged indoors and outdoors. The purging of piping systems shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 406.7.2.1 where the piping system meets both of the following: 
1. The design operating gas pressure is two psig (13.79 kPa) or less. 
2. The piping being purged is constructed entirely from pipe or tubing not meeting the size and length criteria of Table 406.7.1. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
406.7.2.1 is added to read as follows: 
406.7.2.1 Purging Procedure. The piping system shall be purged in accordance with one or more of the following: 
1. The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and shall discharge to the outdoors. 
2. The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and shall discharge to the indoors or outdoors through an appliance burner not located in a combustion chamber. Such burner shall be provided with a continuous source of ignition. 
3. The piping shall be purged with fuel gas that is discharged to the indoor or outdoor, and the point of discharge shall be monitored with a listed combustible gas detector in accordance with section 406.7.2.2. Purging shall be stopped when fuel gas is detected, or 
4. The piping shall be purged by the gas supplier in accordance with written procedures. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
406.7.2.2 is added to read as follows: 
406.7.2.2 Combustible gas detector. Combustible gas detectors shall be listed and shall be calibrated or tested in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Combustible gas detectors shall be capable of indicating the presence of fuel gas. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
410.4 is added to read as follows: 
410.4 Excess flow valve. Where automatic excess flow valves are installed, they shall be listed for the application and shall be sized and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Secs. 204-53-204-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 204-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Electrical equipment means to all wiring, material, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus and the like, used as a part of or in connection with any electrical installation to be installed within or on any building or structure. 
    Roughed in means new or old work roughed in, including all electrical equipment necessary to make the installation complete, free from unintentional grounds, with joints properly made up, ready for attachment of fixtures, drop lights and appliances. 
(Code 1975, § 6-32; Code 1995, § 18-51) 
Sec. 204-67. - Office of electrical inspector created; appointment, term and general powers and duties. 
(a)  There is hereby created, within the department of development services, the office of electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall be appointed by and hold office at the pleasure of the city manager. The electrical inspector may hold another position in the city government. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to see that all laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations relating to the installation of electrical equipment are properly enforced, and he is hereby empowered to enter any premises in the discharge of his duties and to pass upon and decide any questions arising under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 6-33; Code 1995, § 18-52; Ord. No. 1305, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-68. - Special rulings by electrical inspector. 
    The electrical inspector shall have the authority to make special rulings when circumstances warrant for the safeguarding of life and property and the improvement of electrical installations. In all such cases, persons engaged in installing electrical equipment and holding a registration under this article must be notified by letter of these decisions. 
(Code 1975, § 6-34; Code 1995, § 18-53; Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-18-2000) 
Sec. 204-69. - Registration for electrical contractors, journeymen. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business, trade or vocation of electrical contractor or journeyman electrical without a registration as such secured from the electrical inspector. The applicant must have passed an examination given by the state demonstrating the qualifications of the applicant for the registration applied for. The applicant must also pay all fees necessary and such fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(b)  An annual registration issued under this section may be renewed by paying the prescribed fee on or before August 31, and shall be considered surrendered if not renewed within 15 days thereafter. Any person having surrendered his certificate must proceed in the manner required for a new or initial application. 
(c)  After ten days' notice and adequate opportunity for a hearing, the city council may revoke any electrical contractor's registration or any journeyman electrician's registration for the following causes: 
(1)  Serious or repeated violations of the laws, ordinances or other regulations relating to electrical installations; 
(2)  Grossly unethical conduct in connection with the electrical trade or business; 
(3)  Poor workmanship or service; or 
(4)  Installing inferior or substandard materials, fixtures or equipment. 
A request that the registration be revoked may be presented to the council by the electrical inspector or by any aggrieved person. 
(d)  For installing a bell or telephone system not using over 12 volts, no registration will be required under this section, but the installation of same must comply with all other requirements of the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 6-35; Code 1995, § 18-54; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1122, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 204-70. - Work permits. 
(a)  Any person who commences any work on any electrical wiring system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install any electrical wiring, fixtures, equipment or apparatus in or on any building or structure in the corporate limits of the city, or make extensions to any existing electrical installation, without first securing a permit from the electrical inspector, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7, plus court costs. 
(c)  The electrical inspector shall have the authority to refuse to issue a permit for the installation of electrical wiring, or for any additions or extensions to any electrical wiring, in or on any building where, in his judgment, the wiring done or proposed to be done is unsafe or not in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Any registered contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical system, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit and shall pay all such permit fees and any additionally required fees. All such permit fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 6-37; Code 1995, § 18-56; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1122, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1153, § 1, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 204-71. - Inspection and approval of work generally. 
(a)  All work for which a permit is required by this article shall be inspected by the electrical inspector. After making inspection of new work roughed in, the electrical inspector shall leave a tag or notice in the switch cabinet or attached to the service equipment, plainly indicating that the work has been approved and is ready to be concealed, or that the installation is not standard and must not be covered until approved by the electrical inspector. 
(b)  If the inspection fails to pass the proper inspection and a reinspection is therefore required, a fee of established by resolution for the second inspection, or any inspection thereafter, shall be charged. 
(Code 1975, § 6-38; Code 1995, § 18-57; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997) 
Sec. 204-72. - Equipment not to be concealed until installation approved. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed any electrical equipment used for electric light, heat or power, until he knows that the installation has been approved by the electrical inspector. A tag in the switch cabinet or attached to the service equipment properly signed and dated, so stating approval or disapproval, will be sufficient notice. 
(Code 1975, § 6-39; Code 1995, § 18-58) 
Sec. 204-73. - Current not to be connected until work approved. 
    It shall be unlawful for any public service corporation, individual or light, heat or power company to connect, or cause to be connected, any service or building, for the supply of electrical current for light, heat or power, until it or he has been notified by the electrical inspector that electric work has been inspected and approved and is ready for electric service. 
(Code 1975, § 6-40; Code 1995, § 18-59) 
Sec. 204-74. - General standards for installation of equipment. 
    All installations of electrical equipment shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article, with the statutes of the state and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof and with approved electrical standards for safety to persons and property. Where no specific standards are prescribed by this article, by the statutes of the state or by any orders, rules or regulations issued by authority thereof, conformity with the regulations set forth in the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., (NFPA 70) National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, as amended and modified by the Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23 and subsequent amendments as listed below, of the city Code of Ordinances, shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to persons or to property. 
(Code 1975, § 6-41; Code 1995, § 18-60; Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1122, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1305, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-75. - Electric fences. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or maintain any fence charged with electricity except in those areas zoned for agricultural use. 
(Code 1995, § 18-61; Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1122, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 204-76. - National Electrical Code additions, insertions and deletions. 
110.26(D) is amended to read as follows: 
110.26(D) The illumination about service equipment where installed indoors and rated at 201 amperes or more shall also be served by an emergency source as described in section 700-12. 
210.19(A)(4) is amended to read as follows: 
210.19(A)(4) Other Loads is hereby amended by deleting the number "14" in the fifth line and inserting the number "12." 
210.19(A)(4) Other Loads is hereby amended by deleting the number "14" in the fifth line and inserting the number "12." 
210.70 is amended to add Subsection (D) to read as follows: 
210.70 Commercial Buildings. At least one wall switch controlled luminaire shall be installed in each lease type storage building or space. 
Exception: Where all the following apply: 
a. The storage building is designed and built so as to be self-contained; 
b. The only entrances to storage spaces are within the interior of the building; 
c. Interior lighting is sufficient to illuminate the storage space to a minimum of one footcandle when the door to the unit is open and is certified to meet this standard by a State of Oklahoma registered engineer; 
d. The lighting is continuous during business hours and for one hour thereafter; and 
e. The lease space shall not exceed 150 square feet or exceed 15 feet in depth. 
230.28 is amended to add the following sentence: 
230.28 Service Masts as Supports. The raceway for service masts shall be rigid metal conduit and a minimum trade size of one and one-half inches and shall be continuous without coupling. 
250.50 (A) is amended to add the following sentence: 
250.50(A) Metal Underground Water Pipe. The point of connection shall be made before the first solder joint of the premises' incoming metal water piping system. 
250.52 (5) is amended to add the following sentence: 
250.52 (5) Rod and Pipe Electrodes. Single rod and pipe electrodes shall not be used as the sole source of grounding. 
250.118 is amended to read as follows: 
250.118 Types of Equipment Grounding Conductors. The equipment grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors shall be copper or other corrosion resistant conductor. This conductor shall be solid or stranded; insulated, covered, or bare; and in the form of a wire or a bus bar of any shape. 
All raceways containing a circuit or cable assembly shall include a green or bare equipment grounding conductor. Said conductor shall be bonded to all non-current carrying metal parts of the electrical system. 
310.2 (B) is amended to read as follows: 
310.2 (B) Conductor material. Conductors in this article shall be copper. 
First exception: No. 2/0 and larger aluminum and copper-clad aluminum conductors in structure or occupancies other than dwellings. 
Second exception: No. 2 and larger conductors installed overhead or underground at the exterior of structure or occupancies. 
Termination and splices of aluminum and copper-clad aluminum shall be made with solder less pressure connectors as defined in SECTION 110-14 and shall be the crimp type. 
334.12(A) is amended to add the following subsections: 
Uses not permitted: 
(11) In any commercial or industrial buildings; 
(12) In schools; 
(13) In churches; or 
(14) In any public buildings. 
410.52 is amended to add the following paragraph: 
410.52 Switched Lamp Holders is hereby amended by adding the following paragraph: Pull chain lamp holders or switches shall have an insulating link installed in the chain. Where installed above concrete or conductive floors, the uninsulated portion of the chain shall be at least seven feet above the floor. 
680.23(A)(4) Voltage Limitations is amended by deleting "150" and inserting "15." 
(Code 1995, § 18-62; Ord. No. 1122, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1305, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Secs. 204-77-204-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 204-91. - Office of plumbing inspector created; appointment and general powers and duties. 
    The office of plumbing inspector is hereby created within the department of development services. The city manager shall appoint the plumbing inspector who may also hold another position in the city government. The plumbing inspector shall have the powers and duties prescribed by the plumbing code adopted by this article. It shall be his duty to see that all laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations relating to water and sanitary plumbing are properly enforced. 
(Code 1975, § 6-56; Code 1995, § 18-81; Ord. No. 1120, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1306, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
State Law reference- Plumbers and plumbing contractors, 59 O.S. § 1001 et seq.; duty of city to prescribe plumbing regulations, 59 O.S. § 1015. 
Sec. 204-92. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
(a)  A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as International Plumbing Code, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Plumbing Code, 2009 edition, as amended and modified by the Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23 and subsequent amendments as listed below, of the city Code of Ordinances, on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(b)  Any registered contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit and pay all required permit fees and any additionally required fees. All such permit fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 6-57; Code 1995, § 18-82; Ord. No. 1053, § 1, 3-7-2000; Ord. No. 1120, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 1306, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-93. - Registration of plumbers. 
(a)  No person shall work within the city at the trade of journeyman plumber or engage in the business of plumbing contracting, unless he is, at the time, registered with the plumbing inspector of the city. 
(b)  The registration fees shall be as established by resolution and shall be paid to the city clerk. 
(c)  Each registration issued under this section shall expire on August 31 of each year. 
(Code 1975, § 6-58; Code 1995, § 18-83; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 991, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 1120, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority of city relative to registration of plumbers, 59 O.S. § 1020. 
Sec. 204-94. - Additions, insertions, deletions to International Plumbing Code. 
101.1 is amended to insert: 
101.1 City of Yukon, State of Oklahoma 
106.6.3 is amended to read as follows: 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
2. Not more than 80 percent of permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
108.4 is amended to specify the following: 
108.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who makes additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to any plumbing system in violation of a detailed statement of plan submitted and approved hereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued hereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
108.5 is amended to specify the following: 
108.5 Stop Work Orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS 
    The definition of the term "grease interceptor" is hereby modified to delete the original definition and add definitions for hydromechanical and gravity grease interceptors and reads as follows: 
1.  Hydromechanical. Plumbing appurtenances that are installed in the sanitary drainage system to intercept free-floating fats, oils, and grease from waste water discharge. Continuous separation is accomplished by air entrainment, buoyancy and interior baffling. 
2.  Gravity. Plumbing appurtenances of not less than 500 gallons (1,893 L) capacity that are installed in the sanitary drainage system to intercept free-floating fats, oils and grease from waste water discharge. Separation is accomplished by gravity during a retention time of not less than 30 minutes. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REGULATIONS 
305.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
305.6.1 Sewer Depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade or as approved by the code official at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
312.1 is amended to read as follows: 
312.1 Required Tests. The permit holder shall conduct the applicable tests prescribed in sections 312.2 through 312.10 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the code official when the plumbing work is ready for tests. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspection and testing shall be furnished by the permit holder. All plumbing system piping shall be tested with either water or, for piping systems other than plastic, by air as approved by the code official. After the plumbing fixtures have been set and their traps filled with water, the entire drainage system shall be submitted to final tests when required by the code official having jurisdiction. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
312.2 is amended to read as follows: 
312.2 Drainage and Vent Water Test. A water test shall be applied to the drainage system either in its entirety or in sections. If applied to the entire system, all openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening, and the system shall be filled with water to the point of overflow. If the system is tested in sections, each opening shall be tightly plugged except the highest openings of the section under test, and each section shall be filled with water but no section shall be tested with less than a ten-foot (3,048 mm) head of water or as required by the code official. In testing successive sections, at least the upper ten feet (3,048 mm) of the next preceding section shall be tested so that no joint or pipe in the building, except the uppermost ten feet (3,048 mm) of the system, shall have been submitted to a test of less than a ten-foot (3,048 mm) head of water or as required by the code official. This pressure shall be held for at least 15 minutes. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
312.3 is amended to read as follows: 
312.3 Drainage Air Test. This has been modified to remove the words "and vent" to the section title. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
312.4 is amended to read as follows: 
312.4 Drainage and Vent Final Test. Where a smoke test is utilized, it shall be made by filling all traps with water and then introducing into the entire system a pungent, thick smoke produced by one or more smoke machines. When the smoke appears through the stack openings on the roof, the stack openings shall be closed to a pressure equivalent of a 1-inch water column (248.8 Pa) which shall be held for a test period of not less than 15 minutes. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
312.5 is amended to read as follows: 
312.5 Water Supply System Test. Upon completion of a section of or the entire water supply system, the section or system shall be tested and proved tight under a water pressure not less than the working pressure of the system or for piping systems other than plastic or as approved by the code official, by an air test of not less than 50 psi (344 kPa) or other test as may be approved by the code official. This pressure shall be held for at least 15 minutes. The water utilized for tests shall be obtained from a potable source of supply. The required tests shall be performed in accordance with this section and section 107. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
312.9 is amended to read as follows: 
312.9 Shower Liner Test. Unless waived by the code official, where shower floors and receptors are made watertight by the application of materials required by section 417.5.2, the completed liner installation shall be tested. The pipe from the shower drain shall be plugged water-tight for the test. The floor and receptor area shall be filled with potable water to a depth of not less than two inches (51 mm) measured at the threshold. Where a threshold of at least two inches (51 mm) high does not exist, a temporary threshold shall be constructed to retain the test water in the lined floor or receptor area to a level not less than two inches (51 mm) deep measured at the threshold. The water shall be retained for a test period of not less than 15 minutes, and there shall not be evidence of leakage. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
314. Condensate Disposal is hereby deleted. 
CHAPTER 4 FIXTURES, FAUCETS AND 
FIXTURE FITTINGS 
Table 403.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Table 403.1 Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Fixtures. This table has been modified to include a footnote "g" in the "OTHER" column of the table at the end of the service sink requirement to number 2 (classification of business), and number 6 (classification of mercantile). The footnote "g" shall read: "For business and mercantile occupancies with an occupant load of 15 or fewer, service sinks shall not be required." 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
403.2 is amended to read as follows: 
403.2 Separate Facilities. Where plumbing fixtures are required, separate facilities shall be provided for each sex. 
Exception: 
A) Separate facilities shall not be required for dwelling units and sleeping units. 
B) Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupancy load, including both employees and customers, of 15 or less. 
C) Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile occupancies in which the maximum occupant load is 100 or less. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
403.3.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
403.3.1.1 Toilet Room Ingress and Egress. Toilet rooms shall not open directly into a room used for the preparation of food for service to the public. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
417.5.2.6 is added to read as follows: 
417.5.2.6 Liquid Type, Trowel Applied, Load Bearing, Bonded Waterproof Materials. Liquid type, trowel applied, load bearing, bonded waterproof materials shall meet the requirements of ANSI A118.10 and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 5 WATER HEATERS 
504.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
504.4.1 Installation. Temperature relief valves shall be so located in the tank as to be actuated by the water in the top six inches (152 mm) of the tank served. For installations with separate storage tanks, the approved, self-closing (levered) pressure relief valve and the temperature relief valve or combination thereof conforming to ANSI Z21.22 valves shall be installed on both the storage water heater and storage tank. There shall not be a check valve or shutoff valve between a relief valve and the heater or tank served. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
504.6 is amended to read as follows: 
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
A) Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
B) Discharge through an air gap located in the same room as the water heater. 
C) Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
D) Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
E) Discharge to the floor, to the pan serving the water heater or storage tank, to a waste receptor or to the outdoors. 
F) Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
G) Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
H) Not be trapped. 
I) Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
J) Not terminate more than six inches (152 mm) above the floor or waste receptor. 
K) Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
L) Not have valves or tee fittings. 
M) Be constructed of those materials listed in section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1. 
N) Where discharging to the outdoors in areas subject to freezing, discharge piping shall be first piped to an indirect waste receptor through an air gap located in a conditioned area. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 6 WATER SUPPLY AND 
DISTRIBUTION 
605.3 is amended to read as follow: 
605.3 Water service pipe. Water service pipe shall conform to NSF 61 and shall conform to one of the standards listed in Table 605.3. All water service pipe or tubing, installed underground and outside of the structure, shall have a minimum working pressure rating of 160 pounds per square inch (1,100 kPa) at 73.4 degrees Fahrenheit (23 degrees Celsius). Where the water pressure exceeds 160 pounds per square inch, (1100 kPa), piping materials shall have a minimum rated working pressure equal to the highest available pressure. Water service piping materials not third-party certified for water distribution shall terminate a minimum of 30 inches (762 mm) outside the structure at or before the full open valve located at the entrance to the structure. All ductile iron water service piping shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
606.1 is amended to read as follows: 
606.1 Location of full-open valves. Full-open valves shall be installed in the following locations: 
A) On the building water service pipe from the public water supply near the curb. 
B) On the water distribution supply pipe at the entrance into the structure. 
C) On the base of every water riser pipe in occupancies other than multiple-family residential occupancies that are two stories or less in height and in one- and two-family residential occupancies. 
D) On the top of every water down-feed pipe in occupancies other than one- and two-family residential occupancies. 
E) On the entrance to every water supply pipe to a dwelling unit, except where supplying a single fixture equipped with individual stops. 
F) On the water supply pipe to a gravity or pressurized water tank. 
G) On the water supply pipe to every water heater. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
607.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
607.1.1 Temperature-limiting means. A thermostat control for a water heater shall not serve as the temperature-limiting means for the purposes of complying with the requirements of this code for maximum allowable hot or tempered water delivery temperatures at fixtures. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
608.16.5 is amended to read as follows: 
608.16.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a spill resistant backflow preventer or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 7 SANITARY DRAINAGE 
707.1 is amended to read as follows: 
707.1 Prohibited joints. The following types of joints and connections shall be prohibited: 
A) Cement or concrete joints. 
B) Mastic or hot-pour bituminous joints. 
C) Joints made with fittings not approved for specific installation. 
D) Joints between different diameter pipes and made with elastomeric rolling O-rings. 
E) Solvent-cement joints between different types of plastic pipe. 
F) Saddle type fittings. Exception: Saddle-type fittings may be used to connect the building sewer to a public sewer. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Table 709.1 is amended to change the minimum size of shower fixture trap: 
Table 709.1 Drainage Fixture Units for Fixtures and Groups. Shower shall have a minimum two-inch fixture trap. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
710.1.3 is added to read as follows: 
710.1.3 Underground Drainage Piping. Any portion of the drainage system installed underground or below a basement or cellar shall not be less than two inches in diameter. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 8 INDIRECT/SPECIAL WASTE 
802.1.8 is amended to read as follows: 
802.1.8 Food Utensils, Dishes, Pots, Pans and Sinks. Sinks used for the washing, rinsing or sanitizing of utensils, dishes, pots, pans or serviceware used in the preparation, serving or eating of food shall discharge indirectly through an air gap or an air break to the drainage system. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 9 VENTS 
904.1 is amended to read as follows: 
904.1 Roof Extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches (305 mm) above the roof, except where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least seven feet (2,134 mm) above the roof. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 10 TRAPS, INTERCEPTORS, AND 
SEPARATORS 
1002.4 is amended to read as follows: 
1002.4 Trap Seals. Each fixture trap shall have a liquid seal of not less than two inches (51 mm) and not more than four inches (102 mm). Special designs relating to accessible fixtures may be deeper. Where a trap seal is subject to loss by evaporation, a trap seal primer valve or other approved trap seal device shall be installed. Trap seal primer valves shall connect to the trap at a point above the level of the trap seal. A trap seal primer valve shall conform to ASSE 1018 or ASSE 1044. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
1003.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.3.1 Grease Interceptors and Automatic Grease Removal Devices Required. A grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device shall be required to receive the drainage from fixtures and equipment with grease-laden waste located in food preparation areas, such as in restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias and clubs. Fixtures and equipment shall include pot sinks, prerinse sinks, soup kettles or similar devices, work stations, floor drains or sinks into which kettles are drained; automatic hood washing units and dishwashers without prerinse sinks. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall receive waste only from fixtures and equipment that allow fats, oils or grease to be discharged. Where lack of space or other constraints prevent the installation or replacement of a grease interceptor, one or more grease interceptors shall be permitted to be installed on or above the floor. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
1003.3.4 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.3.4 Hydromechanical grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices. Hydromechanical grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be sized in accordance with ASME A112.14.3 appendix A, or ASME A112.14.4, CSA B481.3, or PDI G101. Hydromechanical grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be designed and tested in accordance with ASME 112.14.3 or ASME 112.14.4, CSA B481.1, PDI G101 or PDI G102. Hydromechanical grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Where manufacturer's instructions are not provided, hydromechanical grease interceptors and grease removal devices shall be installed in compliance with ASME A112.14.3, ASME A112.14.4, CSA B481.3 or PDI G101. This section shall not apply to gravity grease interceptors. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
1003.5 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.5 Location. Grease traps and/or interceptors shall not be installed inside of building on new construction and/or occupancy changes without prior approval of the development services director. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 11 STORM DRAINAGE 
1107.3 is added to read as follows: 
1107.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems or scuppers shall be sized in accordance with section 1106 based on a rainfall rate of 10.2 inches per hour for a five-minute duration. In sizing secondary roof drain systems using Tables 1106.2, 1106.3 and 1106.6, the Horizontally Projected Roof Area shall be determined by dividing the horizontally projected roof area for one-inch rain fall per hour by 10.2 inches per hour. Secondary roof scuppers shall be designed in accordance with ASCESEI 7-05 Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures, Chapter 8 C8-RAIN LOADS published by the American Society of Civil Engineers and Structural Engineering Institute. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than four inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system or scuppers. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-95. - Registration of plumbers. 
(a)  No person shall work within the city at the trade or engage in the business of plumbing contracting, unless he is, at the time, registered with the code official. 
(b)  The registration fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. Each registration issued under this section shall expire on August 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 1(18-83), 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-96. - Permit to install building sewer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install any building sewer, without first obtaining a permit from the code official. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: One for residential and commercial service and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. 
(Code 1975, § 26-39; Code 1995, § 18-85; Ord. No. 958, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 1120, § 3, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1306, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-97. - Sewer connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the plumbing inspector. 
(b)  A permit fee for the sewer tap and the appropriate permit shall be paid to the city clerk at the time a permit for any new sewer connection is issued. 
(Code 1975, § 26-5; Code 1995, § 18-86; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997) 
Secs. 204-98-204-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 204-106. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to use or maintenance of mechanical systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such, as amended and modified by the Uniform Building Code Commission pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23 and subsequent amendments as listed below, of the city Code of Ordinances on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 6-71; Code 1995, § 18-106; Ord. No. 1119, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-107. - Office of mechanical inspector created; general powers and duties. 
    The office of the mechanical heating and air conditioning inspector is hereby created within the department of development services. The city manager shall appoint the mechanical inspector and he may hold another position in the city government. The mechanical inspector shall have the powers and duties prescribed by the mechanical code adopted by this article. It shall be his duty to see that all laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations related to mechanical systems are properly enforced. 
(Code 1975, § 6-72; Code 1995, § 18-107; Ord. No. 1119, § 2, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-108. - Registration required. 
    No person shall engage in the following without first registering with the mechanical, heating and air conditioning inspector and obtaining a mechanical registration certificate from the city: 
(1)  Maintain, repair, or renovate, in whole or in part, of any heating system, cooling system, mechanical refrigeration system, ventilation system, any equipment or piping carrying chilled water, air for ventilation purposes, or piping carrying natural gas. 
(2)  Maintain, repair, or renovate process piping used to carry any liquid, substance, material, including steam and hot water used for space heating purposes not under the jurisdiction of the department of labor. 
(Code 1975, § 6-73; Code 1995, § 18-108; Ord. No. 1119, § 3, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1284, § 1, 12-4-2012) 
Sec. 204-109. - Issuance of registration certificate. 
(a)  Registration certificate under this article will be issued upon the applicant's showing to the satisfaction of the mechanical heating and air conditioning inspector proof of a current and valid mechanical license from the state and the payment of the annual fee as set forth in section 204-110. The continued validity of such registration shall be dependent upon the person maintaining a current, valid state mechanical license and the expiration, revocation or suspension of a state mechanical license shall automatically invalidate the registration certificate of the city. Any person continuing to engage in mechanical work without a valid city registration or permit shall be subject to the provisions set forth on section 204-115. 
(b)  An annual registration issued under this section may be renewed by paying the prescribed fee on or before August 31, and shall be considered surrendered if not renewed within 15 days thereafter. Any person having surrendered his certificate must proceed in the manner required for a new or initial application. 
(Code 1975, § 6-74; Code 1995, § 18-109; Ord. No. 992, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 1119, § 4, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 204-110. - Registration fees. 
    The registration fee for persons employed at installing, replacing or repairing gas pipes, appliances or other mechanical work shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 6-75; Code 1995, § 18-110; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 1119, § 5, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 204-111. - Additions, insertions and deletions to International Mechanical Code. 
Section 106.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule. Any registered contractor who desires to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace a mechanical system, the installation of which is regulated by this Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit and shall pay such required permit fees and any additionally required fees. All such permit fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
Section 106.5.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
a. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
b. Not more than 80 percent of permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Section 107.7 is added to read as follows: 
Section 107.7 Heat during construction. Installed heating systems may be utilized during construction only in accordance with the following requirements: 
a. Final mechanical inspection shall be made for construction heat. 
b. Filter or filters shall be installed over each return duct opening. Filters shall be replaced as they become loaded with dust and debris with the mechanical equipment in the off position with no air flow. 
c. Thermostat for construction heat shall have a minimum 55 degrees Fahrenheit set point. 
d. Mechanical equipment must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, relative to construction heat. 
e. All sheetrock, wallboard or paneling shall be installed in all construction areas served by the mechanical system. Mechanical room access door shall have a seal around the entire opening (i.e., weather stripping). Mechanical rooms shall be sealed from all construction areas. All combustion air shall be per the following listed sections of Chapter 7 of the International Mechanical Code (outdoor air only): 
703 - Outdoor Air (Condition 1) 
704 - Outdoor Air (Condition 2) 
f. When combustible, flammable, explosive or corrosive materials in any state (solid, liquid, or gaseous) are being used in the construction process the mechanical rooms shall not be used. The construction area shall be ventilated before the mechanical system is put back into service. 
g. Failure to provide adequate filtering during construction shall require duct work and mechanical equipment to be professionally cleaned before final approval. 
h. Failure to comply with the above requirements shall be grounds for fuel service to be terminated immediately to the building by the code official. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Section 107.8 is added to read as follows: 
Section 107.8 Inspection Access. It shall be the responsibility of the mechanical contractor to provide access to all mechanical equipment and appliances to the code official for all required inspections. Where equipment and appliances are located in remote locations or at different floor levels the contractor shall provide an approved ladder for inspection access. It shall also be the responsibility of the mechanical contractor to coordinate all required inspections with the property owner or the owner's agent. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Section 108.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 108.4 Violations and Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of this code, or in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued hereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS 
    Definition of the term "appliances" is amended to read as follows: 
    Appliances used in a commercial food service establishment for heating or cooking food and which produce grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed through a local ventilation system. Such appliances include deep fat fryers, upright broilers, griddles, broilers, steam-jacketed kettles, hot-top ranges, under-fired broilers (charbroilers), ovens, barbeques, rotisseries and similar appliances. For the purpose of this definition, a food service establishment shall include any building or a portion thereof used for the preparation and serving of food that is not a kitchen in a single-family dwelling unit or apartment. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 3 GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Section 301.12 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 301.12 Wind Resistance. Mechanical equipment, appliances and supports that are exposed to wind shall be designed and installed to resist the wind pressures determined in accordance with the International Building Code, SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards - Metal and Flexible, or other methods as approved by the code official. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Section 304.11 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 304.11 Guards. Guards or parapet walls shall be provided where appliances, equipment, fans (or other components that require routine service) or roof hatches are located within ten feet (3,048 mm) of a roof edge or open side of a walking surface and such edge or open side is located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the adjacent surface or grade below. The guards or parapet walls shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) beyond each end of such appliances, equipment, fans, components, and roof hatch openings; and the top of the guard or parapet wall shall be located not less than 42 inches (1,067 mm) above the adjacent surface. Guards shall be constructed to prevent the passage of a 21-inch diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards as specified in the International Building Code. Guards shall also be provided where appliances, equipment, fans (or other components that require routine service) are located within ten feet (3,048 mm) of a roof hatch or unprotected skylight. Skylights shall be considered protected if the level of the lowest edge of the skylight is on a raised curb not less than 42 inches (1,067 mm) above the roof level, or if the skylight is protected by some other approved means to prevent personnel from falling through the opening. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 5 EXHAUST SYSTEMS 
Section 507.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 507.1 General. Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods shall comply with the requirements of this section. Hoods shall be Type I or II and shall be designed to capture and confine cooking vapors and residues. Commercial kitchen exhaust hood systems shall operate during cooking. 
Exceptions: 
(A) Factory-built commercial exhaust hoods which are tested in accordance with UL 710 listed, labeled and installed in accordance with Section 304.1 shall not be required to comply with Sections 507.4, 507.7, 507.9, 507.11, 507.12, 507.13, 507.14 and 507.15. 
(B) Factory-built commercial cooking recirculating systems which are tested in accordance with UL 710B, listed, labeled, and installed in accordance with Section 304.1 shall not be required to comply with Sections 507.4, 507.5, 507.7, 507.12, 507.13, 507.14, and 507.15. Spaces in which such systems are located shall be considered to be kitchens and shall be ventilated in accordance with Table 403.3. For the purpose of determining the floor area required to be ventilated, each individual appliance shall be considered as occupying not less than 100 square feet (9.3 meters squared). 
(C) Net exhaust volumes for hoods shall be permitted to be reduced during part-load cooking conditions, where engineered or listed multispeed or variable-speed controls automatically operate the exhaust system to maintain, capture and remove cooking effluents as required by this section. Reduced volumes shall not be below that required to maintain, capture and remove effluents from the idle cooking appliances that are operating in standby mode. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Section 507.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 507.2.1 Type I Hoods. Type I hoods shall be installed where cooking appliances produce grease or smoke. Type I hoods shall be installed over medium-duty, heavy-duty, and extra-heavy-duty cooking appliances. 
Exception: Type II hoods shall be permitted to be installed over medium-duty cooking appliances, ranges and ovens that the code official has determined will not produce appreciable amounts of grease and/or smoke. Where cooking appliances, ranges and/or ovens have been approved by the code official for installation under a Type II hood, a sign shall be placed on the wall in close proximity to the hood that reads, "Absolutely No Frying or Grease-Type Cooking Permitted." 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 6 DUCT SYSTEMS 
Section 603.4 is amended to delete the exception: 
Section 603.4 Metallic ducts. The exception to this section has been deleted. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Section 604.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.1 General. Duct insulation shall conform to the requirements of sections 604.2 through 604.13, the International Energy Conservation Code and SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards - Metal and Flexible. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
(Code 1975, § 6-76(a), (b); Code 1995, § 18-111; Ord. No. 985, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 1119, § 6, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 1307, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-112. - Discontinuing service to dangerous installations. 
    The mechanical or plumbing inspector shall instruct the gas company to discontinue gas service to any residence or business in the city when, in his judgment, the gas installation is dangerous. Gas service will remain shut off until such time as corrections are made by a licensed installing agency and approved by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 6-77; Code 1995, § 18-113) 
Sec. 204-113. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 6-78; Code 1995, § 18-114) 
Secs. 204-114-204-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HOUSING CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Housing authorities, 63 O.S. § 1051 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 204-136. - Adoption of International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
    Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated as International Residential Code including appendix chapters: E manufactured housing used as dwellings; G swimming pools, spa and hot tub and H patio covers as published by the International Code Council are hereby adopted as the Code of the City of Yukon for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height in the city and provisions, conditions and terms of such International Residential Code, 2009 edition, as amended and modified by the Oklahoma Uniform Building Code Commission (hereafter referred to as OUBCC) pursuant to 59 O.S. § 1000.23 and subsequent amendments as listed below, of the city Code of Ordinances, on file in the office of the city clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(Code 1995, § 18-136; Ord. No. 1123, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-137. - Additions, insertions, changes and fees to International Residential Code. 
R101.1 is amended to insert the following: 
R101.1 City of Yukon, State of Oklahoma 
R105.2 is amended as follows: 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. 
Subparagraphs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 are hereby deleted from the list of exemptions. Permits shall be required for all work referenced in subparagraphs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. 
R108.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Any contractor who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the development services director and obtain the required permit and shall pay all such required permit fees and additionally required fees. All such permit fees shall be set by resolution by the city council. 
R108.5 is amended to read as follows: 
R108.5 Fee Refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows. 
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
2. Not more than 80 percent of permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permit not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
R113.4 is amended to read as follows: 
R113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or who fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall erect, construct, alter, repair or remove a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued hereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
R301.2(1) is hereby amended to fill the table with the following: 
Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic 
Design Criteria 
Ground Snow Load 10 PSF Wind Speed (mph) 24 PSF 
Wind Pressure Seismic Design Category F Weathering Moderate Frost Line Depth 18" Termite Yes Winter Design Temperature 13ºF Ice Barrier Underlayment Required No Flood Hazards Code of Ordinance Refer to Chapter 54 - Floods Air Freezing Index 332 Mean Annual Temperature 60ºF  
CHAPTER 3 BUILDING PLANNING 
Table R302.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Table R302.1 Exterior walls have been modified for minimum fire separation distance for walls and projections. For a single-family dwelling of one story, the minimum width of the side yard shall be five feet for interior lot lines and 15 feet for the side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot. For buildings of more than one story, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines shall be not less than five feet, provided, however, that: 
(a) the area of exterior wall openings lying or constructed within ten feet of the interior lot line shall be ten percent or less of the total exterior wall opening area of the structure; and 
(b) all interior walls shall have a minimum of one layer of five-eighths inch thickness of sheetrock installed. 
For buildings of more than one story that have: 
(a) exterior wall openings which exceed ten percent of the total exterior wall opening area of the structure; or 
(b) interior walls which have less than one layer of five-eighths inch thickness of sheetrock installed, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines shall be not less than ten feet. 
R302.1.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
R302.1.1 Zoning Requirements. Lot line separations required by the zoning districts are not waived or altered by the provisions of this section. 
R303.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R303.3 Bathrooms or similar rooms shall be provided with the minimum ventilation rate of 50 CFM for intermittent ventilation or 20 CFM for continuance ventilation. Ventilation area from the space shall be exhausted directly to the outside. 
R309.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R309.1 Floor Surface. Garage floor surfaces shall be of an approved noncombustible material. The sills of all door openings between the garage and dwelling shall be raised not less than four inches above the garage floor at the point where any flammable liquids, vehicles and equipment are stored. The area of the floor used for the parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway. 
R311.7.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R311.7.4.1 Riser Heights. The maximum riser height shall be 73/4 inches (196 mm). The riser shall be measured vertically between leading edges of the adjacent treads. The greatest riser height within any flight of stairs shall not exceed the smallest by more than three-eighths inch (9.5 mm) at rough in. Top and bottom riser may vary by three-fourths-inch at final inspection, not to exceed 73/4-inch (196 mm). 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R313.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems. This section has been moved to appendix R, Automatic Fire Systems of the IRC 2009 and is not adopted as a minimum standard for residential construction within the State of Oklahoma. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R313.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R313.2.1 Design and Installation. This section has been moved to appendix R, Automatic Fire Systems of the IRC 2009 and is not adopted as a minimum standard for residential construction within the State of Oklahoma. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R315.1 is amended to add: 
Exception: If a residence with an attached garage has a sealed door between the residence and the garage; and no fuel burning appliances in the residence, then carbon monoxide detection is not required within the residence. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R323.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R323.1 General. This section applies to the construction of storm shelters when constructed as separate attached buildings or when constructed as safe rooms within buildings for the purpose of providing safe refuge from storms that produce high winds, such as tornadoes and hurricanes. In addition to other applicable requirements in this code, storm shelters shall be constructed in accordance with one of the following: ICC/NSSA 500 or FEMA 320 or other equivalent engineered system. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 4 FOUNDATIONS 
R402.2 is amended to add: 
Exception: Interior concrete slabs on grade and enclosed garage slabs are not required to be air entrained. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R403.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R403.1.1 Minimum Footings Allowed. On residential footings, the presumptive load bearing values of foundation materials is between 2,000 and 3,000 pounds per square foot. The following requirements are the minimum standards: 
Types Dimension Material Reinforcement 1 Story 12" x 18" Concrete Two- 5/8 " bars or Four-1/2" bars 1 Story (with brick) 15" x 18" Concrete Four- 5/8 " bars 2 Story 15" x 20" Concrete Four- 5/8 " bars  
All other types of foundations such as pier and grade beam footings require an engineer to sign and seal the footing details (Exception: accessory structures that are 200 square feet or less are exempt from the requirements except garages). No foundations are required for accessory structures that are 200 square feet or less. All structures in excess of 200 square feet require foundations. 
R403.1.5.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
R403.1.5.1 Construction of Concrete Retaining Walls. 
(a) A concrete retaining wall extending six inches above the finished grade shall be constructed under the following circumstances: 
(1) For new construction when the approved grading plan indicates that the slope of the grade from any point on an exterior wall facing the property line to the property line is equal to or more than one foot of rise for each five feet of run; or 
(2) When an application has been made for a building permit which would change the distance from a structure to the side yard property line and there is any indication that the slope of the grade from any point on an exterior wall facing the property line meets or exceeds the slope set forth in the above subsection. 
(b) The concrete retaining wall shall: 
(1) Be constructed as near the property line as practical; 
(2) Extend not less than the length of the exterior wall nearest the side yard; 
(3) Be constructed of materials approved by the code official; 
(4) Direct the drainage of water to the street or other manmade or natural drainage path; and 
(5) Be constructed in such a manner as to prevent the flow of water or flooding of other residential structures. 
R403.1.6 is amended to add: 
Exception: Wood sole plates of brace wall panels at building exteriors on monolithic slabs may be anchored using connectors with a shear capacity of 2,300 pounds and a tensile capacity of 800 pounds over a maximum span of six feet. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R406.2 is hereby amended to include an additional option for waterproofing: 
9. Bentonite. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 5 FLOORS 
R506.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R506.2.3 Vapor Retarder. A 6.0 mil (0.006 inch; 152 micrometers) polyethylene sheeting, other industry accepted vapor retarder products installed per manufacturer specifications or approved vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than six inches (152 mm) shall be placed between the concrete floor slab and the base course or the prepared subgrade where no base course exists. The remainder of this section, including exceptions, is adopted without modification.) 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 6 WALL CONSTRUCTION 
R602.4 is amended to add the following: 
R602.4 Interior Load-Bearing Walls. Interior load-bearing walls shall be constructed, framed and fireblocked as specified for exterior walls. Table R602.3(5) shall be used to establish stud spacing of walls up to ten feet (3,048 mm) high, and Table R602.3.1 shall apply to walls over ten feet (3,048 mm) high. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R602.10.6 is amended to include an additional option for anchors: 
4. Wood sole plates of braced wall panels of building interiors on monolithic slabs may be anchored using connectors with a shear capacity of 2,300 pounds and a tensile capacity of 800 pounds over a maximum span of six feet. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 7 WALL COVERING 
Figure R703.7.2.1 and R703.7.2.2 are hereby amended to clarify that the counter flashing shown goes under the flashing behind the brick veneer not over it. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R703.8 is amended to read as follows: 
R703.8 Flashing. Approved corrosion-resistant flashing shall be applied single fashion in a manner to prevent entry of water into the wall cavity or penetration of water to the building structural framing components. Emil polyethylene flashing shall comply with AAMA 711. The flashing shall extend to the surface of the exterior wall finish. Approved corrosion-resistant flashings shall be installed at all of the following locations. (The remainder of this section is adopted without modifications.) (OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 8 ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION 
R801.3 is hereby deleted 
(OUBCC Amendment). 
R802.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R802.3 Framing Details. Rafters shall be framed to ridge board or to each other with a gusset plate as a tie. Ridge board shall be at least one inch (25 mm) nominal thickness and not less in depth than the cut end of the rafter. At all valleys and hips there shall be a valley or hip rafter not less than two inch (51 mm) nominal thickness and not less in depth than the cut end of the rafter. Hip and valley rafters shall be supported at the ridge by a brace to a bearing partition or be designed to carry and distribute the specific load at that point. Definition of brace includes: 
1. A triangular configuration of framing members with a horizontal tie and rafter members; 
2. King post or similar. 
    Where the roof pitch is less than three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25 percent slope), structural members that support rafters and ceiling joists, such as ridge, beams, hips and valleys, shall be designed as beams. Exception: This exception helps address many situations where due to the design, building bracing is not achievable. This exception shall read: The use of a "Blind Valley", also known as a "Farmers Valley" or "California Valley" will be allowed. In this type of valleys, the main roof is framed as usual, it may or may not be sheathed, and the intersecting roof is framed on top of the main roof. The two valley plates or sleepers lie on top of the main roof rafters or sheathing and provide a nailing base for the jack rafter and ridge board of the intersecting roof. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
R802.5.1 is amended to add: 
Exception: Braces may be spaced not more than six feet (1,829 mm) on center if: 
1. The purlin brace is two inch by six inch (51 mm by 153 mm); 
2. Purlins shall be sized one nominal size larger than the rafter they support; and 
3. Unbraced length of braces shall not exceed eight feet (2438 mm). 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 9 ROOF ASSEMBLIES 
R902.1 is amended to add: 
All roof coverings shall be required to be a minimum Class A, B or C. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 11 ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
N1101.9 is amended to read as follows: 
N1101.9 Certificate. This section has been moved to the appendix S of the IRC 2009 and is not adopted as a minimum standard of residential construction within the state. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
N1102.4.3 is amended to read as follows: 
N1102.4.3 Fireplaces. New Wood-burning fireplaces shall have outdoor combustion air. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
N1103.1.1 is deleted. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
N1103.2.2 is amended to add: 
Exception: Visual inspection may be used instead of the rough-in-test and post construction test. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
N1103.8.3 is amended to read as follows; 
N1103.8.3 Pool Covers. Pools heated to more than 90 degrees Fahrenheit (32 degrees Celsius) shall have a pool cover with a minimum insulation value of R-12. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
N1104.1 is amended to add: 
Exception: Can/recessed lights are exempt from this section of the code. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 13 GENERAL MECHANICAL 
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 
M1307.3.2 is hereby added to read as follows: 
M1307.3.2 Appliance Installation. 
1. Fuel burning mechanical equipment and appliances shall be installed in accordance with section M1307 of this code except that fuel burning central furnaces shall not be installed under a stairwell. 
Exception: This requirement shall not apply to areas under stairwells that are sprinkler protected. 
2. Fuel-burning central heating units installed in a garage or other hazardous location shall be protected by enclosure in a closet and comply with section G2407.6 (Outdoor Combustion Air) of this code. Where approved by the code official, combustion air may be taken from a garage or other hazardous location, provided however that no portion of the lower combustion air opening shall be less than 24 inches from the floor. 
Exception: An appliance enclosure shall not be required where a direct-vent appliance is installed provided the appliance is protected from impact in an approved manner. 
3. Gas combustion type central furnaces installed in rooms or closets with doors or openings that communicate with a garage or other hazardous location shall be installed in accordance with section M1307.1 of this code and the combustion air for the appliances shall be taken from an outdoor source unless otherwise approved by the code official. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
M1308.3 is hereby added to read as follows: 
M1308.3 Construction Equipment. Construction equipment such as backhoes, other motorized earth moving equipment, etc., shall not travel within or over a stem wall area or foundation perimeter after plumbing, electrical or mechanical ducts, piping, equipment or materials have been installed. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
M1309 is hereby added to read as follows: 
M1309.1 Construction Heat. Construction heat shall be allowed according to the following requirements: 
1. An inspection shall be made for construction heat prior to placing the heating system in operation. 
2. Filter or filters shall be installed over each return air opening. Filter shall be cleaned or replaced as they become loaded with dust and debris. Air-handling units, appliances, and equipment shall not be in operation while the air filters are being changed. 
3. The construction heat thermostat shall have a minimum set point of 55 degrees Fahrenheit. 
4. Mechanical equipment and appliances shall be installed in accordance with all safety requirements and limitations of the appliance and equipment manufacturer's installation instructions, relative to construction heat. 
5. All conditioned construction areas served by the mechanical system shall be substantially enclosed. Mechanical and furnace rooms shall be separated and isolated from all construction areas. All combustion air shall be per the following listed section of chapter 24 of this code (outdoor combustion air only): 
G2407.6.1 - Outdoor Air (2 Opening Method) 
G2407.6.2 - Outdoor Air (1 Opening Method) 
6. When combustible, flammable, explosive or corrosive materials in any state (solid, liquid, or gaseous) are being used in the construction process, the mechanical system shall not be in use except where approved by the code official. The construction area shall be adequately ventilated before the mechanical system is put back into service. 
7. Failure to provide adequate filtering during construction shall be grounds requiring ductwork, mechanical equipment, and appliances to be professionally cleaned or replaced before final approval. 
8. Failure to comply with the above requirements shall be grounds for ordering the immediate termination of gas service to the structure by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 14 HEATING AND COOLING 
EQUIPMENT 
M1401.4 is hereby amended to add paragraph 2 and exceptions 1 and 2: 
M1401.4 Exterior Installation. Equipment installed outdoors shall be listed and labeled for outdoor installation. Supports and foundations shall prevent excessive vibration, settlement or movement of the equipment. Supports and foundations shall be level and conform to the manufacturer's installation instructions. Mechanical equipment, appliances, and materials shall not be installed in structures, locations, or areas where such materials are subject to weather elements and outdoor conditions. Mechanical equipment and appliances shall not be installed in buildings during construction until the roofing installation is completed. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Mechanical equipment, appliances, and materials listed and labeled for outdoor installation and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
2.  Equipment, appliances, and materials installed in buildings having a minimum of 60-pound roofing material installed in an approved manner that completely covers the roof of the structure. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
M1411.3.1 is amended to add Items 5, 6, 7 and 8 to read as follows: 
5.  All condensate waste drain lines shall be carried full size from the primary drain pan outlet and piped to a sanitary sewer, storm drain, flood drain, or other approved location or receptor. 
6.  Drains shall have a slope of not less than one-eighth inch per foot and contain no sags. 
7.  Drains shall not discharge under any habitable space or on any sidewalk, walkway, street, alley, parking area, or where a nuisance, unsafe condition, or hazard may result. 
8.  Condensate drains shall not discharge into a plumbing vent. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 15 EXHAUST SYSTEMS 
M1501.1 is hereby amended to add exception no. 2 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Whole-house ventilation-type attic fans that discharge into the attic space of dwelling units having private attics shall be permitted. 
2.  In one and two family construction, PVC pipe, plastic fittings, and approved glued joints conforming to ASTM D1785 SCH 40 shall be approved where installed in an approved manner, in or under a concrete slab and in accordance with the requirements of this code. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
M1502.3 is amended to read as follows: 
M1502.3 Duct Termination. Exhaust ducts shall terminate on the outside of the building. Exhaust duct terminations shall be in accordance with the dryer manufacturer's installation instructions. If the manufacturer's instructions do not specify a termination location, the exhaust duct shall terminate not less than three feet (914 mm) in any direction from openings into buildings. Clothes dryer exhaust duct terminations shall be equipped with a backdraft damper and shall not terminate within three feet (914 mm) of a condensing unit. Screens shall not be installed at the duct termination. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 16 DUCT SYSTEMS 
M1601.1.3 is hereby added to read as follows: 
M1601.1.3 Underground Duct Installation. All underground ducts shall be supported or secured in place by means of an approved method. Supports shall be of metallic construction and shall be capable of preventing duct floatation. The use of screws shall be permitted in duct joints and at fittings in accordance with the duct manufacturer's installation instructions. Ducts shall be supported at intervals not to exceed ten0 feet. Duct tape or wooden materials shall not be used to secure any portion of the air distribution system. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
M1602.1.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
M1602.1.1 Required Minimum Area (return air ducts). The total unobstructed area of return air ducts or openings to a warm-air furnace shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions, but shall not be less than two square inches for each 1,000 Btu/h output rating of the furnace. The minimum unobstructed total area of the return air ducts or openings to a central air conditioning unit and/or heat pump shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Where it cannot be demonstrated that return air ducts have been sized using an approved duct sizing method, the total cross-sectional area of the return air duct shall not be less than six square inches for each 1,000 Btu/h nominal cooling output rating. 
Exception: An approved engineered air distribution system design. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
M1603.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
M1603.1 Required Minimum Area (supply air ducts). The minimum unobstructed total area of supply air ducts from a warm-air furnace shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions, but shall not be less than two square inches for each 1,000 Btu/h output rating of the furnace. The minimum unobstructed total area of the supply air ducts or openings from a central air conditioning unit and/or heat pump shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Where it cannot be demonstrated that supply air ducts have been sized using an approved duct sizing method, the total cross-sectional area of the supply air duct shall not be less than six square inches for each 1,000 Btu/h nominal cooling output rating. Dampers, grilles or registers installed for the purpose of controlling the supply airflow shall not be considered as obstructions. 
Exception: An approved engineered air distribution system design. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 24 FUEL GAS 
G2401.2 is hereby added to read as follows: 
G2401.2 Work on Gas Piping Systems. Repairs, additions, alterations, relocations, and/or other work on any portion of gas piping systems shall only be performed by a state licensed and city registered fuel gas, mechanical and/or plumbing/fuel gas contractor who is duly authorized to do gas work, and whose licenses and registrations are current and active. A permit shall be obtained by the contractor prior to performing such work. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2401.3 is hereby added to read as follows: 
G2401.3 Gas Meter Moving, Connecting and Disconnecting. The moving, connecting, or disconnecting of gas meters shall only be done by employees of, or other persons authorized by the gas utility company. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2401.4 is hereby added to read as follows: 
G2401.4 Residential Gas Meter Location. Gas meters shall be located as required by the gas supplier. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2406.3 is amended to read as follows: 
G2406.3 Outdoor Locations. Appliances installed in outdoor locations shall be either listed for outdoor installation or provided with approved protection from outdoor environmental factors that influence the operability, durability and safety of the appliance. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2408.2 is amended to read as follows: 
G2408.2 Elevation of Ignition Source. Equipment and appliances having an ignition source shall be elevated such that the source of ignition is not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor on which the appliance rests in hazardous locations. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of dwelling unit and that communicate directly with the garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the garage. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2413.2.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
G2413.2.1 State Minimum Sizing Standards. The Oklahoma Corporation Commission (OCC) Gas Utility Service Rules require all consumer gas service piping from the point of delivery to the building to be a minimum of 11/4 inch I.D (inside diameter), or in the case of a mobile or manufactured building, a minimum of one inch I.D. (inside diameter). All gas service lines installed within the city shall have a minimum diameter in accordance with such rules, unless otherwise approved. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Tables G2413.4(3) and G2413.4(4) are hereby deleted. 
(OUBCC Amendment). 
G2414.5 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
G2414.5 Metallic Tubing. Aluminum alloy or steel tubing shall be permitted to be used with gases not corrosive to such materials. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2414.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
G2414.5.2 Copper Piping and Copper Tubing. The use of copper piping and copper tubing shall be prohibited for all natural gas conveying applications unless otherwise approved by the code official. The use of copper piping or tubing for the conveyance of liquefied petroleum (LP) gas, where the installation is in accordance with the Oklahoma State LP Gas Administration rules and regulations shall not be prohibited. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2415.8.1 is added to read: 
G2415.8.1 Insulated Union at Building Riser. All underground gas piping shall have an insulated union above ground level before the service enters the building. Where an anode bag is required, the anode lead wire shall be connected below the union. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2415.10 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
G2415.10 Minimum Burial Depth. Underground gas piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches below grade, except as provided for in section G2415.10.1, as amended. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2415.10.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
G2415.10.1 Individual Outside Appliances. Individual gas lines to outside lights, grills, or other appliances shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches below finished grade, provided that the piping shall be constructed of rigid metallic piping materials with an approved coating, and provided that the piping is installed in locations where it will not be susceptible to physical damage. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
G2417.1.1 Inspections. Inspections shall consist of a visual examination, during or after manufacture, fabrication, assembly, or pressure test as appropriate. All installations, repairs, replacements and modifications of natural gas piping systems, including consumer service lines not under the authority of the department of transportation (DOT) or the Oklahoma State Corporation Commission, and all building piping covered under the scope of this chapter shall be inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.1.2.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
G2417.1.2.1 Gas Appliance Connection and Testing. Upon completing the gas connection to an appliance, all appliance connectors and fittings shall be tested for leakage. The connecting of gas appliances shall only be performed by qualified and licensed individuals. Such appliance connections shall be field-tested by the use of a non-corrosive leak detecting fluids. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.4.1 Test Pressure. The pressure used to test a gas piping system shall not be less than 15 psig with a 30 lb. test gauge. The test duration shall not be less than 15 minutes. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.4.2 is deleted. 
G2417.7 through G2417.7.4 is deleted. 
G2417.7 through G2417.7.3 is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.7 Purging Requirements. 
G2417.7.1 Piping Systems Required to be Purged Outdoors. The purging of piping systems shall be in accordance with the provisions of sections G2417.1.1 through G2417.1.4 where the piping systems meet either of the following: 
1. The design operating gas pressure is greater than two psig. 
2. The piping being purged contains one or more sections of pipe or tubing greater than two inches in nominal size and exceeding the lengths in Table G2417.7.1.1. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.7.1.1 Removal from Service. Where existing gas piping in opened, the section that is opened shall be isolated from the gas supply and the line pressure vented in accordance with section G2417.7.1.3. Where gas piping meeting the criteria of Table G2417.7.1.1 is removed from service, the residual fuel gas in the piping shall be displaced with an inert gas. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Table G2417.7.1.1 Size and Length of Piping 
Nominal Pipe Size 
(inches) Length of Piping 
(feet) 21/2 > 50 3 > 30 4 > 15 6 > 10 8 or larger Any length  
For Sl units: 1 inches = 25.4mm; 1 ft. = 304.8mm 
G2417.7.1.2 Placing in Operation. Where gas piping containing air and meeting the criteria of Table G2417.7.1.1 is placed in operation, the air in the piping shall first be displaced with an inert gas. The inert gas shall then be displaced with fuel gas in accordance with section G2417.7.1.3. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.7.1.3 Outdoor Discharge of Purged Gases. The open end of a piping system being pressure vented or purged shall discharge directly to an outdoor location. Purging operations shall comply with all of the following requirements: 
1.  The point of discharge shall be controlled with a shutoff valve. 
2.  The point of discharge shall be located at least ten feet from sources of ignition, at least ten feet from building openings and at least 25 feet from mechanical air intake openings. 
3.  During discharge, the open point of discharge shall be continuously attended and monitored with a combustible gas indicator that complies with section G2417.7.1.4. 
4.  Purging operations introducing fuel gas shall be stopped when 90 percent fuel gas by volume is detected within the pipe. 
5.  Persons not involved in the purging operations shall be evacuated from all areas within ten feet of the point of discharge. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.7.1.4 Combustible Gas Indicator. The combustible gas indicator used during purging operations shall be listed and shall be calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and recommended schedule. The combustible gas indicator used for pipe discharge monitoring shall numerically display a volume scale from zero percent to 100 percent with a resolution of not greater than one percent increments. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.7.2 Piping systems allowed to be purged indoors or outdoors. The purging of piping systems shall be in accordance with the provisions of section G2417.2.1 where the piping system meets both of the following: 
1.  The design operating gas pressure is two psig or less. 
2.  The piping being purged is constructed entirely from pipe or tubing of two-inch nominal size or smaller, or larger size pipe or tubing with lengths shorter than specified in Table G2417.7.1.1. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.7.2.1 Purging procedure. The piping system shall be purged in accordance with one or more of the following: 
1.  The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and shall discharge to the outdoors. 
2.  The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and shall discharge to the indoors or outdoors through an appliance burner not located in a combustion chamber. Such burner shall be provided with a continuous source of ignition. 
3.  The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and shall discharge to the indoors or outdoors through a burner that has a continuous source of ignition and that is designed for such purpose. 
4.  The piping shall be purged with fuel gas that is discharged to the indoors or outdoors, and the point of discharge shall be monitored with a listed combustible gas detector in accordance with section G2417.7.2.2. Purging shall be stopped when fuel gas is detected. 
5.  The piping shall be purged by the gas supplier in accordance with written procedures. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.7.2.2 Combustible gas detector. The combustible gas detector used during purging operations shall be listed and shall be calibrated or tested in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and recommended schedule. The combustible gas detector used for pipe discharge monitoring shall indicate the presence of fuel gas. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2417.7.3 Purging appliances and equipment. After the piping system has been placed in operation, appliances and equipment shall be purged before being placed into operation. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
G2422.1, subparagraph 1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
G2422.1. Connecting appliances. Appliances shall be connected to the piping system by one of the following: 
1. Rigid metallic gas pipe and fittings, appliance connections. Unless otherwise specified by the appliance or equipment manufacturer, central heating units and duct heaters shall be connected with rigid piping. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 25 PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION 
P2503.4is amended to read as follows: 
P2503.4 Building sewer test. When required by local authority having jurisdiction, the building sewer shall be tested by insertion of a test plug at the point of connection with the public sewer and filling the building sewer with water, testing with not less than ten-foot (3,048 mm) head of water and be able to maintain such pressure for 15 minutes. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2503.6 is amended to read as follows: 
P2503.6 Shower liner test. Where shower floors and receptors are made watertight by the application of materials required by section P2709.2, the completed liner installation shall be tested at plumbing final. The pipe from the shower drain shall be plugged watertight for the test. The floor and receptor area shall be filled with potable water to a depth of not less than two inches (51 mm) measured at the threshold. Where a threshold of at least two inches high does not exist, a temporary threshold shall be constructed to retain the test water in the lined floor or receptor area to a level not less than two inches deep measured at the threshold. The water shall be retained for a test period of not less than 15 minutes and there shall be no evidence of leakage. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2503.7 is amended to read as follows: 
P2503.7 Water-supply system testing. Upon completion of the water-supply system or a section of it, the system or portion completed shall be tested and proved tight under a water pressure of not less than the working pressure of the system or, for piping systems other than PVC or CPVC, by an air test of not less than 50 psi (345 kPa). This pressure shall be held for not less than 15 minutes. The water used for tests shall be obtained from a potable water source. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 26 GENERAL PLUMBING 
REQUIREMENTS 
P2601.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
P2601.2 Connection. Plumbing fixtures, drains and appliances used to receive or discharge liquid wastes or sewage shall be directly connected to the sanitary drainage system of the building or premises, in accordance with the requirements of this code. This section shall not be construed to prevent indirect waste systems. 
Exception: Bathtubs, showers, lavatories, clothes washers and laundry trays are not required to discharge to the sanitary drainage systems where those fixtures discharge to an approved gray water recycling system. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2603.2.2 is added to read: 
P2603.2.2 Construction Equipment. Construction equipment such as backhoes or bobcats, etc., shall not be permitted within a stem wall area or foundation perimeter after the plumbing system has been installed. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2603.3.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
P2603.3 Piping under driveways. Water service piping passing under automobile driveways shall be sleeved. The sleeve shall be a minimum of two pipe sizes greater than the size of the water service. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2603.6 is amended to read as follows: 
P2603.6 Freezing. Water, soil and waste pipes shall not be installed outside of a building, in attic or crawl spaces, concealed in exterior walls, or in any other place subject to freezing temperature unless adequate provision is made to protect pipes from freezing by insulation or heat or both. Exterior water supply system piping shall be installed below recorded frost penetration, but not less than two feet (24 inches) below finish grade. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2603.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2603.6.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. 
CHAPTER 27 PLUMBING FIXTURES 
P2704.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2704.1 General. Slip joints shall be made with an approved elastomeric gasket and shall be installed from fixture to trap outlet. Fixtures with concealed slip-joint connections shall be provided with an access panel or utility space at least 12 inches (305 mm) in its smallest dimension or other approved arrangement so as to provide access to the slip connections for inspection and repair. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2714.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
P2714.1 Sink waste outlets. Sinks on which food waste grinder is installed shall have a waste opening a minimum of 3.5 inches in diameter. Kitchen sinks shall have no less than a two-inch diameter waste pipe and two 1.5-inch stub-outs shall be provided. A two-inch diameter pipe shall extend to the top stub-out. If the sink is on an outside wall, the cleanout shall be to the outside of the building. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 28 WATER HEATERS 
P2801.5 is amended to read as follows: 
P2801.5 Required pan. Where tank type water heaters or hot water storage tanks are installed in locations where leakage of the tanks or connections will cause damage, the tank or water heater shall be installed in a galvanized steel pan having a material thickness of not less than 0.0236 inch (0.6010 mm) (No 24 gauge), or other pans approved for such use. Listed pans shall comply with CSA LC3. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2801.5.2 is hereby amended to add: 
Exception. When an existing water heater is not adjacent to an outside wall and in the opinion of the Inspector where structural conditions will not allow access to the outside of the building, or to an indirect waste, the discharge line from the temperature and pressure relief valve shall be turned down and terminate approximately six inches above the pan. The pan shall be capped and an approved water alarm shall be installed. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2801.6.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
P2801.6.1 Stands and/or platforms. Where water heaters are required to be elevated, they shall be placed on a water-resistant stand/or platform. Such stands or platforms shall be the responsibility of the installing contractor and shall be structurally appropriate for the intended load of the water heater and its contents. The inspector shall determine the structural appropriateness. Testing of the structure may be required for questionable installations. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2803.1 Relief valves required the first paragraph only is hereby amended to add the following: 
P2803.1 Relief valves required. Tank type appliances and equipment used for heating water or storing of hot water shall be protected utilizing the options listed. The remainder of this section is adopted without modification. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 29 WATER SUPPLY AND 
DISTRIBUTION 
P2902.5. is amended to read as follows: 
P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker or a spill resistant backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed down-stream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2902.5.3 is amended to add subsections P2902.5.3.1 through P2902.5.3.4 to read as follows: 
P2902.5.3.1 Contractor responsibility. The plumbing contractor's responsibility for a lawn sprinkler or irrigation system shall start at the point of connection to the public water system and end at the backflow protection assembly valve. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2902.5.3.2 Installation. Before any work on a lawn or irrigation system begins, permits shall be obtained. Before a final approval is given on the lawn or irrigation system, freeze protection shall be provided for all valves and piping exposed to the weather. Protection shall be provided in the form of an approved outdoor enclosure, heat tape and electrical outlet within ten feet. All wiring and electrical controls shall be installed in accordance with the current National Electrical Code. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2902.5.3.3 Locations. Shutoff valves for lawn irrigation systems are required to be installed within two feet of the point of connection to the potable water system. An approved backflow preventer is required to be installed adjacent to the primary structure on the property unless approved by the plumbing inspector. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2902.5.3.4 Maintenance. All plumbing and drainage systems both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices and safeguards required by the code shall be maintained in working order. The owner or designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing system. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2903.9.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2903.9.1 Service valve. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with an accessible main shutoff valve near the entrance of the water service. The valve shall be of a full-open type having nominal restriction to flow. The water service valve shall be installed in accordance with the city policy and procedures. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2905 is amended to read as follows: 
P2905 Materials, Joints and Connections. 
1.  Subsection Table P2905.4 shall be amended by deleting "copper alloy tubing (type M)." 
2.  Subsection P2905.5 shall be amended by adding the following subsection: 
a. Subsection P2905.5.1 Inaccessible water service piping. Inaccessible water service piping installed under concrete slabs shall be installed with no joints under slab. Any material subject to corrosion shall be protected when used in corrosive soils. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2903.10.1 is hereby added to read as follows: 
P2903.10.1 Installation of frost-proof sillcocks. All sillcocks shall be installed so as to drain. Where there is no access sillcocks shall be installed in the following manner: A winged back ell or lop-eared ell, either male or female shall be used, secured solidly to the structure with screws. If more length is needed then a nipple of proper material shall be used. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2904.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2904.1 General. Where installed, residential fire sprinkler systems, or portions thereof, shall be in accordance with NFPA 13D. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
Sections P2904.1.1 through section P2904.8.2 and tables P2904.6.2(1) through P2904.6.2(9) are deleted. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2905.4 is amended to read as follows: 
P2905.4 Water service pipe. Water service pipe shall conform to NSF 61 and shall conform to one of the standards listed in Table P2905.4. Water service pipe or tubing, installed underground and outside of the structure shall have a minimum working pressure rating of 160 pounds per square inch at 73 degrees Fahrenheit (1103 kPa at 23 degrees Celsius). Where the water pressure exceeds 160 pounds per square inch, (1,103 kPa), piping material shall have a rated working pressure equal to or greater than the highest available pressure. Water service piping materials not third-party certified for water distribution shall terminate at least 30 inches outside the exterior wall. Ductile iron water service piping shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P2905.5.1 is added to read as follows: 
P2905.5.1 Under concrete slabs. Inaccessible water distribution piping under slabs shall conform to the respective standards listed in Table P2905.5, and shall be installed with approved fittings or bends. Fittings installed under slabs shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and/or brazed or silver soldered. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 30 SANITARY DRAINAGE 
P3002 Materials is amended to read as follows: 
1.  Section P3002.1 Piping within buildings. When ABS or PVC pipe is used for above ground, soil and waste pipe, it shall be schedule 40. 
2.  Section P3002.1 Piping within buildings, is amended by adding the following subsection: 
a. Section P3002.1.1 Underground building sanitary drainage and vent pipe. Underground building sanitary drainage and vent pipe shall conform to one of the standards listed in Table 3002.1(2). When ABS or PVC pipe is used for underground building drainage and vent pipe, it shall be Schedule 40. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
P3003.2 is amended to add: 
Exception: Saddle-type fittings may be used to connect the building sewer to a public sewer. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 31 VENTS 
P3103.4 is amended to read as follows: 
P3103.4 Prohibited use. Vent terminals shall not be used as a flag pole or to support flag poles, TV aerials, or similar items. 
(OUBCC Amendment) 
CHAPTER 34 THROUGH CHAPTER 43 
ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS 
    Chapter 34 through Chapter 43 Electrical requirements are deleted and replaced with the following: 
    The installation of electrical systems, equipment and components shall be in accordance with the city electrical code. 
    Appendix: The following appendices are specifically adopted and made a part of this Code, including the listed changes: 
   (Appendix A through D, F through N, and P through S are not being adopted.) 
   Appendix E Manufactured Housing used as Dwellings. 
Appendix E is amended as follows: 
   AE101.1 is amended to delete "installed on privately owned (non-rental) lots" from the first sentence. 
   AE302.3 is amended to delete "drawn to scale on substantial paper or cloth and shall be" from the first sentence. 
   AE303.2 is hereby deleted. 
   AE304.1 Permit fees. 
AE304.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Any registered contractor who desires to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or replace a mechanical system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit and shall pay such required permit fees and any additionally required fees. All such permit fees shall be set by the city council by resolution. 
   AE304.2 and AE304.3 including the subsections are hereby deleted. 
   AE305.3 is hereby deleted. 
   AE502.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
AE502.1 General. Foundation systems designed and constructed in accordance with this section may be considered as a permanent installation. Manufactured Home foundations and anchors shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the State of Oklahoma. 
   Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs. 
   Appendix G is amended to delete AG105.2 #9 including 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3. 
   Appendix H Patio Covers. 
   Appendix H as written. 
(Code 1995, § 18-137; Ord. No. 1123, § 1, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 1154, § 1, 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Sec. 204-138. - Accessory uses, carports. 
    602.4 Accessory Uses, Carports. Accessory uses and structures that are incidental and subordinate to permitted uses in residential districts are permitted subject to the applicable city codes and the following requirements: 
1.  Unless modified by section 2 below hereof accessory structures: 
a.  Shall conform to the setback requirements of the residential district within which it is constructed; 
b.  Shall not exceed in total square footage ten percent of the square footage of the primary structure or four percent of the square footage of the lot, whichever is greater; 
c.  Shall not exceed the height of the residential structure, provided that an additional setback from the front and rear setback requirement of one foot for every foot of height over ten feet is required; 
d.  Shall not exceed a maximum height of 30 feet; and 
e.  Shall be consistent with adjacent structures and property, and shall preserve the character of the zone. 
2.  Carports. 
a.  Carports are permitted to be added to an existing single-family or two-family residential structure subject to the code of the city and the following requirements. Applications for carports proposed to be erected and constructed in multi-family residential zones shall be considered by the planning commission, which shall make a recommendation to the city council. The city council may allow the erection of carports in multi-family residential zones under such circumstances and with such restrictions as it deems advisable. Requirements for erection or construction of carports in single-family or two-family residential zones are: 
i.  Fee and permit. All such fees shall be set by resolution by the city council for a permit for the erection or construction, in whole or in part, of a carport. Any person erecting or constructing a carport, in whole or in part, shall obtain a building permit and pay the permit fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct, in whole or in part, a carport without having first obtained a permit and paid the appropriate fee. 
ii.  Application. Application for a permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the development services department and shall be made by the owner or lessee of the subject property, or agent of either, or by a licensed contractor employed in connection with the proposed work. The application shall contain: 
1.  Address of the applicant and the subject property; 
2.  A detailed drawing showing the specifications for the carport and compliance with other requirements or ordinances; and 
3.  Any other information deemed necessary by the development services department. 
iii.  Existing carports. Where a lawful carport exists at the effective date of this section that could not be built under the terms of this section for any reason, such carport may continue to exist so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No such carport may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; 
2.  Should such carport be damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost it shall be removed or replaced or repaired in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
iv.  Setback. All carports must comply with side yard and rear yard setback requirements of the district within which it lies. A carport may extend beyond the required front yard setback provided that of the front yard setback no part of the carport may extend into the five feet nearest the street and no part thereof extends into any sight triangle. 
v.  All carports shall be permanently open on two sides from grade surface to the eave line provided that all carports that extend into the front yard setback shall be permanently open on three sides from grade surface to the eave line. 
vi.  All carports shall be located over a permanent hard surface. 
vii.  Carports constructed in conjunction with a single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling shall not exceed 18 feet in width for a single garage and/or driveway, and shall not exceed 24 feet in width for a double garage and/or driveway. No carport shall exceed 24 feet in width nor 20 feet in length when measured from eave line to eave line. 
viii.  There shall be no more than one carport per dwelling unit. 
ix.  Carports shall be designed, constructed, erected and installed in accordance with the codes and regulations as adopted by the city. 
x.  Carports shall be kept in an attractive state in good repair, and in a safe and sanitary condition. 
xi.  Carports shall be supported by columns that are not less than 21/2 inches in diameter and from material that is no less than 14 gauge steel set in concrete not less than 12 inches in diameter and 24 inches in depth. The concrete shall have a relative strength of 2,000 pounds per square inch or greater. Any support column may be used which meets or exceeds the equivalent strength of the materials above described. 
1. Exception: A carport that has been designed and engineered by a license engineer with the State of Oklahoma to meet or exceed the design requirements of this section and the structural requirements of the adopted building code. 
xii.  Carports shall be designed to support a live load of not less than 20 pounds per square foot plus the weight of the structure. 
xiii.  Metal carports shall be constructed of material not less structurally sound than 26-gauge steel or 25-gauge aluminum decking with baked-on enamel finish to be compatible with the exterior finish of the dwelling. 
xiv.  Carport roof slopes shall meet minimum manufacturer's requirements, but shall not be less than a pitch of one-fourth-inch rise per 12 inches of run. 
xv.  All eaves shall be enclosed and have rain guttering installed to direct water into the street and away from adjacent properties unless the roof pitch diverts the flow of rain water to the street. 
xvi.  The underside of the carport shall be enclosed with materials as approved by the building code. 
xvii.  No part of the interior of the carport shall be less than seven feet, six inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 11-4-2014) 
Secs. 204-139-204-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 204-146. - Appointment of board. 
    The zoning board of adjustment shall constitute the appeals board for this article. 
(Code 1975, § 6-114; Code 1995, § 18-146) 
Sec. 204-147. - Appeals to board. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any officer, department, board or agency of the city affected by any decision or interpretation of the building inspector or other administrative officer of the city in connection with the interpretation or enforcement of any of the provisions of this article may appeal to the board of adjustment. Such appeal shall be taken within ten days from the date of decision by filing with the building inspector and the city clerk a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof and by paying a filing fee established by resolution at the office of the city clerk at the time the notice of appeal is filed. 
(b)  The building inspector, upon receipt of an appeal, shall transmit to the board the papers and information constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action from which the appeal is taken, unless the building inspector certifies to the board that, by reason of facts stated in the certification, in his opinion, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or to property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of competent jurisdiction. Written notice shall be given to the building inspector of any application for a stay to the board. 
(c)  The board shall fix a time for hearing of the appeal. It shall give written notice to the parties in interest at least ten days before the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall contain the date, the hour and the place for the hearing. The board shall also publish notice of the date, time and place of the hearing once in each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper published or of general circulation in the city. Upon the hearing, parties in interest may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(d)  Upon hearing an appeal under this section, the board shall have power to affirm, or if it finds erroneous action, to reverse, set aside or modify the order under appeal. The board shall have no power to authorize a variance from or an exception to the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The board shall render a decision within 45 days from the date on which the appeal is filed under this section. 
(Code 1975, § 6-123; Code 1995, § 18-147) 
Sec. 204-148. - Appeals from board. 
    An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the board of adjustment may be taken by any person, jointly or severally, or by any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1975, § 6-124; Code 1995, § 18-148) 
Secs. 204-149-204-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS) 

Sec. 204-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Wind energy conversion system (WECS) means any device such as a wind charger, windmill or wind turbine, which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy. 
(Code 1975, § 6-173; Code 1995, § 18-171) 
Sec. 204-172. - Permit; application information and fee. 
    Any person who desires to place, erect or construct any WECS within the limits of the city shall make application to the city inspector for a permit, which application shall include the following: 
(1)  A description of the proposed structure, providing details of construction, components and proposed attachment to the ground or other basis. 
(2)  A plot plan showing a scale of one inch equals 40 feet, the boundaries of the property on which placement is proposed, the precise location of the structure to all buildings and other structures on the property and to the property lines. 
Such application shall be accompanied by the fee established by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 6-174; Code 1995, § 18-172) 
Sec. 204-173. - Standards, rules and regulations. 
(a)  Standards, rules and regulations adopted for the purpose of implementing this article are as follows: 
(1)  The general requirements of the International Building Code and National Electrical Code, as adopted, shall govern the construction of WECS structures, and the owner-operator shall comply with good operating practices. 
(2)  All structural elements shall meet or exceed a designated wind-load velocity of 120 miles per hour, and all WECSs shall be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls. The WECS owner/operator shall comply with Federal Aviation Administration notification requirements and any other applicable regulations. 
(3)  WECS towers that are capable of being climbed shall be enclosed by a locked protective fence at least six feet high, and other types of towers shall be unclimbable by design for the first 12 feet. 
(4)  The WECS tower as measured from the base thereof to its highest point, to include height added by any blade in a vertical position, shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to the total height of tower, so that should said tower topple over, it shall come to rest wholly within the confines of the property on which it is placed. 
(5)  The lowest point of the rotor blade arcs of a WECS shall be a minimum of 20 feet above the ground. All WECSs in residential districts shall have rotors that are not longer than 18 feet or 36 feet in diameter, and in other districts shall have rotors that are not longer than 40 feet or 80 feet in diameter. 
(6)  When a WECS located within a commercial or industrial district abuts a residential district, the height of the WECS shall not exceed a maximum of 100 feet and no rotor shall exceed 18 feet or 36 feet in diameter, otherwise provisions within the article shall apply. 
(7)  A WECS on top of buildings shall be designed and constructed in conformance with good engineering practices and certified by a state professional engineer that the WECS is in compliance with good engineering practices. The WECS owner/operator shall comply with all federal and state regulations, including FCC regulations. 
(8)  Noise level of a WECS, measured at the property line, shall not exceed 55 dba. 
(9)  No part of a WECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or other established easements, and shall be allowed only in rear yards of residential districts. 
(b)  The provisions set forth in this section shall be considered minimum requirements and shall not relieve any person from any duty imposed by law to use reasonable care and take reasonable precautions for the safeguarding of people and the protection of and noninterference of property rights. 
(Code 1975, § 6-175; Code 1995, § 18-173) 
Sec. 204-174. - Abandonment of systems; authority of city to remove; cost of removal. 
    Upon abandonment of a WECS or if it is in an operational condition which poses a potential safety hazard or is in violation of local, state or federal regulations, the owner/operator shall take expeditious action to remedy the situation. The city reserves the authority to abate any hazardous situation. If the hazardous condition or violation of regulations cannot be corrected with a reasonable amount of effort, then the city reserves the right to revoke the WECS permit and remove the system. The cost of removing the WECS shall be passed on to the owner/operator. If the city determines that the WECS has not been used for 12 successive months, the WECS shall be considered abandoned. Abandoned machines shall be removed within 30 days of written notice to the owner/operator of the system. 
(Code 1975, § 6-176; Code 1995, § 18-174) 
Chapter 207 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Floodplain management generally, 82 O.S. § 1601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 207-1-207-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 207-19. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature has in 82 O.S. §§ 1601-1618 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain the provisions of this article will be its flood damage prevention regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-1; Code 1995, § 54-26; Ord. No. 1227, § 1, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 207-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure means structures which are on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure (such as garages and storage sheds). 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zone A, AE, AH, AO or A1-99. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation means the elevation in feet above mean sea level of the base flood or one percent chance flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Board means the Oklahoma Water Resources Board. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland/or tidal waters; 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the floodway width, section area and mean velocities. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended, and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain administrator means a person accredited by the board and designated by the city manager to administer and implement laws and regulations relating to the management of the floodplains. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see Flooding ). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed and individually in the National Register of Historic places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees, and associated structures, such as closure, and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure." 
    Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of these regulations or ordinances when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by these regulations. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations). 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10) or (d)(3) of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in regulation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-5; Code 1995, § 54-27; Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1227, § 2, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 207-21. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-2; Code 1995, § 54-28) 
Sec. 207-22. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges, located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-3; Code 1995, § 54-29) 
Sec. 207-23. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods in all zones: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-4; Code 1995, § 54-30; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 1-18-2000) 
Sec. 207-24. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-20; Code 1995, § 54-31) 
Sec. 207-25. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Canadian County, Oklahoma and Incorporated Areas," dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-21; Code 1995, § 54-32; Ord. No. 1045, § 3, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1099, § 1, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 1227, § 3, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 207-26. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-23; Code 1995, § 54-33) 
Sec. 207-27. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-24; Code 1995, § 54-34) 
Sec. 207-28. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-25; Code 1995, § 54-35; Ord. No. 1227, § 4, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 207-29. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On occasion, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-26; Code 1995, § 54-36) 
Secs. 207-30-207-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 207-47. - Floodplain administrator-Designation. 
    The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-40; Code 1995, § 54-46) 
Sec. 207-48. - Same-Duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provision of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the state water resources board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the floodcarrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 207-25, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(9)  a.  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, must require that no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
b.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface evaluation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first complies with 44 CFR, chapter 1, section 65.12. 
(10)  Become accredited by the board in accordance with 82 O.S. §§ 1601-1618, as amended. 
(11)  After a disaster or other type of damage occurs to structures in the city, determine if the residential and nonresidential structures and manufactured homes located in the SFHA have been substantially damaged and enforce the substantial improvement requirement. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-41; Code 1995, § 54-47; Ord. No. 1045, § 4, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1227, § 5, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 207-49. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-22; Code 1995, § 54-48) 
Sec. 207-50. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 207-79. 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 207-48. 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-42; Code 1995, § 54-49; Ord. No. 1045, § 5, 1-18-2000) 
Sec. 207-51. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of adjustment as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objective of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances are as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws, regulations or ordinances. 
(3)  No variance shall be granted for a structure to be construed below the base flood elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a)-(i) of this section are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(l)  Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition with the floodplain administrator accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution. 
(m)  A copy of any variance issued shall be sent to the OWRB within 15 days of issuance. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-43; Code 1995, § 54-50; Ord. No. 1045, § 6, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1227, § 6, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 207-52. - Violations, penalty. 
    Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7, including court costs. Each day on which any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-27; Code 1995, § 54-51) 
Secs. 207-53-207-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 207-78. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-50; Code 1995, § 54-61) 
Sec. 207-79. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated at a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of two feet above the base flood level. 
(3)  Enclosures. All new construction and substantial improvements that fully enclose areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage and have the bottom of the I-beam elevated at a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for a licensed installer shall install resisting wind forces and the home and comply with state law. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood; 
Shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the bottom of the I-beam is elevated at a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Also, the home shall be installed by a licensed installer and comply with state law. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM shall either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(6)  Accessory structure. 
a.  Structure is low valued and represents a minimal investment. 
b.  Structure shall be small and not exceed 600 square feet in size. 
c.  Structure shall be unfinished on the interior. 
d.  Structure can be used only for parking and limited storage. 
e.  Structure shall not be used for human habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas). 
f.  Structure is constructed and placed on building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
g.  Structure is designed to have low flood damage potential (i.e., constructed with flood resistant materials). 
h.  Structure is firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
i.  Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the structure. 
j.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below the BFE. 
k.  Structure is to be located so as not to cause damage to adjacent and nearby structures. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-51; Code 1995, § 54-62; Ord. No. 1045, §§ 7, 8, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 1099, §§ 2-5, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 1227, § 7, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 207-80. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposal in all zones, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 207-21 through 207-23. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of such subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit requirements of sections 207-49 and 207-50, and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for such subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is fewer, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 207-25 or section 207-48(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-52; Code 1995, § 54-63; Ord. No. 1045, § 9, 1-18-2000) 
Sec. 207-81. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 207-25 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of two feet above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at a minimum of two feet above the highest adjacent grade and at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in subsection 207-50(a)(1), are satisfied. 
(4)  Within zone AH or AO, there shall be adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-53; Code 1995, § 54-64; Ord. No. 1099, §§ 6, 7, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 1227, § 8, 8-19-2008) 
Sec. 207-82. - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 207-25 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(Code 1975, § 81/2-54; Code 1995, § 54-65; Ord. No. 1227, § 9, 8-19-2008) 
Secs. 207-83-207-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER RUNOFF 

Sec. 207-108. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public from the hazards and danger of stormwater runoff; use of drainage channels; to protect natural scenic areas, and to provide for the conservation of the natural resources of the area. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to and be binding upon every person, firm, agency, institution or corporation, and every entity which seeks to develop, redevelop, grade, regrade, excavate, landfill, berm or dike land subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 54-86; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-109. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base flood or 100-year flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    City drainage standards means the criteria, standards and specifications for stormwater drainage, earth change and floodplain development adopted by the city. 
    Detention means the temporary storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff. 
    Detention facility means a facility that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff. 
    Development. 
(1)  The term "development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Buildings or other structures. 
b.  Mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
(2)  The following activities shall not constitute development: 
a.  Lawn and yard care. 
b.  Gardening. 
c.  Tree care and maintenance. 
d.  Removal of trees or other vegetation damaged by natural forces. 
    Enforcement authority is the city official who is responsible for ensuring that the provisions of this Code are enforced, and shall be the city manager or his designee. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation. 
    Natural state (historic development) means the cover and topography of land before any development. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the rainfall that is drained into the stormwater drainage system. 
(Code 1995, § 54-87; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-110. - Revision of Yukon-recommended control of surface water drainage. 
    The city shall keep and maintain at the office of the city inspector the current standard drainage policy which shall be available for inspection and purchase by the public, which policy may be revised from time to time. 
(Code 1995, § 54-88; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-111. - Responsibility of developer/owner for storm drainage improvements. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner/developer to control the stormwater runoff leaving his property, to fulfill his obligations detailed herein and in the drainage standards, and to achieve this, the developer/owner shall provide stormwater drainage system improvements for the increased stormwater runoff resulting from his development. 
(b)  Where a developer/owner proposed development or use of only a portion of the property, provision for stormwater runoff improvements shall be required for that portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use. 
(c)  The development shall provide a sufficient stormwater drainage system for the conveyance of existing stormwater runoff received from upstream and from the subject property with specific allowance having been made for the continued conveyance of stormwater runoff from properties adjacent to the proposed development which may develop in the future. 
(d)  All roofs, paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards, other than one-family or two-family residential structures, shall drain into an existing or improved storm sewer system or to an approved place of disposal, not generally including streets. Release of stormwater onto arterial/(section line) streets may be considered acceptable if: 
(1)  Present flow does not exceed four inches in depth at the face of curb during a 50-year storm event; or 
(2)  The release of stormwater when added to existing street flow does not increase the depth of flow at the face of curb above four inches in depth during a 50-year storm. 
Release of stormwater onto all other classifications of streets may be considered acceptable if the depth of flow does not exceed six inches in depth at the face of curb during a 100-year storm event. The addition of off-site stormwater improvements may be waived by the city council if, in the opinion of the city council, the addition of storm sewer would cause extreme hardship on the developer, in which case the council will address alternative methods of disposal. 
(e)  In the case of one-family and two-family residential structures, stormwater may be discharged onto flat areas such as streets or lawns if drainage is provided so that the stormwater will flow away from the building and if the requirements of the city drainage standards are met. 
(f)  The owner/developer shall remain responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of stormwater detention systems, except as provided in section 207-113. No conveyance of the responsibility of the detention system is allowed nor implied by the issuance of building permits. Stormwater detention systems shall be considered a priority during construction. All stormwater drainage systems shall be constructed as one of the first items of a development, and shall be constructed prior to any change in the stormwater runoff of the development. 
(Code 1995, § 54-89; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-112. - Requirements relating to developments. 
(a)  In any development of improvement of property, the developer/owner will be required to provide at his own expense a complete and detailed drainage study for the total area to be ultimately developed. The study shall be submitted to the city engineer for review prior to the placing of any development on an agenda of the planning commission, city council, or other authorizing body. 
(b)  Development activities shall begin and continue only if appropriate sedimentation facilities are installed and maintained throughout the construction period. If, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, there exists inadequate or improper erosion and soil control, said city manager or his designee, shall issue a stop work order to the owner/developer. No further work on the project shall proceed after the stop work order issues until such time as the owner/developer has complied with adequate erosion control and same meets approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  No excavation and/or grading and/or leveling and/or landfilling of any lot or tract of record for single-family residential developments, multi-family or nonresidential development, shall be commenced prior to the approval of the preliminary grading plan or building permit. 
(Code 1995, § 54-90; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-113. - Title ownership and maintenance. 
    Ownership and maintenance of detention storage facilities should remain with the private sector. Developers shall provide a copy of all homeowner association covenants, to include proof of corporate existence, to the city outlining the regulations relating to the maintenance of the detention facilities. For areas which have no neighborhood or homeowners association or the like to regulate such facilities, the drainage facilities may be dedicated to the public and maintained by the public. Facilities which are an integral usable part of the development such as commercial and office park development, the ownership and maintenance of said facilities shall remain with the private sector. Prior to the acceptance of any drainage or detention facility by the city, whether for public or private ownership, the developer shall be in compliance with the drainage standards and the following: 
(1)  Completed construction of all required facilities and erosion control as detailed on the approved site or development plan or provide sufficient surety bond, cash escrow, or letter of credit acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney and approved by the city council guaranteeing the construction of all required facilities, and erosion controls as detailed on the approved site or developed plan. 
(2)  In the case of public ownership, pay a sum to the city equal to the amount established by resolution multiplied by the number of acres dedicated for the detention facility multiplied by seven years to cover the cost of maintenance. All funds received shall be maintained by the city to be used for the maintenance of detention ponds. 
(3)  Submit an approved operation and maintenance (O&M) manual to those individuals and/or organizations responsible for the facility. The O&M manual shall address inspection frequency and the fundamental requirements of safe operation and maintenance of the facility. A listing of improvements and structures and the required maintenance of each shall be included in the O&M manual. 
(Code 1995, § 54-91; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-114. - Performance requirement. 
    The owner/developer understands and agrees by his submitting of a drainage system plan that approval by the city does not relieve him, his successors or assigns of an obligation to revise, improve and/or change any or all of the drainage system if the original proposal does not function as intended by the approved site or development plan. 
(Code 1995, § 54-92; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-115. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article and the city drainage standards, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements. 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council. 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1995, § 54-93; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-116. - Penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article; any person violating any of said provisions is guilty of an offense against the city, and being found guilty thereof by the municipal court of the city constitutes a violation. Each day that an offense is continued in violation of this article is to be construed as a separate offense. In addition to the fine, the city may institute appropriate actions to enforce the provisions of this article or to correct the violations thereof. All costs encountered by the city for such enforcement and correction shall become due and payable to the city upon receipt of written notification of payment due. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such person for the responsibility to correct the prohibited conditions or to remove any prohibited buildings, structures, obstructions, or improvements, nor prevent the enforcement, correction, or removal thereof. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city manager or his designee shall, if in his opinion the circumstances warrant same, issue stop work orders. Said order to remain in effect until the necessary steps are undertaken which make the stop work order no longer necessary. 
(Code 1995, § 54-94; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Sec. 207-117. - Enforcement authority and stop work orders. 
    When, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, inadequate or improper erosion control measures are being taken in a development area, any of the above listed persons have full authority to issue stop work orders. Such orders will remain in effect until compliance with adequate and/or proper measures are undertaken with regard to erosion control. 
(Code 1995, § 54-95; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 4-18-1995) 
Secs. 207-118-207-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 207-148. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the "community waters" or to the "waters of the state" which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
    Agricultural stormwater runoff means any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other non-point source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR 122.24. 
    Aquatic monitoring organism means the Fathead minnow, Primephales promelas, the bacterium Photobacterium phosphoreum, or the daphnid Ceriodaphnia dubia. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means the best available practices or devices that, when used singly or in combination, eliminate or reduce the contamination of surface waters and/or groundwaters. 
    City means the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, a municipal corporation, and the duly authorized officers or agents of the City of Yukon. 
    City council means the governing body of the City of Yukon. 
    Clean Water Act (CWA) means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, codified at 33 USC 1251 et seq., and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Commercial means property devoted in whole or in part to commerce, that is, the exchange and buying and selling of commodities or services. The term "commercial" shall include, by way of example but not of limitation, the following businesses: amusement establishments, animal clinics or hospitals, automobile service stations, new or used automobile dealerships, automobile car washes, automobile and vehicular repair shops, banking establishments, beauty and barber shops, bowling alleys, bus terminals and repair shops, camera shops, dental offices or clinics, day care centers, department stores, drug stores, funeral homes, furniture stores, gift shops, grocery stores, hardware stores, hotels, jewelry stores, laboratories, laundries and dry cleaning establishments, liquor stores, medical offices and clinics, motels, movie theaters, office buildings, paint stores or shops, parking lots, produce markets, professional offices, radio stations, repair establishments, retail stores, restaurants and similar establishments serving prepared food and beverages, rooming houses, shopping centers, stationary stores, television stations and production facilities, and theaters. 
    Community waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the city or the waters into which the sample of stormwater runoff resulting from the combination of individual samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time stormwater system outfalls flow. 
    Confidential information means a document or information regarding or describing a process, product or information that has been determined by the manager to be confidential or has been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be exempt from disclosure to third parties under the Oklahoma Open Records Act and any amendment or supplement thereto. 
    Construction activity means clearing, grading, mining and excavation activities except operations that result in disturbance of less than one acre of total land area and that are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale. 
    Construction stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the city that establishes controls to the maximum extent practicable to effectively prohibit non-stormwater discharged from a construction site to enter the municipal storm sewer system and, where necessary, contains applicable water quality-based controls. 
    Contaminated means containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    Cosmetic cleaning means any system, machine or substance used to remove undesirable substances from any surface or facade creating free foreign matter. 
    Days means calendar days. 
    Department means the department of development services of the city. 
    DEQ means the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Director means the director of the department of development services of the city or the person succeeding to his duties and functions by whatever name known, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or designated representative. 
    Discharge means to cause or allow to throw, drain, release, dump, spill, empty, emit or pour any pollutants or harmful quantity of any substance into the municipal storm sewer system or into the waters of the United States. 
    Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise responsible for a discharge including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility; the owner/operator of any commercial, residential or agricultural property; or the owner/operator or transporter of any source of discharge. 
    Domestic sewage means human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dish washing or food preparation), other wastewater from household drains and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartments and hotels), office buildings, factories or commercial properties and institutions that is free from industrial waste. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a written plan, including drawings or other graphic representations, for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. 
    Fund means the stormwater management fund. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of produce and other food products; ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and other solid waste other than industrial waste. 
    General OPDES permit means a general OPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity issued by the DEQ. 
    Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that will cause pollution of waters of the state, or that will cause lethal or sub-lethal adverse effects on representative, sensitive Fathead minnows, Pimephales Promelas, bacteria Photobacterium Phosphoreum or daphnids Ceriodaphnia Dubia belonging to the city upon their exposure to samples of any discharge into the municipal storm sewer system, community waters or waters of the state. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302 and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR 261. 
    Illicit discharge means any intentional discharge to the municipal storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to any NPDES permit, or discharges resulting from firefighting activities. 
    Impervious surface means any hard-surfaced area that prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil in the manner and to the extent that such water entered the soil under natural conditions, causing water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow than was present under natural conditions such as, but not limited to, roof tops, asphalt or concrete sidewalks, paving, driveways, parking lots, walkways, patio areas, storage areas, and gravel, bituminous substances or other surfaces which similarly affect the natural infiltration or runoff patterns of real property in its natural state. 
    Industrial means a business engaged in industrial production or service that is a business characterized by manufacturing or productive enterprise or a related service business. The term "industrial" shall include, by way of example but not of limitation, the following: apparel and fabric finishers, blast furnace, blueprint and related shops, boiler works, cold storage plants, contractors' plants and storage facilities, foundries, furniture and household good manufacturing, forge plants, greenhouses, junk yards, manufacturing plants, metal fabricating shops, ore reduction facilities, planning mills, rock crushers, rolling mills, saw mills, smelting operations, stockyards, stone mills or quarries, textile production, utility transmission or storage facilities, warehousing and wholesaling facilities. 
    Industrial activity means any activity that is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The term "industrial activity" includes, but is not limited to, industrial plant yards; immediate access roads and rail lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste material or by-products used or created by the industrial facility sites where material handling activities are performed; refuse sites; sites used for the applications or disposal of process wastewaters; sites used for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for residual treatment, storage or disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage areas (including tank farms) for raw materials; and immediate and finished products. 
    Industrial facility means a premises whose function is classified in the latest edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (United States Office of Management and Budget). 
    Industrial stormwater discharge permit means a permit, issued by the city, regulating regular discharges from facilities which may control any conveyance that is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and that is directly related to material storage areas at an industrial plant. 
    Industrial waste means any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industrial, manufacturing, mining, production, trade or business activities. 
    Institutional means an established organization, especially of a charitable or public character. The term "institutional" shall include, by way of example but not of limitation, the following: churches, community buildings, colleges, day care facilities, dormitories, drug or alcohol rehabilitation facilities, fire halls, fraternal organizations, golf courses and driving ranges, government buildings, hospitals, libraries, kindergartens or preschools, nursing homes, mortuaries, schools, social agencies, synagogues, parks and playgrounds. 
    Land disturbing activity means any land change that may result in soil erosion from water and/or wind, and the movement of sediments into community waters or onto lands and roadways within the community including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, stockpiling, mining and filling of land. 
    Manager means the person designated by the city manager to supervise the operation of the stormwater quality management division and the stormwater management system, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Material handling activities means the storage, loading and unloading, transportation or conveyance of any raw material, immediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product. 
    Monitoring means the performance of stormwater flow measurements, stormwater sampling, sample analysis and like procedures necessary to determine compliance with the applicable permit. 
    Motor vehicle fluid means any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend and any other fluid used in, or from within, a motor vehicle. 
    Multi-family residential means an apartment building or other residential structure built for three or more family units, mobile home parks with three or more units or lots under common ownership, and condominiums of three or more units. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains) owned or regulated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit means a permit, and any addition or amendment thereto, issued to the city by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342 (b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to the waters of the United States. 
    Notice of intent (NOI) means a written notice by a discharger or potential discharger to the director that the person wishes his discharge to be authorized under a general permit authorized by state law or regulation. 
    Notice of termination (NOT) means a written notice by a discharger to the director that the permitted project has 70 percent re-vegetation of all bare areas and all soil disturbing activities are concluded, allowing the termination of the permit issued under this section, or the discharger is no longer the operator of the facility and another has assumed the responsibility and obtained an NOI. 
    Oil means any kind of oil in any form including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof that is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with waste. 
    OPDES means Oklahoma Pollution Discharge Elimination System Act, 27 O.S. § 2-201 et seq. and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Owner/operator means the person, firm, organization or any other entity, or its representative, that either individually or together meet the following two criteria: 
(1)  It has operational control over the site specifications (including the ability to make modifications in the specifications); 
(2)  It has the day-to-day operational control of those activities at the site necessary to ensure compliance with plan requirements and permit conditions (e.g., is authorized to direct workers at the site to carry out activities identified in the plan). 
    Permit means a license to conduct an activity, which is regulated by the Clean Water Act or this article. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or a legal representative, agent or assign. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. This definition includes all federal, state or local governments. 
    Pollutant means any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, oil, grease, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste, industrial waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial waste, and characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, total suspended solids, turbidity, color, biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, toxicity, odor). 
    Pollution prevention plan means a written site specific plan to eliminate or reduce and control the pollution of stormwater through designed facilities, sedimentation ponds, natural or constructed wetlands, and best management practices. 
    POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
    Premises means any plot or tract of ground, regardless of size or plat, owned by a person, or used by a person and any contiguous plots. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system, community waters, waters of the state or waters of the United States. 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of: 
(1)  Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar materials; and 
(2)  Non-combustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and any other materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 degrees Fahrenheit to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Sanitary sewer means the system of pipes, conduits and other conveyances that carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a sewage treatment plant or POTW (and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
    Service station means any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks. 
    Sewage means industrial and/or domestic waste. 
    SIC Code means Standard Industrial Classification Code of Executive Office of the President of the United States, Office of Management and Budget. 
    Significant spills means, but is not limited to, releases of oil or hazardous substances in excess of reportable quantities under the Clean Water Act or the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish and refuse, and sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material resulting from or incidental to industrial, municipal, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, and from community, recreational or institutional activities. 
    Spills means any release that, in the opinion of the director, negatively impacts the quality of water within or discharges from the city's municipal storm sewer system or causes damaging or deleterious effects to the city's municipal storm sewer system including all of its structures or appurtenances, and/or waters to the storm sewers. 
    State means the State of Oklahoma. 
    Stormwater means any precipitation runoff, surface runoff and drainage related to rain, storm events or snow melt. 
    Stormwater charge means the fees levied within the boundaries of the city for the use of the stormwater drainage system. 
    Stormwater drainage system means any facility, structure, improvement, development, equipment, property or interest therein, or other structural or nonstructural element made, constructed, used or acquired for the purpose of collecting, containing, storing, conveying and controlling stormwater wherever located including, but not limited to, storm sewers, curbs, street drains, conduits, natural and manmade channels, pipes, culverts and detention ponds whether public or private. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this article and its terms including, but not limited to, measures that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by man-made changes to the land. 
    Stormwater management plan means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise all of the information and specifications for the programs, drainage systems, structures, best management practices, concepts and techniques for the control of stormwater and which is incorporated as part of the NPDES permit for the city, and as part of this article. 
    Stormwater management program or program means the overall strategy and framework for the stormwater management activities of the city. 
    Stormwater regulation board means the board of adjustment as listed in article 7 of the zoning ordinance. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of any precipitation that is drained into the stormwater drainage system. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR 401 promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of 33 USC 1317 and any amendment or addition thereto. 
    Uncontaminated means not containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    Used oil means any oil that has been refined from crude oil or a synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties, but may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law. 
    User means any source of direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm sewer system; the occupant or the owner/operator of any real estate; and the owner/operator of any impervious surface or improvement and/or other person or entity benefiting from the stormwater drainage system. 
    Utilities means a television, electric, gas, water, sanitary and storm sewer, cable TV or other company or legal or government entity that provides service to the public. 
    Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements contained in this article and the stormwater management plan for specific circumstances where strict adherence to the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Waters of the state means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets and canals, inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
    Waters of the United States means all waters that are currently used, were used in the past or may be susceptible to use in the future in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters that are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation or destruction of which would affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition and any waters within the federal definition of "Waters of the United States" at 40 CFR 122.2; but not including any waste water treatment systems, treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Clean Water Act. 
    Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
    Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adopted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(b)  The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  CFR shall stand for Code of Federal Regulations. 
(2)  USC shall stand for United States Code. 
(Code 1995, § 54-101; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-149. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of the city and the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare of the city citizens by controlling discharges of pollutants to the stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the community water into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, the lakes, rivers, streams ponds, wetlands, sinkholes, and groundwater of the city. 
(b)  It is further the purpose of this article to enable the city to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and applicable (40 CFR 122.26) for stormwater discharges. 
(Code 1995, § 54-102; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-150. - Scope. 
    This article establishes methods to regulate the introduction of pollutants into the municipal storm sewer system and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including, but not limited to, the Clean Water Act, the Oklahoma Environmental Quality Act (27A O.S. § 1-1-101 et seq.) and the stormwater regulations (40 CFR 122). The objectives of this article are to allow the city: 
(1)  To regulate the introduction of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(2)  To control spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater into the municipal storm sewer system; 
(3)  To prohibit illicit discharges into the municipal storm sewer system; 
(4)  To carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with this Code; and 
(5)  To comply with NPDES permit conditions and any other federal or state law pertaining to stormwater quality to which the city is subject. 
(Code 1995, § 54-103; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-151. - Authority of the director. 
    The director shall exercise all lawful powers necessary and appropriate to administer the stormwater management program. The director shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Develop and administer all phases of a comprehensive program of stormwater management, including studying, planning, designing, establishing, acquiring, constructing, developing, installing, administering, maintaining, operating, improving, repairing, replacing and reconstructing the stormwater drainage system; 
(2)  Administer the accounting, budgeting, record keeping and support personnel necessary for the efficient operation of the stormwater management program; 
(3)  Administer the regulations contained in the NPDES permit and in this chapter; 
(4)  Perform studies, tests and analyses required to establish or modify the stormwater management program; 
(5)  Provide for public information and awareness that would improve management and reduce pollution and hazards to life and property; 
(6)  Establish a flood alert and early warning system as a joint effort with emergency response agencies; 
(7)  Coordinate enforcement of the regulations contained in this chapter with other city departments; 
(8)  Seek the cooperation of counties and municipalities within the metropolitan area in reducing the contribution of all stormwater drainage systems to flooding and, in particular, cooperate with other affected political subdivisions in preparing and implementing master drainage plans; 
(9)  Hear and consider challenges to the application of this chapter, the calculation of fees, the determination of the impervious surface area and the classification of users; 
(10)  Provide an exchange of information between the public and city employees and officers on flooding and stormwater drainage problems in the city; 
(11)  Recommend to the city manager and the city council a comprehensive stormwater management program; 
(12)  Propose cooperation studies and plans for coordinated stormwater drainage services in the city and surrounding areas; and 
(13)  Recommend from time to time to the city manager and the city council policies for establishing new kinds of stormwater drainage services, preserving and expanding existing services and making changes in services for the benefit of the public. 
(Code 1995, § 54-104; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-152. - Stormwater management fund; establishment; funding. 
(a)  The stormwater management fund is hereby established to receive all of the stormwater charges collected for the use of the city's stormwater drainage system and to meet applicable local, state and federal regulations, including, but not limited to, the NPDES permit. The fund shall be maintained for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues and expenses attributable to the stormwater charge. All of the stormwater charges collected and all loans, grants or funds received for the administration, operation, construction and improvement of the stormwater drainage system shall be deposited into the fund. The fund shall be used to pay for costs of administration, data collection, planning, designing, engineering, policing, constructing, maintaining, operating and improving drainage services and facilities and any other activity provided for by this article. 
(b)  Expenditures and disbursements from the fund shall be at the direction and discretion of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 54-105; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-153. - Stormwater charge; exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be and there is hereby established a stormwater charge which shall be billed monthly, beginning May 1, 2003, with the other city utilities. The stormwater charge shall be a minimum established by resolution per account. The deposit requirement, late charges and penalties as are now or may be established in the future for utility service shall also apply to the stormwater charge. The payment of the stormwater charge shall be governed by the same ordinances as the payment of the other city utilities. 
(b)  The stormwater charge shall be based on the size of the water meter serving the facility and shall be as established by resolution. 
(c)  The stormwater charge shall not be imposed on the following types of property: 
(1)  City, state and federal roads, bridges, highways, streets and rights-of-way; 
(2)  City parks, city buildings, city facilities and open spaces owned or operated by the city; or 
(3)  Undeveloped parcels of land. 
(d)  All proceeds from the stormwater charge shall be deposited into the fund. 
(e)  The provision for collection provided herein shall be in addition to any other rights or remedies that the city may have under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1995, § 54-106; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-154. - Appeal or adjustments of charge. 
    Any user who considers the stormwater charge, application of the stormwater charge or calculation of the stormwater charge to be inaccurate or erroneous may request review thereof by the director. The determination by the director may be appealed to the city council by written notice of appeal stating the reasons or basis for the appeal filed with the manager and director within ten days of the director's written determination. 
(Code 1995, § 54-107; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-155. - Inspection. 
    The director shall have the right to inspect any on site detention or retention facility at any reasonable time to determine if it is in compliance with the approved design and is capable of functioning properly. The director shall have the right to inspect any property within the city to determine the source, quantity, quality or flow rate of stormwater and to determine the source and nature of pollutants, hazards and/or activities creating or promoting pollutants or hazards. 
(Code 1995, § 54-108; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-156. - City council discretion. 
    The determination of stormwater services to be provided, and stormwater facilities and improvements to be constructed, will be made at the sole discretion of the city council. The director shall recommend the provision of stormwater services and construction of stormwater facilities and improvements to the city council based upon engineering analyses, taking into consideration frequency of flooding events, potential loss of life, potential property damage, potential affect upon the general public and any other factor affecting the purpose of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 54-109; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 207-157-207-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION AND PERMITS FOR INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 207-181. - Existing facilities required to obtain permit. 
(a)  Any existing industrial, commercial, institutional or multi-family or group residential facilities that discharge stormwater into community waters and that do not have current NPDES permits issued by the DEQ authorizing a discharge of stormwater into the waters of the state will be required to develop a pollution prevention plan and apply for an industrial stormwater discharge permit. The industrial stormwater discharge permit shall be required in addition to any permits required by the EPA or the state. Facilities that have the following standard industrial classification codes must apply and receive an industrial stormwater discharge permit: 
SIC Code Title 10 Metal mining 12 Coal mining 13 Oil and gas extraction 14 Nonmetallic minerals, except fuels 20 Food and kindred products 21 Tobacco products 22 Textile mill products 23 Apparel and other textile products 24 Lumber and wood products 25 Furniture and fixtures 26 Paper and allied products 27 Printing and publishing 28 Chemicals and allied products 29 Petroleum and coal products 30 Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products 31 Leather and leather products (except 311) 32 Stone, clay, and glass products 33 Primary metal industries 34 Fabricated metal products 35 Industrial machinery and equipment 36 Electronic and other electric equipment 37 Transportation equipment 38 Instruments and related products 39 Miscellaneous manufacturing industries 40 Railroad transportation 41 Local and interurban passenger transit 42 Trucking and warehousing 43 United States Postal Service 44 Water transportation 45 Transportation by air 5015 Motor vehicle parts, used 5093 Scrap and waste materials 5171 Petroleum bulk stations and terminals  
(b)  An application, including a pollution prevention plan, shall be submitted to the manager. Upon approval, an industrial stormwater discharge permit shall be issued within six months of the submittal of the pollution prevention plan. Any approved pollution prevention plan shall be incorporated into the industrial stormwater discharge permit. The industrial stormwater discharge permit may require the facility to implement structural and non-structural best management practices to reduce pollution discharge. If the application is not approved, the manager shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies. The applicant shall have 90 days to revise and re-submit the application. If the deficiencies noted by the manager are not corrected and the application re-submitted for approval within the 90 days or, if after being re-submitted, is disapproved, any discharge of stormwater after that date into waters of the community shall be unlawful. Once issued, an industrial stormwater discharge permit shall be valid for five years, unless sooner revoked for violations of permit conditions, changes in applicable law, changes in discharge or other good cause. 
(c)  The application for an industrial stormwater discharge permit for an existing facility shall include the following: 
(1)  Site map of facility showing buildings, parking, drives, materials loading and access areas, type of each impervious surface, ditches, pipes, catch basins, drainage basin limits, area of facility, acreage of off-site water draining into facility, discharge points to waters of the state or community waters with name of the water or drainage basin. This map will be a minimum of scale of one inch=100 feet; 
(2)  Description of facility including the nature of work performed and type of facility; 
(3)  Narrative description of significant materials (as defined at 40 CFR 122.26) that are currently or in the past have been treated, stored or disposed of at the facility; method of on-site storage or disposal; materials management practices used to minimize contact of these materials with stormwater runoff currently and for the past three years; materials loading and access area; the location and description of existing structural and non-structural control measures to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff; and a description of any treatment the stormwater receives; 
(4)  Cleanup schedule for debris, material storage areas, garbage storage or disposal areas, or other areas that have the potential to pollute stormwater; 
(5)  Description of plan of instruction to employees at all levels in ways to prevent pollution and spill response. The plan shall identify periodic dates for such training; 
(6)  Name of contact person for permit compliance, including job title, address and phone number; 
(7)  Maintenance schedule of sweeping or vacuuming of facility to prevent washout of a build-up of emissions laden with hydrocarbons, oxides, salts, metals, worn pavement particulates, hydrocarbons for leaks and spills, trash, debris, garbage, metals, tire particles, brake lining particles and various chemicals from the wear, deterioration and deposition of vehicles; 
(8)  Description of other ways the facility plans to implement programs to reduce the discharge of pollutants through stormwater flow. For each area of the facility that generates stormwater discharges associated with an activity with a reasonable potential for containing significant amounts of pollutants, a prediction of the direction of flow and an estimate of the types of pollutants which are likely to be present in stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity; 
(9)  Plans showing the construction of an appropriately sized grit sediment basin and oil skimmer structure for discharge outfalls into community waters in accordance with detailed drawings of these structures which are shown in the stormwater management section Best Management Practices Manual; 
(10)  A record of available sampling data describing pollutants in stormwater discharges; 
(11)  A preventative maintenance program that includes regular inspection and maintenance of stormwater management devices (e.g., cleaning grit chambers, catch basins) as well as inspecting and testing plant equipment and systems to uncover conditions that could cause breakdowns or failures resulting in discharges of pollutants to surface waters; and 
(12)  Designation of a person to keep a record of incidents such as significant spills or other discharges that materially affect stormwater, along with other information describing the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges. Inspections and maintenance activities shall be documented and recorded. 
(Code 1995, § 54-121; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-182. - Construction stormwater discharge permit. 
(a)  All new utility, industrial, commercial, institutional and multi-family residential facilities, and all residential subdivisions shall obtain a construction stormwater discharge permit prior to construction activity. The construction stormwater discharge permit shall be required in addition to any permits required by the state or elsewhere in this Code for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity or for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity or land disturbing activity. 
(b)  The minimum standards for issuance of a construction stormwater discharge permit shall be a pollution prevention plan, and either an approved general OPDES permit or a land disturbing permit. The application for a construction stormwater discharge permit shall be filed with the manager and shall: 
(1)  Include, if the facility is to be covered under a DEQ OPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, a general OPDES permit, an industrial OPDES permit or an NOI, copies of such documents; 
(2)  Demonstrate how the owner/operator or developer will ensure that post-development off-site discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates; 
(3)  Unless otherwise specified, on site and off-site discharges for the existing and developed conditions shall be computed by using the city ordinance for "control of surface water" or as otherwise directed by the city engineer. The design shall show an evaluation of the result of the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year return frequency storm; 
(4)  To reduce the "first flush" pollutant load, facilities shall be designed to capture the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year return frequency storm in a detention or retention basin per the requirements of the city ordinance for "control of surface water" which shall provide a minimum of 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained. Where providing the required detention or retention per the city ordinance for "control of surface water" or the minimum of 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained is not attainable, small sediment basins or equivalent volume should be used; 
(5)  Include detention or retention ponds that shall be at least two feet below any finished floor elevation of the facility, provide a paved emergency overflow and the maximum level in the pond to be two feet below any finished floor level of the facility. Ponds shall also have permanent vehicle access for maintenance purposes. A plan for the routine maintenance of the ponds will be incorporated in the pollution prevention plan; 
(6)  Include constructed wetlands which meet the detention or retention requirements of the city ordinance for "control of surface water" instead of the pond of 3,600 cubic feet per acre storage. Grit trap and oil separators must be installed upstream of the wetlands to prevent contamination; 
(7)  Include in the pollution prevention plan a demonstration of how the facility will collect, control and treat stormwater so as to control the quantity and quality of stormwater leaving the site. The plan shall also include, as necessary, structural controls and non-structural best management practices adequate to prevent the violation of any water quality standard, and shall meet the provisions of the Clean Water Act (best conventional technology and best available technology treatment requirements). 
(c)  The pollution prevention plan must be reviewed and approved by the manager prior to the issuance of a construction stormwater discharge permit. 
(d)  The manager must receive an NOI or a certificate of occupancy for the facility or subdivision for a final inspection. 
(Code 1995, § 54-122; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-183. - Permit application fees. 
(a)  Each application for the issuance of a construction stormwater discharge permit under this article shall be accompanied by a minimum non-refundable fee in the amount established by resolution plus such additional fees for land disturbing activity or industrial activity as may be required below. 
(b)  Each application for the issuance of a land disturbing permit under this article shall be accompanied by a non-refundable permit fee established by resolution. 
(c)  Each application for an existing facility permit shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution. 
(Code 1995, § 54-123; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-184. - Maintenance and submittal of records. 
    Appropriate proof and records of compliance with the provisions of a stormwater discharge permit or land disturbing permit shall be made available for the manager's review at any time. The owner/operator shall send a permit renewal request annually to the manager prior to the anniversary date of the permit. 
(Code 1995, § 54-124; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-185. - Transfer of permit. 
    An industrial or construction stormwater discharge permit or land disturbing permit may be transferred to a subsequent owner/operator only upon the filing of an amended application containing all of the subsequent owner/operator's information required on an application provided that there are no changes in the operation of the facility which may affect the quantity or quality of the stormwater runoff. If there are to be any changes in the operation of the facility which may affect the quantity or quality of stormwater runoff, then the subsequent owner/operator shall re-submit, by NOI, for a stormwater discharge permit or land disturbing permit prior to the beginning of operation of the facility. The filing of an amended application shall be treated as an interim permit allowing the continued operation of the facility pending review of the amended application by the manager, which shall remain in force until the amended application shall be approved or denied by the manager. 
(Code 1995, § 54-125; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-186. - Signatory requirements. 
(a)  All applications and reports required by this article to be submitted to the manager shall be signed: 
(1)  By a responsible party (e.g., developer, owner/operator, contractor) with operational control over the project specifications and daily operations; 
(2)  For a corporation, by an officer of the corporation, as authorized and in charge of principal business functions, or any other person as authorized to perform similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; 
(3)  For a limited liability company, by its manager; 
(4)  For a partnership or sole proprietorship, by a general partner or the proprietor, respectively; 
(5)  For a municipality, state, federal or other public facility, by either a principal executive officer or the chief executive officer of the agency or a senior executive officer having responsibility for the overall operations of a principal geographic unit of the agency. 
(b)  Any person signing any document required by this article shall make the following certification: 
"I certify under the penalty of law that I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in the attached document; and, based on my inquiry of those individuals immediately responsible for obtaining the information, I believe the submitted information is true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and/or civil penalty." 
(Code 1995, § 54-126; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 207-187-207-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY AND EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 207-211. - General land disturbing activity. 
    All land disturbing activities shall be in compliance with and after receiving a permit under this article. An application must submitted to DEQ for a general OPDES permit. If a general OPDES permit is applied for, a copy of the NOI must be sent to the manager. To seek coverage under the general OPDES permit, the NOI must be submitted to the DEQ. 
(Code 1995, § 54-136; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-212. - Land disturbing activity regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, or permit to be conducted, any land disturbing activity upon any land without a land disturbing permit issued under this article and a general OPDES permit, with a copy provided to the manager. Such permit shall be required in addition to any building permit or other permit required by this Code for the site and shall be available for inspection by the manager on the job site at all times during which land disturbing activities are in progress. The phrase "land disturbing activity" shall not include the following: 
(1)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, home repairs, home maintenance work and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(2)  The construction of single-family residences when built separately on lots less than one acre not within a subdivision or which have been recorded in the office of stormwater quality management, and have been issued building permits; provided that excavation is limited to trenches for the foundation, basements, service and sanitary sewer connections, and minor grading for driveways, yard areas and sidewalks, with no offsite discharge of pollutants; 
(3)  Individual service and sanitary sewer connections for single- or two-family residences; 
(4)  Agricultural practices involving the establishment, cultivation or harvesting of products of the field or orchard, preparing and planting of pasture land, forestry land management practices including harvesting, farm ponds, dairy operations and livestock and poultry management practices, and the construction of farm buildings; 
(5)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(6)  Installation, maintenance and repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surface road, street or sidewalk, provided the activity maintains pollution control and is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced and a street, curb, gutter or sidewalk permit has been obtained; and 
(7)  Construction, repair or rebuilding of tracks of a railroad company. 
These activities may be undertaken without the required permits; however, the persons conducting these excluded activities shall remain responsible for conducting these activities in accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable laws including responsibility for controlling sedimentation and runoff both during the land disturbing activity and after the land disturbing activity is complete. 
(b)  The minimum standards for controlling erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activities shall be set forth in the best management practices manual, as adopted and amended from time to time by resolution approved by the city council. A copy of the manual shall be maintained on file in the offices of the director, the city engineer and the manager. A copy of the manual shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and may be viewed and copied in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 54-137; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-213. - Permit application. 
(a)  An application for the issuance of a land disturbing permit under this article shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Business or residence address of the applicant; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner/operator of the subject property; 
(4)  Address and legal description of the subject property; 
(5)  Name and address of any contractor and any subcontractor who will perform the land disturbing activity and who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan; 
(6)  A statement setting forth the nature, extent and purpose of the land disturbing activity including the size of the area for which the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land disturbing activity; and 
(7)  A copy of the NOI and erosion and sediment control plan. 
(b)  Each application for a land disturbing permit shall be accompanied by a map or plat of the premises showing the present contour lines and the proposed contour lines resulting from the land disturbing activity in relation to all parts of the premises and the properties immediately adjacent thereto and in relation to all abutting street grades and elevations. Such map or plat shall show all proposed and existing drainage facilities and the proposed permanent disposition of surface waters upon completion of the land disturbing activity. 
(c)  The erosion and sediment control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from the land disturbing activity, and shall explain and illustrate the measures which are to be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the erosion and sediment control plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition and the potential for off-site damage. The erosion and sediment control plan shall contain a description of the existing site conditions, a description of adjacent topographical features, a description of soil types and characteristics of the area, potential problems of soil erosion and sedimentation, stabilization specifications, stormwater management considerations, a time schedule for completion of the land disturbing activity and for maintenance after completion of the project, clearing and grading limits, and all other information needed to accurately depict solutions to potential soil erosion and sedimentation problems. Any erosion and sediment control plan must comply with the best management practices manual and shall be reviewed by the manager prior to the issuance of the land disturbing permit. The land disturbing permit shall be issued within 30 days of the submission of the plan if the application and the plan are approved by the manager. 
(d)  At any time the manager determines that an erosion and sediment control plan does not comply with the provisions of this article, the manager shall notify the applicant in writing of all deficiencies within the plan. 
(Code 1995, § 54-138; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-214. - Sediment and erosion control. 
    No land disturbing activity shall be conducted within the city except in such a manner that: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted so as to minimize erosion. Clearing and grubbing must be held to the minimum necessary for grading and equipment operation. Pre-construction vegetative ground cover shall not be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than ten days prior to grading or earth moving. Construction must be sequenced to minimize the exposure time of cleared surface area; 
(2)  Upon completion of land disturbing activities, will not leave slopes so that they will erode. Such methods shall include re-vegetation, sodding, mulching, rip-rapping or guniting. Regardless of the method used, the objective will be to leave the site as erosion-free and maintenance-free as practicable; 
(3)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(4)  Permanent or temporary soil stabilization is applied to disturbed areas to the extent feasible within seven days on areas that will remain unfinished for more than 14 days. Permanent soil stabilization with perennial vegetation shall be applied as soon as practicable after final grading is reached on any portion of the site. Soil stabilization refers to measures that protect soil from the erosive forces of wind, raindrop impact and flowing water, and includes the growing of grass, sod, application of straw, mulch, fabric mats, and the early application of gravel base on areas to be paved; 
(5)  A permanent vegetative cover shall be established on disturbed areas not otherwise permanently stabilized; 
(6)  Sediment in stormwater runoff is trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures, but not hay bales, until the disturbed area is stabilized; 
(7)  Neighboring persons and property are protected from damage or loss resulting from excessive stormwater runoff, soil erosion or deposition upon property or public streets of water-transported silt and debris. Adjacent property owners shall be protected from land devaluation due to exposed bare banks; 
(8)  A controlled construction entrance/exit is maintained in a condition that will prevent tracking or flowing of sediment onto the public right-of-way; 
(9)  Erosion and sediment control measures must be in place and functional before earth moving operations begin, and must be constructed and maintained throughout the construction period. Temporary measures may be removed at the beginning of the workday, but must be replaced at the end of the workday; 
(10)  Structural controls shall be designed and maintained as required to prevent pollution. All surface water flowing toward the construction area shall, to the extent practicable, be diverted by using berms, channels or sediment traps as necessary. Erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed according to the size and slope of disturbed or drainage areas to detain stormwater runoff and trap sediment. Discharges from sediment basins and traps must be through a pipe or lined channel so that the discharge does not cause erosion. Muddy water to be pumped from excavation and work areas must be held in settling basins or treated by filtration prior to its discharge into surface waters where practicable. Waters must be discharged through a pipe or lined channel so that the discharge does not cause erosion and sedimentation; 
(11)  All control measures are inspected, and repaired as necessary, bi-weekly in dry periods and within 24 hours after any precipitation of 0.5 inches or more within a 24-hour period. During prolonged precipitation, daily inspections and repairing must be performed. The permittee shall maintain records of such inspections and repairs; 
(12)  A specific individual is designated to be responsible for erosion and sediment controls on each site; 
(13)  There shall be no distinctly visible floating scum, oil or other matter contained in the stormwater discharge. The stormwater discharge must not cause an objectionable color contrast in the receiving water. The stormwater discharge must result in no materials in concentrations sufficient to be hazardous or otherwise detrimental to humans, livestock, wildlife, plant life or fish and aquatic life in the receiving stream; and 
(14)  When the land disturbing activity is finished and stable, perennial vegetation has been established on all remaining exposed soil. The permittee shall notify the manager of these facts and submit an NOI of the permit issued under this section. The manager shall then provide a final inspection of the site within 20 days after receipt of such notice and, when advisable, may require additional measures to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. If such requirements are given by letter, the permittee shall continue to be covered by the provisions of this article until a request for termination of the permit has been accepted by the manager. 
(Code 1995, § 54-139; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 207-215-207-236. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT DIVISION 

Sec. 207-237. - Establishment and functions of division. 
    The city stormwater quality management division development services department is hereby created. Its functions shall be to design and implement compliance programs protecting the community's natural resources. 
(Code 1995, § 54-151; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-238. - Authority of stormwater quality manager. 
(a)  There shall be a manager of stormwater quality management who shall manage the stormwater quality management division. 
(b)  With respect to the city's compliance with environmental laws, the manager shall have the power and authority to perform the following acts: 
(1)  Carry out all inspections, surveillance, enforcement and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance; 
(2)  Administer the city's compliance with its NPDES permit to discharge from the municipal storm sewer system; 
(3)  Inspect city and commercial properties for the presence of hazardous substances, and develop and administer whatever remediation programs are required; 
(4)  Determine whether the city is in compliance with the federal and state Clean Water Acts, whether the city has obtained all permits required by federal and state environmental laws; and whether the city is in compliance with the permits it has; 
(5)  Audit use of herbicides, fertilizers and pesticides to determine compliance with the Clean Water Act and to recommend alternative solutions where practicable for the reduction of their use through education and out-reach programs; 
(6)  Control the discharge of spills and the dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater (e.g., industrial and commercial waste, trash, motor vehicle fluids, leaf litter, grass clippings, animal waste, etc.) into the municipal storm sewer system; 
(7)  Administer programs to identify and control pollutants from the transportation, storage, treatment and disposal of hazardous wastes; and monitor hazardous waste facilities that receive the city's Resource Conservation Recovery Act hazardous waste for treatment or disposal for compliance with NPDES permit requirements; 
(8)  Assist in the protection of drinking water and surface water bodies which are a source of the city's drinking water; 
(9)  Assist the city with the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, and with compliance with NPDES permit requirements; 
(10)  Monitor the city's compliance with all federal, state and local laws, except that: 
a.  Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws relating to discharge from the POTW is the responsibility of the wastewater department; 
b.  Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws relating to the production and distribution of drinking water is the responsibility of the water department; 
c.  Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws relating to the operation of the city's transfer station, recycling efforts and landfill programs is the responsibility of the sanitation department; and 
d.  Administering the city's compliance with state and federal laws relating to risk management and safety operations training and programs is the responsibility of the personnel and safety department; 
(11)  Perform such other administrative duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(c)  With respect to enforcement, the manager shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Investigate violations of and enforce those aspects of the Clean Water Act that are within the authority of local governments; 
(2)  Investigate violations of and enforce this article; 
(3)  Investigate violations of and enforce those provisions that relate to hazardous substances and spills although primary enforcement will remain with the city fire department; 
(4)  Investigate all other violations of and enforce environmental laws within the city and within the city's extended jurisdiction; 
(5)  Perform other environmental activities as may be required to ensure compliance of environmental regulations by the city and others within the city and its extended jurisdiction. 
(d)  With respect to other programs, the manager shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Monitor and coordinate with other city departments on the city's response to releases of hazardous substances; 
(2)  Review and assess the environmental hazards of real property involved in city land transactions; 
(3)  Monitor the use of city rights-of-way, property and easements by persons with use agreements for environmental monitoring; 
(4)  Establish and supervise a program for the collection of hazardous household waste; 
(5)  Create, promote, and publicize educational programs for environmental awareness; and 
(6)  Provide quantitative data through field screening programs. 
(Code 1995, § 54-152; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 207-239-207-269. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 207-270. - Monitoring. 
    The manager shall monitor the quantity of, and the concentration of, pollutants in stormwater discharges from the areas and locations as designated in the city stormwater management plan. 
(Code 1995, § 54-161; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-271. - Illicit connections and improper disposal. 
(a)  The manager shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate illicit connections to the stormwater drainage system, including the adoption of a program to screen illicit discharges and identify their sources. 
(b)  The manager shall take appropriate steps to detect and eliminate improper discharges, including instituting programs to screen for improper disposal and programs to provide for public education, public information and other appropriate activities to facilitate the proper management and disposal of used oil, toxic materials and hazardous household waste. 
(Code 1995, § 54-162; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-272. - Inspections. 
(a)  The manager, bearing proper credentials and identification, may enter and inspect all properties for regular periodic inspections, investigations, monitoring, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, to effectuate the provisions of this article and the stormwater management program. The manager shall duly notify the owner/operator and the inspection shall be conducted at reasonable times. 
(b)  In the event the manager reasonably believes that discharges from the property into the city's stormwater system may cause an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the environment, the inspection may take place at any place at any time and without notice to the owner/operator. The inspector shall present proper credentials upon reasonable request by the owner/operator. 
(c)  Upon refusal by any owner/operator to permit an inspector to enter or continue an inspection, the inspector shall terminate the inspection or confine the inspection to areas concerning which no objection is raised. The inspector shall immediately report the refusal and the grounds to the manager. The manager may seek appropriate compulsory process. 
(d)  At any time during the conduct of an inspection or at such other times as the manager may request information from an owner/operator, the owner/operator may identify areas of the property, facility or establishment, material or processes which contain or might reveal confidential information. If the manager has no clear and convincing reason to question such identification, the inspector shall nonetheless inspect; however, the inspection report shall not contain any of the confidential information. 
(Code 1995, § 54-163; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 207-273-207-292. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT 

Sec. 207-293. - Unauthorized discharge a public nuisance. 
    Discharge of stormwater in any manner in violation of this article or of any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this article or a stormwater discharge permit issued by the state is hereby declared a public nuisance and must be corrected or abated by the owner/operator. 
(Code 1995, § 54-171; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-294. - Illicit discharge and illegal dumping. 
    The following direct or indirect discharges into community waters or waters of the state are prohibited and shall be unlawful: 
(1)  Sewage dumping or dumping of sewage sludge; 
(2)  Chlorinated swimming pool discharge; 
(3)  Discharge of any polluted household wastewater such as, but not limited to, laundry washwater and dishwater, except to a sanitary sewer or septic system; 
(4)  Leaking sanitary sewers and connections, which shall have remained uncorrected for seven days or more; 
(5)  Leaking water lines that shall have remained uncorrected for seven days or more; 
(6)  Commercial, industrial or public vehicle wash or power wash discharge; 
(7)  Garage, rubbish or sanitary waste disposal; 
(8)  Dead animals or animal fecal waste; 
(9)  Non-stormwater discharges, except pursuant to a permit issued by the state and the city; 
(10)  Dredged or spoil material; 
(11)  Solid waste; 
(12)  Chemical waste; and 
(13)  Wrecked or discarded vehicles or equipment. 
(Code 1995, § 54-172; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-295. - Prohibition of pollutant discharge not covered by the NPDES permit. 
(a)  Every person who is or who is planning to carry out any of the activities requiring a permit shall obtain such a permit prior to carrying out such activities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry out any of the following activities, except in accordance with the conditions of a valid permit: 
(1)  The alteration of the physical, chemical, radiological, biological or bacteriological properties of any of waters of the state or community waters; 
(2)  The construction, installation, modification or operation of any treatments works or part thereof, or any extension or addition thereto; 
(3)  The increase in volume or strength of any wastes in excess of permissive discharges specified under any existing permit; 
(4)  The development of a natural resource or the construction, installation or operation of any establishment or any extension or modification thereof or addition thereto, the operation of which will or is likely to cause an increase in the discharge of wastes into the waters of the state or would otherwise alter the physical, chemical, radiological, biological or bacteriological properties of any waters of the state in any manner not already lawfully authorized; 
(5)  The construction or use of any new outlet for the discharge of any wastes into the waters of the state; 
(6)  The discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into waters, or a location from which it is likely that the discharged substance will move into waters; and 
(7)  The discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into a well or a location where it is likely that the discharged substance will move into a well, or the underground placement of fluids and other substances which do or may affect the waters of the state. 
(Code 1995, § 54-173; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-296. - Discharges. 
(a)  In the event of a significant spill or any other discharge that could constitute a threat to human health or the environment, the discharger, the owner/operator or the facility shall give notice to the manager and the field office of the DEQ as soon as practicable, but in no event later than the close of business on the day following the significant spill or other discharge or the day the discharger, owner/operator or the facility becomes aware of the discharge. If an emergency response by governmental agencies is needed, the discharger must also call 911 immediately to report the discharge. A written report must be provided within five days of the time the discharger becomes aware of the discharge, unless this requirement is waived by the manager for good cause shown, on a case-by-case basis, containing the following particulars: 
(1)  A reasonably precise description of the discharge; 
(2)  The exact date and time of discharge; and 
(3)  Steps being taken to eliminate and prevent recurrence of the discharge. 
(b)  The owner/operator shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any adverse impact to the community waters or the waters of the state, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the discharge. It shall not be a defense for the discharger in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the business or activity of the facility in order to maintain water quality and minimize any adverse impact that the discharge may cause. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 54-174; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-297. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Whenever the manager finds that any permittee or any person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this article, or a stormwater permit or order issued hereunder, the manager may serve upon said person or permittee written notice of the violation. Within ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability or criminal prosecution for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  The manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the compliance or for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger and the owner/operator to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  The manager has the authority to order any person who causes or contributes to a violation of this article or stormwater permit or order issued hereunder to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any individual or the individual or the principal executive, general partner or manager of any legal entity or person of legal age at the office or business address of the permittee. 
(d)  When the manager finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this article or a permit or order issued thereunder, the manager may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specified time period, adequate structures or devices be installed or procedures implemented and properly operated, supervised and administrated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-monitoring and best management practices. 
(e)  When the manager finds that any person has violated or continues to violate this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, the manager may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; or 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(f)  A person receiving an order may file a written notice of appeal with the director and manager, no later than the tenth calendar day after receipt of the order. Such notice shall include an explanation as to why the person believes the enforcement action should not be taken. The director shall determine whether the appeal has merit. If the director determines that the appeal has merit, he shall rescind the order. 
(Code 1995, § 54-175; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-298. - Declared unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Violate any provision of this article; 
(2)  Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful notice to abate issued by the manager within the time specified by such notice; or 
(4)  Violate any lawful order of the manager within the time allowed by such order. 
(b)  Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment for each offense. Each and every day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1995, § 54-176; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-299. - Judicial proceedings and relief. 
(a)  The manager is authorized to initiate proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person who has or is about to: 
(1)  Violate the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Violate the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(3)  Fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order issued by the manager, which has not been timely appealed to the appropriate court within the time allowed by this article; 
(4)  Violate any lawful order within the time allowed by such order. 
(b)  Any person found to have committed any act declared unlawful or failing to perform any act required by or under this article shall be in violation of this article and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment for not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense. Each and every day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The manager, with consent of the city council, may also initiate civil proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction seeking monetary damages for any damages caused to publicly owned stormwater facilities by any person, and to seek injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce compliance with the provisions of this article or to enforce compliance with any lawful orders. 
(d)  The manager, with the consent of the director, may petition the DEQ to regulate and prosecute stormwater dischargers which cannot be adequately controlled by municipal resources. 
(Code 1995, § 54-177; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Secs. 207-300-207-316. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RECONSIDERATION; HEARINGS; VARIANCES 

Sec. 207-317. - Reconsideration. 
(a)  Any person subject to a denial of a permit issued under this chapter, a compliance order, a stop work order, an emergency suspension of utility service, or any other enforcement action in this chapter which allows for reconsideration and hearing under this article, may petition the stormwater regulations board to reconsider the basis for the action. In order for the petition to be reconsidered, it shall be filed with the director or the manager no later than the tenth calendar day after receipt of the notice/order. 
(b)  Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the action. 
(c)  In its petition, the petitioner shall indicate the action objected to, and the reasons for the objections, any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, whether the petitioner requests a hearing on its petition and the address where notice of hearing will be received and accepted. 
(d)  The effect of a compliance order or stop work order shall be stayed pending the stormwater regulations board's ruling on the petition for reconsideration, and any hearing thereon, unless the stormwater regulations board expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effect of an emergency suspension of utilities shall not be stayed pending the stormwater regulations board ruling on the petition or any hearing, unless the stormwater regulations board expressly, and in writing, stays the emergency order. 
(e)  Within a reasonable time of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the stormwater regulations board shall either grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order or modify or grant the permit accordingly; deny the petition if no material issue of fact is raised, or, if a hearing has been requested and/or a material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the petition. 
(Code 1995, § 54-181; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-318. - Hearings. 
(a)  The director is authorized to set a hearing if the director determines that a show cause hearing should be conducted, if grounds exist to revoke or suspend a permit issued under this chapter, or if grounds exist to terminate utilities on a non-emergency basis. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing shall be served on a petitioner/violator at least ten days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be served in person or by fax or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  Notices shall specify the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  Notice that is mailed shall be deemed received five days after it is placed in a mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service. 
(e)  No decision may be rendered at a hearing by reason of the petitioner/violator's failure to appear unless proof of service is shown. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, the stormwater regulations board shall be empowered to administer oaths and to promulgate procedural rules for the conduct of the hearing. 
(g)  Whenever any deadline specified in this section falls upon a Saturday, Sunday or a city-recognized holiday, the deadline shall be the next regular city business day. 
(h)  The date of an order or ruling required to be made under this section shall be deemed to be the date it is signed. 
(i)  Decisions shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. The city shall have the burden of proof in all hearings except permit denial hearings. In permit denial hearings, the burden of proof shall be on the petitioner. 
(j)  The chairperson shall act as the hearing officer. 
(k)  After the conclusion of the hearing, the stormwater regulations board shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall issue a written decision without undue delay. 
(l)  A hearing shall exhaust all administrative remedies of the petitioner/violator. 
(Code 1995, § 54-182; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Sec. 207-319. - Variances. 
(a)  The stormwater regulations board may grant a revocable variance from the requirements of this article; provided, to do so would not result in the violation of any state or federal law or regulation and if exceptional circumstances applicable to the site exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship and will not result in a condition contrary to the intent of the article. 
(b)  A written petition for a variance shall be required and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, why a variance should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. The petition shall be filed with the director. 
(c)  The stormwater regulations board shall conduct a review of the request for a variance within ten days after receipt and may either support the petition or may object to the petition. If the stormwater regulations board objects to the variance, the stormwater regulations board shall state the reasons therefor. 
(d)  Once the stormwater regulations board's review is complete or the ten days for review have expired, the petition shall be subject to action at the discretion of the stormwater regulations board. 
(Code 1995, § 54-183; Ord. No. 1125, § 1, 6-3-2003) 
Chapter 210 - MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Liability insurance required, 47 O.S. § 7-607(B); permit to move manufactured homes required, 47 O.S. § 14-103(D); defined, 47 O.S. § 1102.11; standards for factory-built housing generally, 63 O.S. § 1084. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 210-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dependent mobile home means a mobile home which does not have a flush toilet and bath or shower. For purposes of regulation under this chapter, the term "dependent mobile home" shall be considered to be the same as a travel trailer, unless otherwise specified. 
    Emergency means any condition or circumstance in which the building inspector finds that the health, safety and general welfare of the public is being jeopardized or otherwise violated. 
    Freestanding mobile home or travel trailer means any mobile home or travel trailer not located in a mobile home park or travel trailer park licensed by the city or in an approved mobile home subdivision. 
    Independent mobile home means a mobile home which has a flush toilet and a bath or shower. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this chapter, the term "mobile home" shall mean an independent mobile home. 
    Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Mobile home means a single-family dwelling designed for transportation on streets and highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailers, on either highway or rail, and arriving at the place where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or permanent foundations, connection to utilities and similar operations. Unless otherwise indicated in the text of this chapter, the term "mobile home" shall refer to an "independent mobile home." 
    Mobile home park means any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home, and not located on a mobile home sales lot. 
    Mobile home subdivision means a subdivision designed and intended for residential use where residence is in mobile homes exclusively, and mobile home lots are sold for occupancy. 
    Motor home means a truck or van-type motor vehicle equipped with a self-contained living compartment that is an integral part of the vehicle chassis (including recreational vehicles) or a pickup truck to which it is attached, either permanently or temporarily, a unit commonly referred to as a camper body, designed and constructed so as to provide living quarters consisting of at least facilities for cooking and sleeping and not as a permanent residence. 
    Park means a mobile home park, a travel trailer park or a mixed park. 
    Primary thoroughfare means any public right-of-way which is designated as a state or federal highway or expressway or any section line street as noted on the map of the city. 
    Public water system or public sewer system means any such system built and owned by, or dedicated to and accepted by, the city. All other such systems are private. 
    Rural means any area zoned single-family or agriculturally and which is rural and undeveloped and does not contain more than one residence for each five acres. 
    Service building means a building housing toilet and bathing facilities for men or women, and may also include buildings containing laundry facilities and other facilities as required by this chapter or desired by the park operator. 
    Subdivision means a mobile home subdivision, unless otherwise indicated. 
    Travel trailer means a nonself-propelled land vehicle, equipped with living facilities, designed to be towed by a motor vehicle and not used as a permanent residence. 
    Travel trailer park means any plot of ground upon which two or more travel trailers, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Travel trailer space means a plot of ground within a travel trailer park designed for the accommodation of one travel trailer. 
    Urban means any area shown in the Yukon General Plan for urban intensity development. 
(Code 1975, § 13-1; Code 1995, § 66-1) 
Sec. 210-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place or locate a mobile home or travel trailer at any place within the city, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 13-2; Code 1995, § 66-2) 
Sec. 210-3. - Inspector to enforce chapter. 
    The building inspector and the city engineer shall have the power to inspect the outside premises of private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter and regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 13-3; Code 1995, § 66-3) 
Sec. 210-4. - Freestanding mobile homes and travel trailers generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, no freestanding mobile home shall be permitted in the city, unless it is actively being offered for sale; and no freestanding travel trailer shall be permitted in the urban area, unless it is being actively offered for sale. Except for mobile homes or travel trailers within regular commercial mobile home or travel trailer sales lots, each such freestanding mobile home or travel trailer offered for sale must be clearly marked as such, shall not be occupied for either living or sleeping purposes, and must be removed from the premises when sold, or within 120 days, if not sold. 
(b)  Freestanding mobile homes and travel trailers may be parked on sales lots for the purpose of inspection and sale. No mobile home or travel trailer sales lot shall be located except in compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  The operation of trailers by contractors on construction projects for which building permits have been issued or which are otherwise approved by the building inspector is permitted during the term of such construction project. 
(d)  The parking of only one unoccupied freestanding travel trailer in an accessory private garage building or in a rear yard is permitted on the premises or any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of an occupied dwelling, provided no living quarters are maintained therein and no business of any kind is conducted therein while such trailer is so parked or stored. 
(e)  Emergency or temporary parking or stopping of mobile homes and travel trailers is permitted on any street, alley or highway, for no longer than two hours, subject to any other prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for such street, alley or highway. 
(Code 1975, § 13-4; Code 1995, § 66-4) 
Sec. 210-5. - Use of freestanding mobile home or travel trailer as residence on tract of five acres or more. 
(a)  An owner of any tract of land of five acres or more which is zoned agricultural may park a freestanding mobile home or travel trailer on such tract of land at a density not to exceed one freestanding unit per each five acres and use the same for the residence of himself, a grandparent, parent or child, provided he first makes application for and receives a conditional use permit from the city. The application shall set forth all necessary information that may be requested for the proper consideration of the application. 
(b)  The application for a permit under this section shall first be submitted to and be considered by the planning commission, which shall make its findings and recommendations thereon and submit the same to the city council for its consideration, the city council may impose such conditions, restrictions and requirements upon the applicant, as a prerequisite to the issuance of the permit, as the city council shall deem necessary. The city council, in its discretion, may approve or reject the application, and the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(c)  Upon the approval of the application for a permit under this section by the city council, the owner of the tract of land shall obtain the permit from the building inspector by paying a permit fee as set by the city council by resolution. Such permit shall set forth the terms and conditions under which the same is issued, as ordered and directed by the city council. The permit shall be renewed each year, at the annual date of its issuance, by request to the city manager and by showing proof that the mobile home or travel trailer is being used by the owner of the tract of land as his residence, and that the owner is complying with all the terms and conditions under which the permit was issued, as ordered and directed by the city council. 
(d)  If it is determined by the city manager that a mobile home or travel trailer covered by a permit issued under this section is being used for any purpose other than the residence of the owner of the tract of land, or if the owner is not complying with the terms and conditions under which the permit was issued, the permit shall be revoked. 
(Code 1975, § 13-5; Code 1995, § 66-5; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 210-6. - Compliance with housing code. 
    Every mobile home located in a mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision and every freestanding mobile home shall comply with the housing code of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 13-6; Code 1995, § 66-6) 
Sec. 210-7. - Storage and parking in residential districts. 
(a)  Commercial vehicles, motor homes, boats, boats and trailers, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, and cargo hauling, utility, and travel trailers shall not be parked, stored, or occupied on any public street, or any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following conditions and provisions: 
(1)  Inside parking shall be permitted. 
(2)  Outside parking in the side yard, as defined in the zoning ordinance, behind the front building line shall be permitted. 
(3)  Outside parking in the rear yard shall be permitted. 
(4)  Front yard parking shall be permitted so long as it is on a hard surface area, being continuous asphalt or concrete. 
(5)  Commercial vehicles, motor homes, boats, boats and trailers, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, and cargo hauling, utility, camping and travel trailers, and mobile homes shall not be greater than 102 inches in width. The body, including the bumper and tongue of motor homes and travel trailers, and all of the vehicle including the bumper and tongue shall be at least 12 feet from the face of the curb, or if there is no curb, then 12 feet from the edge of the pavement. 
(6)  No part of the commercial vehicle, motor home, boat, boat and trailer, boat trailer, camper shell not attached to a vehicle, or cargo hauling, utility, camping or travel trailer, or mobile home shall extend over the public sidewalk or street. 
(7)  No sight triangle as required by ordinance shall be violated. 
(8)  Parking is permitted only if the motor home or travel trailer, while parked in this zone, is: 
a.  Not used for dwelling purposes, except one motor home or travel trailer may be used by the owner or tenant of the premises, friends, relatives or guests for dwelling purposes for a maximum of 21 days in any calendar year, and a maximum of 14 days at any one time on any given lot; provided that such motor home or travel trailer shall not be connected to any utility, other than temporary electrical hookups; and provided further that the host person shall receive no compensation for such occupancy or use; provided no such motor home or travel trailer shall discharge any litter, sewage, effluent or other matter, except into sanitary facilities designed to dispose of such material; 
b.  Not permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines, or electricity. The motor home or travel trailer may only be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries. Hookup facilities shall comply with applicable state law and the National Electrical Code; and 
c.  Not used for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the motor home or travel trailer or essential for its immediate use. 
(b)  No commercial vehicle which exceeds 14,500 pounds gross vehicle weight and in no case a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products shall be permitted. 
(c)  Commercial vehicles not otherwise prohibited, motor homes, boats, boat and trailer, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, and travel trailers may be parked anywhere on the premises during active loading or unloading for a period not to exceed 72 hours; provided: 
(1)  No electricity or propane fuel is used, except when necessary to prepare the commercial vehicle, motor home, boats, boat and trailer, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, and travel trailer for use; 
(2)  No part of the commercial vehicle, motor home, boats, boat and trailer, boat trailers, camper shells not attached to a vehicle, cargo hauling, utility, and travel trailer extends over the public sidewalk or within six feet of the face of the curb, or if there is no curb, then six feet from the edge of the pavement; and 
(3)  No sight triangle as required by ordinance is violated. 
(d)  Prior to a motor home or travel trailer being used for temporary dwelling purposes as permitted in subsection (a)(8)a of this section, a permit shall be obtained from the city police department. A permit fee established by resolution shall be paid by the person making application for the permit. Payment of the required fee and compliance with all the provisions of this chapter shall entitle the applicant to a permit. The police department shall establish procedures to identify vehicles for which a permit has been obtained. 
(Code 1975, § 13-7; Code 1995, § 66-7; Ord. No. 993, 8-5-1997) 
Secs. 210-8-210-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FREESTANDING MOBILE HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS USED FOR OFFICE PURPOSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 210-33. - Application of and compliance with article. 
    This article shall apply to freestanding mobile homes and travel trailers and other temporary buildings used for office purposes and any person desiring to so use such a mobile home, travel trailer or other temporary building shall comply with the terms, conditions and requirements of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 13-17; Code 1995, § 66-31) 
Sec. 210-34. - Location restricted. 
    A mobile home, travel trailer or temporary building governed by this article shall be located only in an industrial or commercial zoning district and shall be consistent with the surrounding and adjoining land uses and structures. 
(Code 1975, § 13-18; Code 1995, § 66-32) 
Sec. 210-35. - Required modifications and equipment; to be used as office only. 
    A mobile home, travel trailer or temporary building governed by this article shall be sufficiently modified to preclude all living room and bedroom furniture and fixtures, and be equipped with normal office furnishings and equipment, and shall be used as an office and for no other purpose, except that the occupancy of a mobile home or travel trailer is permitted for a full-time salaried night watchman and his family. 
(Code 1975, § 13-19; Code 1995, § 66-33) 
Sec. 210-36. - Connection to city utilities. 
    A mobile home, travel trailer or temporary building governed by this article shall be connected to the city utilities, provided such utilities are within 150 feet of the property line of the property upon which the structure is located. 
(Code 1975, § 13-20; Code 1995, § 66-34) 
Secs. 210-37-210-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TEMPORARY USE PERMIT 

Sec. 210-61. - Required. 
    No person shall use any freestanding mobile home or travel trailer or any other temporary building for office purposes, unless he has a currently valid temporary use permit issued in accord with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 13-26; Code 1995, § 66-46) 
Sec. 210-62. - Application. 
    Application for a permit under this division shall be submitted to the city council. Such application shall set forth the kind of business to be conducted and all necessary information that may be required for the proper consideration of the application. The city council, in its discretion, may approve or reject the application, and its decision shall be final. 
(Code 1975, § 13-27; Code 1995, § 66-47) 
Sec. 210-63. - Prerequisites to issuance. 
    The city council may impose such conditions, restrictions and requirements upon the applicant, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit applied for under this division, as the city council shall deem necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 13-28; Code 1995, § 66-48) 
Sec. 210-64. - Issuance procedure; fee; contents. 
    Upon the approval of an application by the city council, the applicant shall obtain a temporary use permit required by this division from the city clerk, by paying a permit fee established by resolution. Such permit shall set forth its expiration date and the terms and conditions under which the same is issued, as ordered and directed by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-29; Code 1995, § 66-49) 
Sec. 210-65. - Term. 
    A permit issued under this division shall be valid for such period of time, not exceeding one year, as if fixed by the city council, unless sooner revoked. 
(Code 1975, § 13-30; Code 1995, § 66-50) 
Sec. 210-66. - Not transferable. 
    No permit issued under the provisions of this division, or any renewal thereof, shall be transferable. 
(Code 1975, § 13-31; Code 1995, § 66-51) 
Sec. 210-67. - Renewal. 
    At the expiration date of a temporary use permit issued under this division, the original holder of such permit may make request to the city council for a renewal of the permit, by showing proof that such original permit has not been transferred; that the mobile home, travel trailer or temporary building is being used as an office and for no other purpose, except as provided in section 210-35; that the original holder of such permit is conducting the same kind of business for which the permit was issued; and that the original holder of such permit is complying with all the terms and conditions under which the original permit was issued, as ordered and directed by the city council. The city council, in its discretion, may approve or reject such request for the renewal of the permit, and the decision of the city council shall be final. No additional permit fee shall be charged for such renewal. 
(Code 1975, § 13-32; Code 1995, § 66-52) 
Sec. 210-68. - Revocation. 
    If, at any time, it shall be determined by the city council that an original temporary use permit issued under this division, or any renewal thereof, has been transferred by the original holder of such permit to any other person, or that the mobile home, travel trailer or temporary building is being used for any other purpose other than an office, except as provided in section 210-35, or that the original holder of such permit is not conducting the same kind of business for which the permit was issued, or that the holder of such permit is not complying with the terms and conditions under which the permit was issued, the permit shall be revoked by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-33; Code 1995, § 66-53) 
Sec. 210-69. - Not intended for use in residential and fully developed areas of city. 
    It is the intent of the city council that temporary use permits for mobile homes and travel trailers used for night watchmen and their families shall be located only in areas not served by regular police patrols and that such use shall not be adjacent to residential areas or in fully developed areas of the city. Such uses shall be limited to areas south of I-40, west of a point which is one-half mile west of Eleventh Street from the south city limits to Main Street; north of Main Street from the west city limits to Eleventh Street; north of Ash from Eleventh Street to Cornwell; north of Wagner Road from Cornwell east to the east city limits; and an area one-quarter mile north of Main Street and south of Main Street from the east city limits to Mustang Road. 
(Code 1975, § 13-34; Code 1995, § 66-54) 
Secs. 210-70-210-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME, RV AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 210-97. - Applicability of other city ordinances. 
    All ordinances enacted by the city pertaining to traffic and vehicles, the control of pets and other animals, and the prevention of crime shall be fully effective within a park as though streets and driveways were dedicated to public use, and the consent and agreement of the owner of the park and streets and highways thereto shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a license for the operation of the park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-44; Code 1995, § 66-76) 
Sec. 210-98. - Building permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to construct a mobile home park or travel trailer park or make any additions to a mobile home park or travel trailer park shall, before commencing work thereon, secure a written permit from the building inspector so to do, and no physical improvements shall be begun and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, repaired or added to, unless a written permit therefor has been previously secured. The application for a building permit shall contain a plot plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. Such plot plan shall show: 
(1)  The area and dimensions of the tract of land. 
(2)  The number, location and size of all mobile home or travel trailer spaces. 
(3)  The location and width of roadways, walkways, buffer strips and recreational areas. 
(4)  The location of service buildings and other proposed structures. 
(5)  Provisions for drainage. 
(6)  The location and size of utility lines and treatment facilities. 
(7)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the park, including a detailed sketch of at least one typical trailer space. Ten copies of the plot plan shall be submitted with the application for a building permit. 
(b)  The fee for the permit provided for in this section shall be as prescribed in section 204-30. 
(Code 1975, § 13-45; Code 1995, § 66-77) 
Sec. 210-99. - Permit to construct mobile home or travel trailer space. 
    A permit issued by the building inspector shall be required for the construction of a mobile home space or a travel trailer space in a park. This section shall not be applicable to spaces authorized by the initial building permit issued for the park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-46; Code 1995, § 66-78) 
Sec. 210-100. - Plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs. 
    All plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs in a park shall be made in accordance with the ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 13-47; Code 1995, § 66-79) 
Sec. 210-101. - Additions or alterations to exterior of mobile homes. 
    A permit issued by the building inspector shall be required before any structural addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile home takes place in a mobile home park. No addition or alteration to the exterior of a mobile home located in a mobile home park shall be permitted, unless of the same type of construction or materials as the mobile home affected. All such additions or alterations shall be in compliance with applicable state statutes and city ordinances. No permit under this section shall be required for the addition of steps, canopies, awnings or antennas. 
(Code 1975, § 13-48; Code 1995, § 66-80) 
Sec. 210-102. - Skirting of mobile homes. 
    Skirting of mobile homes in a park is permissible, but areas enclosed by such skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a harborage for rodents or create a fire hazard. 
(Code 1975, § 13-49; Code 1995, § 66-81) 
Sec. 210-103. - Structures other than mobile homes on mobile home spaces. 
    No structure other than a mobile home shall be permitted on a mobile home space in a park, except that one structure not to exceed 250 cubic feet may be used for storage on each such space. 
(Code 1975, § 13-50; Code 1995, § 66-82) 
Sec. 210-104. - Minimum height of power supply lines. 
    No power supply line in a park shall be suspended less than 18 feet above the ground, unless otherwise approved by the building inspector. 
(Code 1975, § 13-51; Code 1995, § 66-83) 
Sec. 210-105. - Exterior lighting requirements. 
    Exterior lighting shall be provided as necessary for safety and convenience of occupants of the park. Streets, areas at the entrances to buildings used by occupants at night, and walkways for use at night shall be lighted at night, when the park is occupied, with a minimum illumination of at least 0.3 footcandle. All lights shall be so located and shielded as to prevent direct illumination of sleeping areas. 
(Code 1975, § 13-52; Code 1995, § 66-84) 
Sec. 210-106. - Electrical outlets. 
    An electrical outlet supplying at least 100 amperes shall be provided for each mobile home space and travel trailer space in a park. The installation shall comply with the electrical code and all other applicable ordinances. Such electrical outlets and extension lines shall be grounded and weatherproofed. Plug receptacles shall also be grounded and weatherproofed. 
(Code 1975, § 13-53; Code 1995, § 66-85) 
Sec. 210-107. - Fuel piping. 
    All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes or travel trailers in a park shall be of acceptable material, as determined by the building inspector, and shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath the mobile home or travel trailer or less than five feet from any mobile home or travel trailer exit. 
(Code 1975, § 13-54; Code 1995, § 66-86) 
Sec. 210-108. - General maintenance standards; responsibility of attendant or caretaker for violations of article. 
    The licensee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to keep the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition and free from any unsightly condition or condition that will be a menace to the health of any park occupant or the public. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this article to which the licensee is subject. 
(Code 1975, § 13-55; Code 1995, § 66-87) 
Sec. 210-109. - To be kept free of litter, rubbish and flammable materials. 
    Park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and flammable materials. 
(Code 1975, § 13-56; Code 1995, § 66-88) 
Sec. 210-110. - Igniting of fires. 
    Fires in parks shall be made or ignited only in stoves and other cooking or heating equipment intended for such purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 13-57; Code 1995, § 66-89) 
Sec. 210-111. - Occupants to give owner access to premises. 
    It shall be the duty of every occupant of a park to give the owner thereof or his agents or employees access to any part of the park or his premises, at reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article, or with any lawful regulations adopted hereunder, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 13-58; Code 1995, § 66-90) 
Sec. 210-112. - Guest register. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep a register containing a record of all mobile home and travel trailer owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or occupant of each mobile home and travel trailer and motor vehicle by which it is towed. 
(2)  The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home and travel trailer and motor vehicle. 
(3)  The state, territory or country issuing such license. 
(4)  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home and travel trailer. 
(5)  Whether or not a mobile home is a dependent or independent mobile home. 
(b)  The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, the building inspector, the city engineer, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record of each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of one year following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-59; Code 1995, § 66-91) 
Sec. 210-113. - Inspections. 
    The building inspector and the city engineer are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of mobile home and travel trailer parks located within the city, in order to perform their duty of safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of occupants of mobile home and travel trailer parks and of the general public. 
(Code 1975, § 13-60; Code 1995, § 66-92) 
Secs. 210-114-210-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT 

Sec. 210-140. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain a park within the city, without first having obtained a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 13-66; Code 1995, § 66-106) 
Sec. 210-141. - Applicant may be required to furnish plot plan. 
    Upon request of the planning commission or the city council, the applicant for a conditional use permit for a park shall furnish a plot plan meeting the requirements of section 210-98. 
(Code 1975, § 13-67; Code 1995, § 66-107) 
Sec. 210-142. - Prerequisites to issuance. 
    The city council shall require, as a prerequisite for the issuance of a conditional use permit required by this division, the following: 
(1)  The granting of an easement for public utilities, sidewalks and street or road purposes, or to widen existing streets or roads adjoining the park; and the paving of one-half of any unpaved street or road adjacent to or adjoining the park or widening and paving the widened portion of any paved street or road adjacent to or adjoining the park. 
(2)  Where the park is adjoining or adjacent to a city street or streets, or where streets within the park are dedicated to public use, such streets, or the widening thereof, shall be in accordance with the standard street specifications of the city. Where the park is adjoining or adjacent to a city street or streets, the owner shall install sidewalks in the manner required for sidewalks in R-1 residential districts. 
(3)  The reservation of space for recreation or play areas shall constitute at least eight percent of the gross land area and should be provided in a central location. Provisions for separate adult and tot lots are encouraged. 
(4)  Suitable screening or fencing to protect adjoining property owners. 
(Code 1975, § 13-68; Code 1995, § 66-108) 
Sec. 210-143. - Failure to commence or complete construction after issuance. 
(a)  If the permittee has not commenced the construction of the park within 12 months from the date of the issuance of the conditional use permit, the city council may thereafter revoke the permit. 
(b)  If the permittee has commenced the construction of the park within 12 months from the date of granting the conditional use permit, but has not substantially completed the construction of the park in accordance with the park plans submitted to the city, the city manager shall so advise the city council and the city council may revoke the conditional use permit or may extend the time for the completion of the construction of the park, or may authorize a change in the park plan or revoke the conditional use permit as to that part of the land on which the park has not been constructed. 
(Code 1975, § 13-69; Code 1995, § 66-109) 
Sec. 210-144. - Transfer. 
    A conditional use permit for a park may not be transferred by the permittee prior to the complete construction of the park in accordance with the park plans submitted to and approved by the city. After a park is constructed, the conditional use permit shall be transferred to each subsequent owner of the park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-70; Code 1995, § 66-110) 
Secs. 210-145-210-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE 

Sec. 210-172. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any park within the limits of the city, unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 13-76; Code 1995, § 66-121) 
Sec. 210-173. - Application. 
    Application for an original park license shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The interest of the applicant in the location and legal description of the park. 
(3)  A complete plot plan of the park showing compliance with all applicable provisions of this article, the zoning ordinance of the city and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(4)  Such further information as may be requested by the building inspector or the city engineer related to the foregoing and consistent with the intent of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 13-77; Code 1995, § 66-122) 
Sec. 210-174. - Fee. 
    There shall be paid to the city clerk an annual license fee for each park, which fee shall be in an amount established by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 13-78; Code 1995, § 66-123) 
Sec. 210-175. - Issuance. 
    A park license will be issued by the city clerk after notification by the building inspector and city engineer that minimum requirements have been complied with and that the park is permitted by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 13-79; Code 1995, § 66-124) 
Sec. 210-176. - Posting. 
    A park license issued under this division shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the premises of the park at all times. 
(Code 1975, § 13-80; Code 1995, § 66-125) 
Sec. 210-177. - Transfer. 
(a)  Application for the transfer of a park license shall be made to the city clerk, who shall issue a license to the transferee, upon approval of the building inspector and upon compliance by the applicant with all pertinent provisions of this article and other ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(b)  Every person holding such a park license shall notify the city clerk, in writing, within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of his interest in or control of the licensed park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-81; Code 1995, § 66-126) 
Sec. 210-178. - Expiration and renewal. 
    A license issued under this division shall expire one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewed annually thereafter. Applications for renewals of park licenses shall be made in writing by the holder of the license and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Any change in the information submitted since the time the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. 
(2)  Other information as may be requested by the building inspector or city engineer consistent with the intent of this article. 
(3)  Where any change in the park has been made since the time of the information submitted for the original license or the latest renewal thereof, the applicant for a renewal of such license shall furnish the information required to be submitted by section 210-98, or so much of such information as the city clerk shall require. 
(Code 1975, § 13-82; Code 1995, § 66-127) 
Sec. 210-179. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Whenever the building inspector or the city engineer determines that a violation of any provision of this article or other applicable ordinances or regulations exists in a park, he shall give notice of such violation to the park licensee. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance. 
(3)  Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(4)  Specify a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, for the performance of any act it requires, and inform the licensee that his license will be suspended if such act is not completed within such time. 
(5)  Be served upon the licensee or his agent; provided that, such notice shall be deemed as properly served upon the licensee or his agent when a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to his last known address. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the time specified in the notice given pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the building inspector or the city engineer shall inspect the park and, if the remedial action required by such notice has not been taken or completed, he shall suspend the park license. The park licensee or his agent shall be given notice of such suspension, which notice shall be served in the manner prescribed in subsection (a)(5) of this section and shall advise the licensee that he has ten days in which to cease operation of the park or appeal to the city council. If such appeal is not taken within such time, the license shall be deemed automatically revoked and it shall be unlawful for the licensee or any other person to continue the operation of the park. 
(c)  The licensee upon whom a notice of suspension has been served pursuant to subsection (b) of this section may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council. Such person shall file with the building inspector a written request for such hearing, setting forth briefly the grounds for such request, within ten days after the day the notice of suspension was served. The hearing shall be held at the next city council meeting for which the agenda has not been completed, or at a later meeting, if so requested by the petitioner, should the building inspector determine sufficient cause for such delay exists. 
(d)  After the hearing provided for in subsection (c) of this section, the city council shall issue an order, in writing, sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the prior notice, which order shall be served as provided in subsection (a)(5) of this section. Upon failure to comply with such order, the building inspector shall issue an order declaring the license of the park to be revoked after ten days, which shall be provided to allow the licensee to file an appeal with the district court. Such order shall be in writing and delivered in person or by certified mail. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, whenever the building inspector or the city engineer finds that, by reason of a violation of this article or other applicable ordinance or regulation, an emergency exists in a park, which emergency requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the park license. Such order shall be in writing and shall be effective immediately, notwithstanding any other provision of this section. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the city council, shall be afforded a hearing at the next regular meeting, even if the agenda has been completed. The provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
(Code 1975, § 13-83; Code 1995, § 66-128) 
Secs. 210-180-210-196. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL LAYOUT AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 210-197. - Park types designated. 
    Parks shall be of three types as follows: 
(1)  Mobile home parks. 
(2)  Travel trailer parks. 
(3)  Mixed mobile home and travel trailer parks. 
(Code 1975, § 13-90; Code 1995, § 66-141) 
Sec. 210-198. - Separation of mobile homes and travel trailers in mixed parks. 
    In a mixed park, separate areas shall be reserved for mobile homes and for travel trailers. No mobile home shall be permitted in the travel trailer sector and no travel trailer shall be permitted in the mobile home sector. 
(Code 1975, § 13-91; Code 1995, § 66-142) 
Sec. 210-199. - Site drainage. 
    All parks shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. Drainage shall not endanger any water supply, and shall conform to the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 13-92; Code 1995, § 66-143) 
Sec. 210-200. - Minimum area. 
    The minimum area of any park shall be five acres. 
(Code 1975, § 13-93; Code 1995, § 66-144) 
Sec. 210-201. - Intensity of development. 
    Intensity of development shall be limited to no more than eight mobile homes per gross acre for a mobile home park and no more than 15 travel trailers per gross acre for a travel trailer park; provided that, in no case, shall the intensity of the land use exceed 40 percent of the land area in any acre. Area used for sewage treatment facilities shall not be included in density computations. 
(Code 1975, § 13-94; Code 1995, § 66-145) 
Sec. 210-202. - Major means of ingress and egress. 
    Mobile home parks shall have their major means of ingress and egress on at least a secondary thoroughfare. Travel trailer parks and mixed parks shall have their major means of ingress and egress on at least a primary thoroughfare. 
(Code 1975, § 13-95; Code 1995, § 66-146) 
Sec. 210-203. - Buffer strip. 
    All parks shall have and maintain a buffer strip of a minimum of three feet in width along all park boundaries not bordering a street. Such strip shall be bordered by a sightproof fence or screen not less than six feet in height constructed on the park boundary line; provided, however, that upon the recommendation of the building inspector and the city engineer, and with the approval of the city council, some other proper and suitable form of screening may be used. 
(Code 1975, § 13-96; Code 1995, § 66-147) 
Sec. 210-204. - Streets. 
(a)  All mobile home spaces and travel trailer spaces in a park shall abut upon a street of not less than 26 feet in width. Such streets must have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
(b)  All streets within a park shall be constructed with a minimum of two inches of asphaltic concrete on a six-inch stabilized aggregate or four-inch hot-sand subbase with a plus 25 Hveem. Such streets shall have a curb and gutter section approved by the city engineer and all materials used shall meet the paving specifications of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 13-97; Code 1995, § 66-148) 
Sec. 210-205. - Mobile home and travel trailer spaces generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a mobile home or travel trailer to be located in a park, unless it is placed in a designated mobile home space or travel trailer space, respectively. 
(b)  Every mobile home space and travel trailer space in a park shall be clearly defined. 
(c)  Mobile home spaces in a park shall be at least 30 feet wide where pads are closest to streets. Travel trailer spaces shall be at least 25 feet wide where trailers are located closest to the street. 
(d)  The space or pad on which a mobile home or travel trailer is located in a park shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete driveway ribbons, a minimum of 40 feet in length, separated by no less than six feet nor more than 12 feet by an area which shall be treated to kill all vegetation. 
(Code 1975, § 13-98; Code 1995, § 66-149) 
Sec. 210-206. - Storage building and patio for mobile home spaces. 
(a)  Each mobile home space in a park shall have a storage building of no less than 90 cubic feet. 
(b)  Each mobile home space in a park shall have a hard surface patio of no less than 180 square feet. 
(Code 1975, § 13-99; Code 1995, § 66-150) 
Sec. 210-207. - Location of mobile homes and travel trailers with respect to service road, property lines, etc. 
(a)  Mobile homes and travel trailers shall be so located in a park that, at the nearest point, they are at least ten feet from the service road, 71/2 feet from all property lines and 15 feet from any other mobile home or travel trailer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to locate a mobile home or travel trailer less than 25 feet from any public street or highway right-of-way or so that any part of such mobile home or travel trailer will obstruct any roadway or walkway in the park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-100; Code 1995, § 66-151) 
Sec. 210-208. - Parking spaces for motor vehicles. 
    At least two clearly defined parking spaces for motor vehicles shall be provided for each mobile home space in a park, and at least one parking space for motor vehicles shall be provided for each travel trailer space in a park. Such parking spaces shall be located either on or adjacent to the mobile home or travel trailer space. 
(Code 1975, § 13-101; Code 1995, § 66-152) 
Secs. 210-209-210-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SERVICE AND SANITARY FACILITIES 

Sec. 210-240. - Service buildings. 
    At least one service building shall be provided in each park accommodating travel trailers to house sanitation and laundry facilities. Service buildings shall be constructed to conform to the building code and other ordinance requirements for buildings and shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be located no less than 25 feet and no more than 200 feet from any travel trailer space. 
(2)  Be of permanent construction and be adequately lighted. 
(3)  Be of moisture-resistant material, to permit frequent washing and cleaning. 
(4)  Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit during cold weather, and to supply adequate hot water during peak demands. 
(5)  Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively screened. 
(Code 1975, § 13-107; Code 1995, § 66-166) 
Sec. 210-241. - Toilet and other sanitary facilities. 
(a)  Each travel trailer park and mixed mobile home and travel trailer park shall provide the following: 
(1)  Toilet facilities for males consisting of not less than two toilets and one urinal for the first ten travel trailer spaces, or fraction thereof, and not less than one additional urinal and one additional toilet for every 20 additional travel trailer spaces, or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Toilet facilities for females consisting of not less than two flush toilets for the first six travel trailer spaces, or fraction thereof, and one additional flush toilet for every ten additional travel trailer spaces, or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Each sex shall be provided with not less than two lavatories and two showers or bathtubs, with individual dressing accommodations, for the first ten travel trailer spaces, or fraction thereof, and not less than one additional lavatory and one additional shower or bathtub, with individual dressing accommodations, for every ten additional travel trailer spaces, or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Each toilet for females and each shower or bathtub with individual dressing accommodations for females, as required by this section, shall be in a private compartment or stall. 
(c)  The toilet and other sanitation facilities required by this section for males and females shall either be in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. 
(d)  In addition to the above requirements, each travel trailer park and mixed mobile home and travel trailer park shall provide, in a separate compartment, not less than one flush toilet bowl receptacle for emptying bed pans and other containers of human excreta or a slop sink with at least a three-inch trap and an adequate supply of hot running water for cleaning such bed pans or containers. 
(Code 1975, § 13-108; Code 1995, § 66-167) 
Sec. 210-242. - Laundry facilities. 
    Laundry facilities shall be provided in every park accommodating travel trailers in the ratio of one laundry unit to every 30 travel trailer spaces, and shall be in a separate soundproof room of a service building or in a separate building. A laundry unit shall consist of not less than one clothes washing machine. 
(Code 1975, § 13-109; Code 1995, § 66-168) 
Sec. 210-243. - Clothes drying facilities. 
(a)  Mobile home parks shall have at least 100 linear feet of outdoor clothes drying line or one mechanical clothes drying unit in good condition. Travel trailer parks and mixed parks shall have at least 25 linear feet of outdoor clothes drying line for each travel trailer space or one mechanical clothes drying unit for the first ten travel trailer spaces, or any fraction thereof, and an additional unit for each ten additional travel trailer spaces or any fraction thereof. 
(b)  Mechanical clothes drying units shall be located in a service building or a separate building in the park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-110; Code 1995, § 66-169) 
Secs. 210-244-210-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 210-265. - From park buildings. 
    Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service and other buildings within a park shall be disposed of into a public sewer system controlled and operated by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 13-115; Code 1995, § 66-170) 
Sec. 210-266. - From mobile homes. 
(a)  Each mobile home space in a park shall be provided with at least a three-inch sewer connection, at least four inches above the surface of the ground. The sewer connection shall be fitted with a standard ferrule and close nipple and provided with a screw cap. 
(b)  Every mobile home occupying a mobile home park space shall tie into the park sewerage system and shall dump any accumulated waste into the system. The connection between the mobile home drain and the sewer shall be watertight and self-draining. 
(Code 1975, § 13-116; Code 1995, § 66-182) 
Sec. 210-267. - From travel trailers. 
(a)  The person in charge of a travel trailer shall dump all accumulated waste into a receptacle provided in the park, upon entering and upon leaving the park. Such receptacles must be approved by the building inspector or the city engineer. Any other dump of accumulated waste within the city is prohibited. 
(b)  Sewer connections shall be made to travel trailer spaces in a park, where specified on plans. 
(Code 1975, § 13-117; Code 1995, § 66-183) 
Sec. 210-268. - Maintenance of sewer connections. 
    The park licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance, in good condition, of mobile home and travel trailer connections to the sewer system and shall see that there is no sewage leakage in the park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-118; Code 1995, § 66-184) 
Secs. 210-269-210-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WATER SUPPLY 

Sec. 210-300. - General requirements. 
    The following requirements shall apply to all parks: 
(1)  Plans for water supply must be submitted to and approved by the building inspector before construction is started, as required by state law. Application for construction of a water well must be submitted to the city council. The water supply must comply with all city ordinances and state regulations. 
(2)  An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each park capable of furnishing a minimum of 250 gallons per day per mobile home space. Where a public supply of water of such quality is available within 300 feet, or becomes available within 300 feet, of the park, connection shall be made thereto and its supply shall be used exclusively. 
(3)  Where private water supplies must be developed, the building inspector or city engineer must approve the location, construction and development of both the water well and pipe system and connections. No private source other than a water well shall be used. 
(4)  No water well shall draw water from any sands reserved to or drawn from by the city for its use, except as may be otherwise permitted by ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 13-124; Code 1995, § 66-196) 
Sec. 210-301. - Required connection to buildings and mobile home and travel trailer spaces; cold water tap for mobile homes; hot water for service buildings. 
    The water system of a park shall be connected by pipes to all buildings and all mobile home spaces. Every mobile home shall be provided with a cold water tap. An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing, washing, cleaning and laundry facilities. Water connections shall be made to travel trailer spaces, where specified on plans. 
(Code 1975, § 13-125; Code 1995, § 66-197) 
Sec. 210-302. - Protection of connections from damage by parking of mobile homes or travel trailers. 
    Individual water-service connections which are provided in a park for direct use by mobile homes or travel trailers shall be of such construction so that they will not be damaged by the parking of such mobile homes or travel trailers. 
(Code 1975, § 13-126; Code 1995, § 66-198) 
Sec. 210-303. - Piping requirements; prohibited connections. 
    All water piping in a park shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state statutes and city ordinances. The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies. There shall be no cross-connection between private water supplies for the area within the city water supply. 
(Code 1975, § 13-127; Code 1995, § 66-199) 
Sec. 210-304. - Protection from backflow and backsiphonage. 
    The water piping system in a park shall be protected against the hazards of backflow and backsiphonage. Mobile homes with fixtures from which backsiphonage may occur shall not be connected to the park's water system until the defect has been corrected. 
(Code 1975, § 13-128; Code 1995, § 66-200) 
Sec. 210-305. - Underground stop and waste cocks prohibited. 
    Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be installed on any water connections in a park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-129; Code 1995, § 66-201) 
Sec. 210-306. - Connections to be weathertight. 
    All water connections in a park shall be weathertight. 
(Code 1975, § 13-130; Code 1995, § 66-202) 
Sec. 210-307. - Maintenance of connections. 
    The park licensee shall be responsible for the maintenance, in good condition, of mobile home and travel trailer connections to the water system and shall see that there is no water leakage in the park. 
(Code 1975, § 13-131; Code 1995, § 66-203) 
Sec. 210-308. - Pressure. 
    The park water system shall be adequate to provide 20 pounds per square inch of pressure at all mobile home or travel trailer connections. 
(Code 1975, § 13-132; Code 1995, § 66-204) 
Sec. 210-309. - Pumping equipment requirements. 
    No well casing, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room or space above the ground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below ground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface. All floors shall be watertight and sloped from the pump pedestal to the drain, and floors shall extend at least two feet from the well in all directions. The pedestal shall not be less than 12 inches above the floor. This shall not be construed as prohibiting submersible pumps. 
(Code 1975, § 13-133; Code 1995, § 66-205) 
Sec. 210-310. - Water risers. 
    Where the water supply system of a park does not provide at least six-inch water mains, there shall be provided a two-inch frost-protected water riser, within 300 feet of each mobile home space or building. 
(Code 1975, § 13-134; Code 1995, § 66-206) 
Sec. 210-311. - Park reservoirs. 
    All water storage reservoirs in a park shall be watertight and constructed of impervious material. All overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated material. Overflow pipes from a reservoir shall not connect to any pipe in which sewage or polluted water may back up. 
(Code 1975, § 13-135; Code 1995, § 66-207) 
Sec. 210-312. - Supply for travel trailer reservoirs. 
    Provisions shall be made, within 150 feet of each travel trailer space in a park, to supply water for travel trailer reservoirs. 
(Code 1975, § 13-136; Code 1995, § 66-208) 
Sec. 210-313. - Drinking fountains. 
    Where drinking fountains are provided for public use in a park, they shall be of a type and in a location approved by the building inspector. 
(Code 1975, § 13-137; Code 1995, § 66-209) 
Secs. 210-314-210-344. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 210-345. - Compliance with subdivision and zoning ordinances. 
    Mobile home subdivisions shall comply with the subdivision and zoning ordinances of the city, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 13-148; Code 1995, § 66-231) 
Sec. 210-346. - Minimum size. 
    The minimum size of any mobile home subdivision shall be ten acres. 
(Code 1975, § 13-149; Code 1995, § 66-232) 
Sec. 210-347. - Minimum lot widths and area. 
    The minimum effective lot widths in a mobile home subdivision shall be 40 feet, measured at the front building line, and minimum lot areas shall be 4,000 square feet; provided that, at least a ten-foot side yard shall be provided on each lot beyond any mobile home and addition thereto; and further provided that, in areas not serviced by a public sewer, the minimum lot area on which any mobile home may be placed shall be one acre. The effective lot width of a mobile home lot shall be determined, for interior lots, by measuring at right angles across the lot from one diagonal side line to the other, and for corner lots, the measurement shall be made at right angles from the diagonal having the greatest divergence from perpendicular to the street, through the midpoint of the rear line of the required front yard, to the opposite lot line or an extension thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 13-150; Code 1995, § 66-233) 
Sec. 210-348. - Relation of lot side lines to street lines. 
    Side lines of lots in mobile home subdivisions need not be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
(Code 1975, § 13-151; Code 1995, § 66-234) 
Sec. 210-349. - Lots to abut public street. 
    Regardless of the effective lot width, mobile home subdivision lots must abut a public street for at least 25 feet. 
(Code 1975, § 13-152; Code 1995, § 66-235) 
Sec. 210-350. - Greenbelt planting strip and landscaping. 
    All mobile home subdivisions, except those developed under residential standards, shall have a greenbelt planting strip, not less than 20 feet in width, along all boundaries of the subdivision. Appropriate landscaping, including a fence, shall be required. 
(Code 1975, § 13-153; Code 1995, § 66-236) 
Chapter 213 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 213-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish effective sign regulations which recognize the public as well as private interest and investment in our environment. This chapter is intended to promote economic and business development while protecting and reducing distractions and obstructions that may contribute to traffic accidents by prohibiting unsafe signs. Further, the purpose of this chapter is also to regulate the number, size and location of signs, cause the removal of abandoned signs, and protect the health, safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the city for its residents and visitors. 
(Code 1975, § 20-1; Code 1995, § 94-1; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 3-16-2005) 
Sec. 213-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned/obsolete sign means any sign or sign structure, whether permitted or not or required to be permitted or not under this chapter, which advertises or pertains to a business, product, service, event, activity, or purpose which is no longer conducted or that has not been in use for 90 days. Any sign structure that no longer displays any sign copy or wording shall be deemed to be an obsolete or abandoned sign. 
    Accessory means subordinate or incidental to and on the same lot or within a common development as the building or use being identified or advertised. 
    Animation means any visible mechanical movement in any sign or apparent movement achieved by electrical pulsations or by other means, such as sequential light phasing. 
    Architectural projections means any projection, excluding signs, which is not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, including, but not limited to, roof overhangings, wing walls, mansards, unenclosed exterior balconies, marquees, canopies, pilasters, fascias and awnings. 
    Awning means a movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. 
    Billboard, including poster and panel types, means a nonaccessory sign or sign structure upon which advertising may be posted, painted or affixed and which is primarily designed for the rental or lease of the sign space for advertising not related to the use of the property upon which the sign is located. 
    Building code means the latest building code as amended and adopted by the city. 
    Canopy means a permanently roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or other similar area, which is supported by the building to which it is attached. 
    code enforcement official means the city manager is the person charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter and he may designate certain persons as code enforcement officials to carry out such duties. 
    Copy means the wording and/or logo on a sign surface. 
    Days means consecutive working days exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and recognized city legal holidays. 
    Designated mile means that distance along the centerline of a street measured between the centerlines of two section lines intersecting such street. 
    Directory signs means signs used to guide pedestrians and drivers to individual businesses within a multiple-tenant office development, or in any district developed for office uses without retail trade. Directory signs conforming to the requirements hereof shall not be deemed to be ground or wall signs. 
    Display face. See Sign side. 
    Electric sign means any sign continuing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated solely by exterior light sources, such as floodlights. 
    Electrical code means the electrical code adopted by the city. 
    Fence sign means signs displayed on any structure used as a fence. 
    Flare means any torch, fuse, wick or other illuminating device utilizing open flames to attract attention to an establishment. 
    Frontage, building, means the horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building which abuts a street, a parking area, mall or other circulation area open to the general public and having either a main window display of the enterprise or a public entrance to the building. In industrial districts, a building side with an entrance open to industrial employees shall also qualify as a building frontage. Where more than one use occupies a building, each such use having a public entrance or main window display for its exclusive use shall be considered to have its own building frontage, which shall be the front width of the portion of the building occupied by that use. 
    Frontage, street, means the linear frontage or frontages of a lot or parcel abutting on a private or public street which provides principal access to, or visibility of, the premises. 
    Height means the vertical distance measured from the elevation of the nearest sidewalks (or, in the absence of a sidewalk within 35 feet, from the lowest point of finished grade on the lot on which the sign is located and within 35 feet of the sign) to the uppermost point on the sign or sign structure. 
    Illumination, direct, means any sign designed to provide artificial light either through exposed lighting in front of the face or through transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign. 
    Illumination, indirect, means any sign which reflects light from a source intentionally directed upon it; for example, by means of floodlights, gooseneck reflectors or externally mounted fluorescent light fixtures. 
    Kiosk means a small structure, typically located within a pedestrian walkway or similar circulation area, and intended for use as a key, magazine or similar type of small shop, or for use as display space for posters, notices and exhibits. 
    Leading edge means that portion of the sign structure projecting the farthest from the building. 
    Light source includes neon lights, fluorescent lights, incandescent lights and any reflecting surface which, by reason of its construction and/or placement, becomes in effect the light source. 
    Lot means a portion or parcel of land, whether part of a platted subdivision or otherwise, occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or use and its accessories, together with such yards as are required under the provisions of the zoning ordinance. A lot must be an integral unit of land held under unified ownership in fee or in cotenancy or under legal control tantamount to such ownership. 
    Maintenance means the replacing, repairing or repainting of a sign structure made necessary by ordinary wear and tear, weather or accident. All such work shall be performed so as to conform with all applicable code provisions. 
    Marquee means a permanently roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting from the building. 
    Menu board sign means a sign which is designed and utilized for the purpose of disclosing the availability and cost of products sold on the premises on which it is situated, which products are delivered directly to the stall or place where the menu board is installed or which are delivered at some point in a lane of travel in which the menu board sign is part. 
    Message sign means the wording or copy, including logo, on a sign. 
    Multiple-unit sign means a single business utilizing a single sign structure using more than one separate component to convey its advertising message. 
    Nonaccessory sign means a sign or advertising device which directs attention to an activity, service, products sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Owner means that person who owns a sign and who either owns the property on which the sign is located or is the owner of the business being conducted on the premises to which the sign pertains. 
    Political sign means all signs concerning the candidacy of an individual for public office or concerning support or opposition to any public issue. 
    Property line means the line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property abutting thereon as determined by the legal description of the property and the records of the county clerk. Property lines abutting section line roads shall not be considered to be nearer than 50 feet from the centerline of the section line. 
    Public entrance means an entrance to a building or premises which is customarily used or intended for use by the general public. Fire exits, special employee entrances, loading dock entrances not generally used by the public, and the like shall not be considered as public entrances. 
    Roof means the cover of any building, including the eaves and similar projections. 
    Roof line means the highest point on any building where an exterior wall encloses usable floor space, including floor area for housing mechanical equipment. The term "roof line" shall also include the highest point on any parapet wall, providing said parapet wall extends around the entire perimeter of the building. 
    Setback line means a line or lines designating the yard requirements established for the particular zoning district classification of a tract, parcel or lot. 
    Shopping center means a concentration of five or more primarily retail stores and service establishments under one ownership or management, including, but not limited to, retail shops, department stores, restaurants, and other related or similar business establishments. The term "shopping center" also includes shopping malls. 
    Sight triangle means the same as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
    Sign. 
(1)  The term "sign" means any writing, pictorial representation, decoration (including any material used to differentiate sign copy from its background), form, emblem or trademark, flag, stripe, color, banner or any other figure of similar character which: 
a.  Is a structure or any part thereof (including the roof or wall of a building); or 
b.  Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed for or upon any building, board, plate, canopy, awning, vehicle or upon any material object or device whatsoever; and 
c.  Is designed to attract attention to the subject thereof or is used as a means of identification, advertisement or announcement by means of its form, color, wording, symbol, design, illumination, motion or striping. 
(2)  Signs are classified as follows: 
    Bench signs, courtesy, means any bench or seat placed for the convenience of the public and containing advertising matter. 
    Billboard sign means any existing sign or advertising device which advertises products, services or activities unrelated to the property upon which the sign or device is located, whether lawfully permitted or legally nonconforming. 
    Bulletin board sign means a sign used for the purpose of notification to the public of an event or occurrence of public interest, such as a church service, political rally, civic meeting or other similar events. 
    Canopy sign means any sign attached to or constructed in or on a canopy. 
    Changeable copy sign (manual) means a sign on which copy or sign panels may be changed manually in the field, such as boards with changeable letters or changeable pictorial panels. 
    Directional sign means a sign guiding or directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic onto or off a lot or within a lot. 
    Grand opening sign means any temporary sign which calls attention to a new business. 
    Ground signs means a sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, poles or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground or a sign which is erected on the ground; providing, that no part of the sign is attached to any part of any building structure or other sign. 
    Identification sign includes the following: 
1.  A sign which establishes the identity of a building or building complex by name or symbol only. 
2.  A sign which indicates street address or combines name plate and street address. 
3.  A sign which identifies an area in the city which, by reason of development, natural features, historical occurrences or common references, has or will become a landmark in the city. 
4.  A commemorative sign, such as a cornerstone, memorial or plaque, when such is cut into a masonry surface or constructed of bronze or other incombustible material and is made an integral part of the structure. 
    Illuminated awning sign means a frame structure with translucent, flexible, reinforced vinyl covering designed in awning form, but whose principal purpose and use is signage. Such signs are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources in fixtures approved under national and local electrical codes. 
    Joint identification sign means a sign which serves as common or collective identification for two or more commercial or industrial uses on the same lot. 
    Marquee sign means a sign depicted upon, attached to or supported by a marquee. 
    Message center sign means any electronic communication display device utilizing lights, diodes or similar illumination to create letters, numerals or graphic presentations, capable of one or more of such various functions or operating modes as steady, scrolling, travelling, alternating or flashing copy. 
    Model home sign means any temporary sign which calls attention to a model home for sale or rent in a subdivision. 
    Off-premises sign means any sign, including a billboard or general outdoor advertising device, which advertises or directs attention to a business, commodity, service or activity conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the same lot or within the same building upon which such sign is located. 
    Open house sign means any temporary sign that calls attention to a home for sale or rent, which is temporarily open to the public. 
    Political campaign or special election signs. 
    Portable sign means a sign so designed as to be removable from one location to another and not permanently attached to the ground or to any immobile structure, whose primary function during a specific time is to advertise products or direct people to a business or activity located on the premises. 
    Portable trailer sign means a sign so designated as to be removable from one location to another and not permanently attached to the ground or to any immobile structure, whose primary function during a specific time is to advertise products or direct people to a business or activity located on the premises. 
    Projecting sign means a sign attached to a building or extending in whole or in part 15 inches or more horizontally beyond the surface of the building to which the sign is attached and where the face of the sign is not in a plane parallel to the wall to which it is attached, but not including a marquee sign. 
    Real estate sign means a sign indicating the availability for sale, rent or lease of the specific lot, building or portion of a building upon which the sign is erected or displayed. 
    Residential development entrance sign means a sign on a fence or gateway at the entrance of a residential complex or development denoting the name and/or address of the complex or development. 
    Roof sign means a sign painted on the roof of a building, supported by poles, uprights or braces extending from the roof of a building, or projecting above the roof line of a building, but not including a sign projecting from or attached to a wall as permitted by this chapter. 
    Suspended sign means a sign suspended from the ceiling of an arcade, marquee, canopy or other architectural projection. 
    Temporary sign means a sign, banner, pennant, balloon or similar device or display which is intended for a temporary period of display for the purpose of announcing a special event or construction. Such sign may be constructed of cloth, canvas or cardboard material, with or without a structural frame. 
    Time-temperature-date sign means a sign which displays the time, outdoor temperature and/or date of the month. 
    Vehicle-mounted sign means a sign displayed upon a trailer, van, truck, automobile, bus, railroad car, tractor, semitrailer or other vehicle, whether or not such vehicle is in operating condition. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached flat to any wall of an enclosed building, where the exposed face of the sign is in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall and extends not more than 15 inches horizontally from the face of such wall. A sign erected upon or against the side of a roof having an angle of 45 degrees or less from the vertical shall be considered to be a wall sign and shall be regulated as such. The term "wall sign" also means a sign painted directly on the surface of the building. 
    Wind sign means a sign consisting of one or more banners, flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers or captive balloons, or other objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze. 
    Window sign means a sign which is painted on, applied or attached to, or located within three feet of the interior of a window, which sign can be seen through the window from the exterior of the structure. Merchandise which is included in a window display shall not be included as part of a window sign. 
    Sign, illegal nonconforming, means a sign that was in violation of any of the laws of the city governing the erection or construction of such sign at the time of its erection, and that has never been erected or displayed in conformance with all such laws, including this chapter, and which shall include signs that are pasted, nailed, painted on or otherwise unlawfully displayed upon structures, utility poles, trees, fences or other signs. 
    Sign, legal nonconforming, means any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the enactment of this chapter, and any amendments thereto, and which does not conform to all the applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter. 
    Sign side means the surface of a sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated. 
    Sign structure means a sign, including any supports, uprights, braces or framework of a sign. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground above grade, but not including poles, lines, cables or other transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities. 
    Subdivision means the same as defined in the subdivision regulations of the city, set forth in appendix B of this Code. 
    Vertical surface means that wall area of a single building elevation, which encompasses all of such elevation from ground or grade level to the top of all sides. 
    Zoning ordinance means the city zoning ordinance, together with all amendments thereto, as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 20-6; Code 1995, § 94-2; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 3-16-2005) 
Sec. 213-3. - Scope and application of this chapter. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the display, construction, erection, alteration, use, location and maintenance of all signs within the city, including any sign erected or constructed prior to the enactment of this chapter. 
(b)  This chapter does not regulate in any manner noncommercial holiday signs and decorations, public informational and safety signs, or signs required by local, state or federal law. 
(Code 1975, § 20-2; Code 1995, § 94-3) 
Sec. 213-4. - Exemptions. 
    Except as specifically provided, the following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Signs which are not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are located, or from any public right-of-way, or from any parking area, mall or other circulation area open to the general public, except that such signs shall be subject to the safety regulations of the building code and the electrical code of the city. 
(2)  Official governmental notices and notices posted by governmental officers in the performance of their duties, governmental signs to control traffic or for other regulatory purposes, or to identify streets, or to warn of danger. 
(3)  The flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, organization of nations, state, county or city; any religious, civic, fraternal organization; or any educational institution. Additionally, one corporate name or logo-bearing flag not exceeding 24 square feet in size will be permitted. 
(4)  Temporary decorations or displays, when such are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday or celebration. 
(5)  Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices. 
(6)  Merchandise, pictures or models of products or services which are incorporated as an integral part of a window display. 
(7)  Signs displayed on trucks, buses, trailers or other vehicles which are being operated or stored in the normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the name of the owner or business which are located on moving vans, delivery trucks, rental trucks and trailers and the like; provided that they are parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as vehicles. 
(8)  Directional signs located in the street right-of-way; provided such signs are approved by the building inspector or his designee. 
(Code 1975, § 20-11; Code 1995, § 94-4) 
Sec. 213-5. - Provisions of chapter declared to be minimum requirements. 
    The provisions of this chapter, in their interpretation and application, shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any of the lawfully adopted codes or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standard shall govern. 
(Code 1975, § 20-40; Code 1995, § 94-5) 
Sec. 213-6. - Violations. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to perform or order the performance of any act which is contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or to fail to perform any act which is required by the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a continuing violation, each 24-hour period in which the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1975, § 20-4; Code 1995, § 94-6) 
Sec. 213-7. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any requirements hereof is guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. In addition to all other remedies for the enforcement of this chapter and its provisions, the city may institute any proper action in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, enjoin, restrain, abate or otherwise to correct any violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 20-41; Code 1995, § 94-7) 
Sec. 213-8. - Application of other laws. 
    If any of the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law of the city presently existing or enacted in the future, in that the requirements regarding signs of the respective provisions differ, the provision containing the more restrictive requirements will apply. 
(Code 1975, § 20-5; Code 1995, § 94-8) 
Sec. 213-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter. He shall appear for and on behalf of the city in all matters regarding the interpretation and application of this chapter, and shall resist and oppose any deviations from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, the city manager or his authorized representative may enter at reasonable times the public areas of any building, structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 20-3; Code 1995, § 94-9) 
Sec. 213-10. - Temporary signs, time limits. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to allow to remain or fail to remove, from property under his care, custody or control, any temporary sign after 60 days. 
(Code 1995, § 94-10) 
Sec. 213-11. - Standards for billboards and similar nonaccessory type signs. 
    The regulations of this section shall not be applied to billboards when constructed on premises as accessory signs according to the accessory sign regulations of this chapter. In such cases, location, size, number, and all other relevant standards for accessory signs shall be applied. 
(1)  General nonaccessory signs shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  With a conditional use permit in zoning districts A, C5, I-1, and I-2 which lie within 100 feet of the I-40 right-of-way. 
b.  Such signs must be located as near to the interstate highway as practicable and must be oriented for interstate traffic. 
(2)  Sign size. 
a.  The display surface area shall not exceed 672 square feet per sign face, except for a 20 percent allowance for extensions and cutouts. 
b.  The maximum width of a sign shall be 60 feet. 
(3)  Height. 
a.  The maximum height of the highest point of the structure shall be 35 feet above road grade; however, where the sign is adjacent to an elevated roadway the maximum height shall be 35 feet above the elevated road grade. 
b.  All billboards shall maintain a minimum clearance of 12 feet when measured from the ground level at the base of the sign to the bottom of the sign face or to the bottom of the deck, whichever is lower. 
(4)  Location. 
a.  The location shall comply with all established building lines and required setbacks as outlined in this chapter and all other ordinances of the city. 
b.  Where there is no building setback line established by ordinance or subdivision plat, such signs shall be set back from the front lot line not less than 25 feet. 
c.  Where a railroad right-of-way crosses a public right-of-way, required setbacks or established building lines on adjacent properties are extended through or across the railroad right-of-way. 
d.  Billboards which are erected or painted on a roof and billboards which extend above the roofline of any building on which a sign is erected are prohibited. 
(5)  Spacing. Regardless of the applicable zoning, no sign displayed to be read from a divided, limited access roadway with four or more traffic lanes, shall be constructed, erected, placed, or replaced closer than 1,000 feet to another nonaccessory sign facing in the same direction and on the same side of the roadway from which the sign is intended to be read. 
(6)  Spacing from residentially zoned property. No nonaccessory sign shall be constructed, erected, placed, or replaced closer than 300 feet to the nearest residentially zoned property. 
(7)  Design and construction standards. No billboards shall be constructed with more than two steel posts or columns. Wood posts are specifically prohibited. 
(8)  Lighting. Nonaccessory signs may be illuminated which that are in compliance with the following conditions and any other applicable ordinances. 
a.  Signs shall not be erected which contain any of the following: flashing, intermittent, revolving, or moving light. 
b.  No sign shall be illuminated so that interferes with the effectiveness, obscures, imitates or may be confused with any such official traffic sign, device, or signal. No sign shall be permitted to have beams or rays directed at any portion of the traveled ways and/or such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or otherwise interferes with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
(9)  Electronic messaging displays (EMDs). Electronic messaging display signs shall be subject to the following limitations. 
a.  Such signs shall display static images for a period of at least eight seconds before transitioning to another static image. 
b.  Transitions from one static image to the next may display frame effects so long as the use of animation and/or flashing as defined in this chapter are prohibited. 
c.  No such sign, if the illuminated portion of such sign is visible from an R zoning district other than street, highway or freeway right-of-way, or if the illuminated portion of such sign is visible from a designated residential development area, shall be located within 300 feet of such district or area. The 300 feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest visible illuminated point on a sign structure to the nearest point of an R zoning district or Residential development area boundary line. 
d.  No sign shall exceed a brightness of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (Lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area. The measurement distance shall be calculated with the following formula: The square root of the product of the sign area and 100. 
1.  Example using a 12 square foot sign: Measurement Distance = v(12 Sq. Ft. x 100) = 34.6 
2.  The standard for brightness adjustment as ambient light intensity declines shall be a maximum increase in light intensity from the digital sign of 0.3 foot candles over ambient levels as measured using a foot candle meter at a pre-set distance in accordance with the following procedure: 
3.  At least 30 minutes past sunset, record the ambient light using a foot candle meter for the area while the sign is off or displaying all black copy, with the meter located directly in front of and aimed directly at the sign at the appropriate distance. 
4.  Turn on the sign to display all white and take another measurement in accordance with the same procedure. 
5.  If the difference between the measurements is 0.3 foot candles or less, the brightness is properly adjusted, otherwise the sign must be adjusted to comply with the brightness adjustment standard set forth above. 
(i)  No such sign shall display an illuminative brightness of such intensity or brilliance that it impairs the vision or endangers the safety and welfare of any pedestrian, cyclist, or person operating a motor vehicle. 
(ii)  No such sign shall resemble or simulate any warning or danger signal, or any official traffic control device, sign, signal or light. 
e.  The display area of the sign shall utilize dimming technology which automatically adjusts the brightness of the sign based on ambient light conditions. A certificate signed by the sign contractor that the electronic message display (EMD) sign will be so equipped. 
f.  The display area of the sign is not allowed to resemble or simulate any warning or danger signal or any official traffic control device, sign, signal or light or to cause a driver to mistake the sign for a warning or danger sign. 
g.  The display area of the sign is not allowed to operate unless it is equipped with a default mechanism that shall freeze the sign in one position of static message if a malfunction occurs or shall be manually turned off within six hours of a reported malfunction. 
h.  Use of sound is prohibited in all zoning areas. 
i.  For illuminated signs, a statement declaring the sign's brightness, image change rate and transition time shall be submitted; along with electronic sign application which declare the type of software used, programming details and specify how the photo cell will operate. 
(10)  Maintenance. 
a.  All signs shall be maintained in good and safe condition. The painted portions shall be periodically repainted and kept in good condition. 
b.  The general area of the sign shall be kept free and clear of sign material, weeds, debris, trash and other refuse. 
(Code 1975, § 20-12; Code 1995, § 94-11; Ord. No. 917, § 1, 10-3-1995; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 3-16-2005; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-12. - Sign height along I-40 Corridor. 
    For lots which are zoned commercial and lie within 1,320 feet of the center line of the I-40 right-of-way, one additional accessory ground sign may be erected. Such sign must be located as near to the interstate highway as practicable, and must be oriented for interstate traffic. The additional sign can have a maximum height of 80 feet, and the bottom of the sign must be a minimum of 25 feet from the ground. No such sign may be constructed closer to the boundary line of any residentially zoned property than a distance equal to four times the height of the sign. The size of the sign shall not exceed the following dimensions: 
(1)  Bottom of sign between 25 and 50 feet: 75 square feet per side (150 square feet total). Bottom of sign above 50 feet but below 65 feet: 100 square feet per side (200 square feet total). Bottom of sign above 65 feet: 150 square feet per side (300 square feet total). 
(2)  The total amount of all signage, including this additional sign, shall not exceed the maximum allowable specified in section 213-11(2)a. 
(3)  Outdoor lighting shall be of an intensity that is practical and in general conformity to industry standards. Lighting shall be designed so as not to spill over onto any residentially zoned property. Every lighting system will be designed and installed to the satisfaction of the city which may require a photometric study at the expense of the applicant. 
(4)  All signs over 35 feet in height shall require a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1995, § 94-12; Ord. No. 980, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 3-16-2005) 
Secs. 213-13-213-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS, LICENSES AND FEES 

Sec. 213-43. - Permits. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 213-53, it shall be unlawful to display, erect, relocate or alter any sign without first filing with the development services director or designee an application in writing and obtaining a sign permit. 
(b)  When a sign permit has been issued by the development services director or designee, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of said permit without prior approval of the development services director or designee. A written record of such approval shall be entered upon the original permit application and maintained in the files of the development services department. 
(Code 1975, § 20-20; Code 1995, § 94-31; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-44. - Application for permit. 
    The application for a sign permit shall be made by the owner or a sign contractor licensed by the city. Such applications shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the development services department and shall be signed by the applicant. 
(Code 1975, § 20-21; Code 1995, § 94-32; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-45. - Plans, specifications and other data required. 
    The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the following plans and other information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector. 
(2)  The location by street address and legal description of the site of the proposed sign structure. 
(3)  Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done including details of all connections, guy lines, supports and footings and material to be used. 
(4)  A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of the building structure and lot to which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected. 
(5)  The position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to nearby buildings or structures. 
(6)  Two sets of plans and a digital copy submitted on a CD/R in a PDF format or flash drive in PDF format. 
(7)  Specifications and method of construction. 
(8)  Method of attachment to the building or ground when required by the director of development services or his designee. 
(9)  Copy of documents which provide information to ensure compliance with the International Building Code as it may from time to time be amended. 
(10)  Application for an electrical permit and required information shall be a licensed electrician making the electrical connection. 
(11)  Such other information as required by the director of development services or designee to show full compliance with all ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 20-25; Code 1995, § 94-33; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-46. - Permit fees. 
    A permit fee shall be paid to the city for each sign permit issued under this article. All such permit fees shall be set by the city council of the City of Yukon by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 20-26; Code 1995, § 94-34; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-47. - Identification and marking. 
    Signs erected or remodeled shall bear a clearly legible identification plate that is accessible from ground level not exceeding 15 square inches in area, stating the name of the person responsible for its construction and erection, with installation date and permit number. Such information shall be kept current. Electrical signs shall be marked with input amperes at full load input. 
(Code 1975, § 20-27; Code 1995, § 94-35; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-48. - Inspections. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the development services director or designee. 
(b)  Footing inspections may be required by the development services director or designee. 
(c)  All signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of the governing Electrical Code and the electrical components used shall bear the label of an approved testing agency. 
(d)  The development services director or designee may order removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of section 213-81, Summary removal, and section 213-82, Notice to repair or remove. 
(Code 1975, § 20-28; Code 1995, § 94-36; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-49. - Sign contractor's certificate. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of installing, erecting, moving or maintaining signs in the city unless such person has obtained a sign contractor's certificate in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  An initial contracting fee shall be paid to the city for each sign permit issued. All such fees shall be set by the city council of the City of Yukon by resolution. The renewal shall be paid prior to July 1 of each year. 
(2)  Each contractor shall procure and maintain a general liability policy of insurance with limits per occurrence of not less than $500,000.00. A certificate of insurance shall be provided at the time application is made for a contractor's certificate. Contractor shall notify the city within ten days of termination of the policy. City shall be named a certificate holder. Failure to maintain general liability insurance in the specified limits shall cause the contractor's certificate to be deemed revoked. 
(b)  Workers compensation insurance requirements. 
(1)  Each sign contractor who is defined in the Workers' Compensation Act, 85 O.S. § 1 et seq.(the "Act") as an employer of employees as defined in the Act and not exempt, which contractor is registered under this article shall be required to document to the City of Yukon and to keep in force during the life of its registration, a workers' compensation insurance policy to protect the contractor's employees against occupational hazards and diseases as regulated and defined in the Act. 
(2)  A certificate of insurance for workers' compensation with the city named as a certificate holder from an insurance company duly licensed to do business in the State of Oklahoma or proof of exemption or own risk status shall be submitted with the application for registration to the city. Persons who are self-employed and do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Workers' Compensation Act are not required to submit a certificate of insurance. However, in lieu of the certificate of insurance requirement, the applicant must execute an affidavit certifying he is wholly self-employed and does not fall under the jurisdiction of the Workers' Compensation Act with proof of exemption. The city attorney will establish acceptable criteria for proof of exemption. 
(3)  The contractor shall be required to notify the city within ten working days upon termination of an insurance policy. This will cause the city to invalidate the certificate. 
(c)  Method of application. 
(1)  Any person who is required by this article to possess a sign contractor's certificate shall make an application to the city on application forms provided for that purpose by the city. 
(2)  The lending of any sign contractor's certificate and or the person obtaining other permits thereunder for any other person shall be deemed cause for revocation. A sign contractor's certificate issued by the city is not transferable, and violation of this provision is a cause for revocation in addition to other penalties in this code. 
(3)  The city council may revoke the sign contractor's certificate for just cause. The development services director may suspend such certificate if, in his opinion, such the certificate holder violates any provision of the code. In such case, the development services director shall give notice of the suspension to the contractor, and such suspension shall be effective until the city council determines whether the certificate shall be revoked. The sign contractor whose certificate has been suspended shall have the right to appear before the council and be heard before the certificate is permanently revoked and shall be given adequate notice of the time and place of such hearing and of the charges against the certificate holder. Such a cause must be disposed of by the city council within 30 days of the time of the suspension. 
(4)  Each sign certificate issued shall expire on June 30 th of each year. 
(5)  The annual renewal application, appropriate documentation and fees must be received by the city on or before July 1 st and shall be considered surrendered if the certificate is not renewed within 15 days. After July 15, the applicant must proceed in the manner required for a new or initial applicant. 
(d)  Violation and penalties. Any person violating any provision of this article is guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 20-29; Code 1995, § 94-37; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1353 , adopted Feb. 6, 2018, amended the title of § 213-49 to read as herein set out. The former § 213-49 title pertained to sign contractor's license. 
Sec. 213-50. - Revocation of permits. 
    If the development services director or designee finds that work under any permit issued is not in accordance with the information supplied in the permit application and/or is in violation of this chapter or any other pertinent ordinance, or should he find that there has been any misrepresentation in connection with the application for the permit, he shall notify the owner or sign contractor of such findings and that the violation must be corrected without delay. If such correction is not made, the development services director or designee shall revoke the permit and serve written notice thereof upon the owner or sign contractor. No person shall proceed with any part of such work after such notice is received. 
(Code 1975, § 20-22; Code 1995, § 94-38; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-51. - Revocation of permits for nonuse. 
(a)  If substantial actual work either on or off site is not commenced under any permit issued within 60 days from the date of such permit, and/or if substantial building operations under any permit issued under this article are suspended for a period of 60 consecutive days, the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(b)  Delays which are not a result of willful acts or neglect of the contractor, owner or person obtaining the permit may be excluded from the terms of subsection (a) of this section, and the development services director or designee may grant an extension of time in which to start or resume operations. All requests for extension and approval thereof shall be in writing. 
(Code 1975, § 20-23; Code 1995, § 94-39; Ord. No. 1353 , 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 213-52. - Forfeiture of fees. 
    When any permit has been revoked under the terms of section 213-50 or 213-51, permit fees shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1975, § 20-24; Code 1995, § 94-40) 
Sec. 213-53. - Permits not required for certain signs. 
    All applicable provisions of this chapter shall apply, except that setback requirements shall not apply nor shall a sign permit or a sign permit fee be required for the following signs in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Nonilluminated identification signs which do not exceed two square feet in total surface area; provided such signs are limited to six feet or less in height and limited to one such sign per use or per building, whichever is the greater number. 
(2)  Temporary nonilluminated real estate signs, including "model home" and "open house" signs, which do not exceed six square feet per side and 12 square feet in total area and six feet in height and limited to one such sign per street frontage. Such signs shall not remain in place more than seven days after the occupancy of the subject property. 
(3)  Signs in the nature of cornerstones, commemorative tablets and historical signs which do not exceed four square feet per face in area and six feet in height, and which are nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated. 
(4)  Private traffic directional signs guiding or directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic onto or off a lot or within a lot, when such do not exceed three square feet per sign per face in area and eight feet in height, do not contain any advertising or trade name identification, and are nonilluminated. 
(5)  Signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by a law, statute or ordinance may be of any type, number, area, height above grade, location or illumination authorized by the law, statute or ordinance under which such signs are required or authorized. No such sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way unless specifically authorized or required by law, statute or ordinance, and, except for warning signs or barricades of a temporary nature, such signs shall be permanently affixed to the ground, a building or other structure. 
(6)  Temporary nonilluminated political signs. 
(7)  Bulletin boards not over 32 square feet in area for public, nonprofit, charitable or religious institutions. 
(8)  No permit shall be required for copy changes on signs using interchangeable letters or for maintenance where no structural changes are made. 
(Code 1975, § 20-10; Code 1995, § 94-41) 
Secs. 213-54-213-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 

Sec. 213-80. - Enumerated. 
    The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in the city: 
(1)  Flares. 
(2)  Strings of light bulbs used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes, other than traditional holiday decorations. 
(3)  Wind signs, except for grand opening signs. 
(4)  Signs which incorporate projected images or emit any sound which is intended to attract attention. 
(5)  Any sign, together with its supporting structure, now or hereafter existing which, 90 days or more after the premises have been vacated, advertises an activity, business, product or service no longer produced or conducted upon the premises upon which such sign is located. 
(6)  Any sign which is installed or erected in or projecting into or over any public right-of-way or center median, or placed on any curb, sidewalk, utility post or pole, lamppost, bench, hydrant, bridge, wall, tree, fence or other structure or surface on public property, except as allowed by ordinance or law or as may be allowed by written agreement with the city, city council or the city municipal authority. Persons placing signs in violation of this subsection may be subject to prosecution. 
(7)  Any sign which identifies a home business defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(8)  Signs not permanently affixed or attached to the ground or to any structure, including A-frame-type signs, except for real estate signs attached to posts driven into the ground, window signs and temporary barriers. 
(9)  Any sign or sign structure which: 
a.  Is structurally unsafe; 
b.  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation; 
c.  Is not kept in good repair; 
d.  Is abandoned; or 
e.  Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it. 
(10)  Any sign or sign structure which: 
a.  In any way obstructs the view of, may be confused with, or purports to be an official traffic sign, signal or device or any other official sign; 
b.  Uses words, phrases, symbols or characters implying the existence of danger or the need for stopping or maneuvering of a motor vehicle; 
c.  Creates in any other way an unsafe distraction for motor vehicle operators; or 
d.  Obstructs the view of motor vehicle operators entering a public roadway from any parking area, service drive, private driveway, alley or other thoroughfare. 
(11)  Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way. 
(12)  Illegal nonconforming signs. 
(13)  Garage sale signs, other than those issued by the city. 
(14)  Trailer signs. 
(15)  Any sign which is installed or erected upon any building, fence, sidewalk, bridge, viaduct, post, automobile, other vehicles or other property of another, without the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof. Persons placing signs in violation of this subsection may be subject to prosecution. 
(Code 1975, § 20-7; Code 1995, § 94-61; Ord. No. 1165, § 1, 3-16-2005) 
Sec. 213-81. - Summary removal. 
    Any sign which is unlawfully placed in the right-of-way, or signs which are pasted, nailed, painted on or otherwise unlawfully displayed upon structures, utility poles, trees, fences or other signs, may be removed summarily by the city manager or his designee without notice, including garage sale signs, as set forth in subsection 213-80(13). 
(Code 1975, § 20-8(c); Code 1995, § 94-62) 
Sec. 213-82. - Notice to repair or remove. 
    If the city manager or his designee shall find that any sign is erected or maintained in violation of section 213-80, he shall give written notice which may be served personally to the owner or his agent, sign contractor or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such sign is located. If such person fails to alter or remove the sign so as to comply with section 213-80 within 48 hours after receipt of such notice, the city manager is authorized to cause removal of obliteration of such sign. The city may institute any property action in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, enjoin, restrain, abate or otherwise to correct any violation of this chapter. The city manager or his designee may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily without notice. 
(Code 1975, § 20-9; Code 1995, § 94-63) 
Chapter 214 - RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2018, added a new Ch. 214, §§ 214-1-214-9, to the Code, however, said provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 214, §§ 214-1-214-4, 214-21, 214-41, and 214-61-214-63, at the editor's discretion, for purposes of maintaining Code format. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 214-1. - Definition. 
    Retail Marijuana Establishments are defined as any retail marijuana establishment licensed by the State of Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 214-2. - Business license and permit requirements. 
(a)  All operators of retail marijuana establishments are required to obtain a retail marijuana establishment permit and a business license from the development services director or designee. 
(b)  The retail marijuana establishment permit fee shall be set forth by resolution by the city council of City of Yukon. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of retail marijuana establishments. 
(c)  A retail marijuana establishment permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location is located outside a commercially zoned area of the corporate city limits of Yukon. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Cross reference- Businesses, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 214-3. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  A Retail marijuana establishment permit will not be granted to any applicant where the proposed location would be located within 300 feet of any of the following uses: 
(1)  Any library or museum; 
(2)  Any public playground; 
(3)  Any child care center; 
(4)  Any place of worship or religious assembly; 
(5)  Any public park, pool or recreation facility; 
(6)  Any juvenile or adult halfway house, correctional facility or substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment center; 
(7)  Within 300 feet of another medical marijuana or retail marijuana establishment; or 
(8)  One thousand feet of any private or public school, preschool, elementary, secondary, high school, vocational or trade school, college or university. 
(b)  For the distance requirements outlined in this chapter, the distances described shall be computed by direct measurement in a straight line from the nearest entry of the parcel of land on which the above described use is located to the nearest of property line of the building or unit in which the proposed retail marijuana establishment would be located. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 214-4. - Conditions of operation. 
(a)  Buildings where marijuana is stored or dispensed must be equipped with ventilation/air filtration systems so that no odors are detectable off premises. 
(b)  The retail establishment must collect the appropriate sales tax on all sales. 
(c)  The hours of operation shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Operations shall be closed on Sundays, as well as Christmas, Thanksgiving, July 4 th and New Year's Day. 
(d)  Any violations of this section will result in the revocation of the retail marijuana establishment permit. 
(e)  It is the intent of the City of Yukon that nothing in the this chapter be construed to: 
(1)  Allow persons to engage in conduct that endangers or causes a public nuisance; 
(2)  Allow the use of marijuana for non-medical purposes; or 
(3)  Allow any activity that is otherwise illegal and not permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Secs. 214-5-214-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MARIJUANA FACILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - MARIJUANA FACILITIES ALLOWED 

Sec. 214-21. - Commercial marijuana growing facilities. 
    Commercial marijuana growing facilities are not allowed within the municipal boundaries of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Secs. 214-22-214-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WHOLESALE MARIJUANA FACILITIES 

Sec. 214-41. - Wholesale marijuana facilities. 
    Wholesale marijuana facilities are not allowed within the municipal boundaries of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Secs. 214-42-214-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MARIJUANA STORAGE FACILITIES 

Sec. 214-61. - Marijuana storage facilities. 
    Marijuana storage facilities other than in a retail outlet are not allowed within the municipal boundaries of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 214-62. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to Article III, Division 4. 
Sec. 214-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to Article III, Division 4. 
Secs. 214-64-214-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MARIJUANA PROCESSING FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 2018, added a new Division 4 by adding a new § 214-81 and renumbering former §§ 214-62 and 214-63 as §§ 214-82 and 214-83. The historical notations have been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 

Sec. 214-81. - Marijuana processing facilities. 
    Marijuana processing facilities are not allowed within the municipal boundaries of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
(Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 , § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 214-82. - Marijuana growing facilities for personal use. 
(a)  All owners of marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use are required to obtain a permit from the development services director or designee. 
(b)  Marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use permit fee shall be set forth by resolution by the city council of the City of Yukon. The fee shall be used to offset municipal expenses covering costs related to licensing, inspection, administration and enforcement of marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use. 
(c)  All marijuana growing facilities for personal medical use shall be subject to security provisions as stated herein prior to the granting of a permit. Failure to comply with security provisions as stated herein will result in revocation of the permit. 
(d)  Any access or entry point to residential facilities used for marijuana cultivation for personal medical use must be secured by lock and key or equivalent, at all times except when the residential facility is actively being supervised in person by the permit holder. 
(e)  Growing marijuana for personal medical use shall be limited to the interior of a single private residence. 
(f)  Growing marijuana shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
(g)  The growing area including any lighting, plumbing or electrical components used shall comply with municipal building and fire codes. The growing area must be properly ventilated so as not to create humidity, mold or other related problems. Lighting shall not exceed 1,000 watts per light. The use of gas products (C02, butane, etc.) or C02 and ozone generators in the growing area is prohibited. 
(h)  Growing marijuana shall not be conducted in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance. A public nuisance may be deemed to exist if growing marijuana produces light, glare, heat, noise, odor or vibration that is detrimental to public health, safety or welfare or interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life and property. 
(i)  The primary use of the residential property in which marijuana is grown shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, eating, sleeping and sanitation/bathing facilities with proper ingress and egress. No room shall be used for growing marijuana where such cultivation will impair or prevent the primary uses of cooking, eating, sleeping or sanitation/bathing. 
(j)  If the residence is rented consent of the property owners shall be obtained in writing prior to any cultivation commencing. This consent must be evidenced by a signed and notarized statement from the property owner permitting the growth of marijuana in a residence. 
(k)  Marijuana grown for personal use may not be given, sold or traded to a third party. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 214-83. - Permit inspections and other requirements. 
(a)  All permits outlined in this chapter will be subject to inspection by an authorized municipal inspector prior to issuance. 
(b)  The inspection prior to a permit decision will occur at a time scheduled and approved by both the applicant and the municipal inspector. 
(c)  The applicant will be required to be present during the inspection. 
(d)  The smell or noxious odor emitted from smoking or consumption of marijuana by a person possessing a valid state issued medical marijuana license shall be treated as a public nuisance. 
(e)  Other regulations: Smoking or using marijuana shall be prohibited on all city property including vehicles, buildings, parks or other facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1363 , § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 1365 , § 1, 9-18-2018; Ord. No. 1385 ; § 1, 2-19-2019) 
Appendix A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the zoning regulations, consisting of part 2 of Ordinance No. 475, adopted by the council on December 21, 1972. The original numbering system and all titles, headings and catchlines have been retained. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from Ordinance No. 475. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of citation to state statutes as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated within brackets. 
State Law reference- Zoning generally, 11 O.S. § 43-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION, JURISDICTION, SEVERABILITY, AND REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES 

Sec. 101. - Title. 
    101.1. This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma." 
Sec. 102. - Purpose. 
    102.1. This Ordinance is enacted for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community; lessening congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the community; and promoting the development of the community in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 103. - Interpretation and application. 
    103.1. As concerns interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. Terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined in Article 3 of this Ordinance. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall mean as well the word "structure"; the word "used" shall include "arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended to be used," and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. 
Sec. 104. - Jurisdiction. 
104.1.  This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect in the corporate limits of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. Territory annexed to the corporate limits of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance shall immediately be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and shall be deemed to be designated as A-Agriculture District until altered or reclassified in the manner provided by law. 
104.2.  Future rezoning and cancellation thereof. From and after the effective date of this Ordinance, the City Council may, in pursuance of protecting the public health, peace, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens, include in any or all future rezoning ordinances contingency provisions, which contingency provisions may include, but may not be limited to, specific requirements with respect to the development of the land including the type or form of construction thereon contemplated, and further providing that any substantial divergence from the plot plans, affidavits or memorandum of intent on which such zoning may have been based shall result in the immediate cancellation of such zoning after notice and public hearing thereon. The City Council shall take whatever action at the time it deems necessary, including, but not limited to, resolutions to cease and desist operations on the land concerned which [when] such operations are inconsistent with the representations, plot plans, affidavits or memorandums of intent theretofore submitted to the City Council by the applicant or owner of said property. 
(Ord. No. 707, § 1, 5-3-1983) 
Editor's note- Per city instructions, in the section 1300 was moved to its present location per city instruction and renumbered 104.2. 
ARTICLE 2. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 201. - Zoning Districts. 
201.1.  Zoning districts established. For the purpose of this Ordinance and the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare of the community, the following districts are hereby established for the City of Yukon, Oklahoma: 
A Agricultural District R-1 Single-Family Residential District R-2 Combined Residential District R-3 Low and Medium Density, Multifamily Residential District CB Central Business District C-1 Office District C-2 Convenience Commercial District C-3 Restricted Commercial District C-4 Planned Shopping Center District C-5 Automotive and Commercial Recreation District C-6 General Commercial District I-1 Light Industrial District I-2 Heavy Industrial District PUD Planned Unit Development Supplemental District  
(Ord. No. 573, 12-21-1976; Ord. No. 618, 12-19-1978; Ord. No. 1316, § 1, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 1345, § 1, 7-18-2017) 
201.2.  Zoning map incorporated. 
    The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be established by Ordinance and shall be delineated and shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma," and the Zoning Map is hereby incorporated as a part of this Ordinance. 
201.3.  District boundaries established. 
    The boundaries of a zoning district shall extend to a centerline of abutting streets, regardless of the legal description used in establishing such districts. In the event of uncertainty in the exact boundaries of any of the districts as shown on the official "Zoning Map of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma," the Planning Commission, upon written application or upon its own motion, shall recommend the location of such boundaries to the City Council, and the City Council shall make the final determination. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 8-6-1974) 
201.4.  Maintenance of official zoning map. 
    It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to maintain an up-to-date official "Zoning Map of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma" including all amendments directly adopted by the City Council. 
ARTICLE 3. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 301. - Interpretation of words and terms. 
    Accessory use or structure: A use or structure customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of a building or to the principal use of land and which is located upon the same lot therewith. 
    Agriculture: The use of land for agricultural purposes including farming, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities, and provided further that the above uses shall not include the commercial feeding of swine or other animals, stockyards or commercial feed lots for cattle. 
    Alley: A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use not more than thirty (30) feet wide affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Automobile or trailer sales area: An open area, other than a street, used for the display, sales or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition and where no repair work is done. 
    Automobile repair, major: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; vehicle steam cleaning. 
    Automobile repair, minor: Incidental replacement of parts and motor service to passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity. 
    Automobile service station or filling station: Any area used for retail sale of gasoline or oil fuels or automobile accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, and washing and cleaning, but not including painting, major repair, or the sale of butane or propane fuels. 
    Automobile wash or automatic car wash: A building or structure or chain conveyor, blowers, steam cleaners and other mechanical devices used primarily for the purpose of washing motor vehicles. 
    Block: In describing the boundaries of a district, the word "block" refers to the legal description. In all other cases, the word "block" refers to the property abutting on one side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets or between an intersecting street and a railroad right-of-way or between an intersecting street and a watercourse. 
    Board of adjustment: The Board of Adjustment of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma; also referred to as the "Board." 
    Boardinghouse and roominghouse: Where meals or lodging are provided for persons other than the family or their relatives and excluding facilities for transient persons such as hotels, motels, inns and other such facilities. 
    Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls that is used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property. 
    Building, accessory: See "Accessory Use or Structure." 
    Building height: The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or the deckline of a mansard roof or the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. 
    Building line: A line established beyond which no part of a building shall project, except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance. 
    Building, principal: A building or buildings in which the principal use of the building site is conducted. In any Residential District, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the building site. 
    Bulletin board: Any sign announcing the activities of an educational, religious, institutional or similar use. 
    Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes. 
    Child care center: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, and received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this definition shall not include public and private schools organized, operated or approved under the laws of this State, custody of children fixed by a court, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children within their institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes and other church activities. 
    Child care center, commercial care taking: Any place, home or institution which receives six (6) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, and received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this definition shall not include custody of children fixed by a court, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children within their institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes and other church activities. 
    Child care center, family: Any home which receives five (5) or less children under the age of sixteen (16) years for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians, and received for regular periods of time for compensation; provided, however, this definition shall not include custody of children fixed by a court, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children within their institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes and other church activities. 
    Child care center, institutional: Any place, home or institution which receives six (6) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years for specialized care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians on an intermittent or continuous basis including such establishments as a juvenile shelter, orphan's home, school for physically handicapped and drug addiction treatment center; provided, however, this definition shall not include custody of children fixed by a court, children related by blood or marriage within the third degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children within their institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services or meetings or classes and other church activities. 
    City (council) (commission) (board of trustees): The official governing body of the City of Yukon. 
    City planning commission: The Yukon City Planning Commission, as established by the statutes hereinbefore cited, also referred to as "Planning Commission." The City Planning Commission shall also be the Zoning Commission for the City of Yukon. 
    Clinic: A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and injured persons and those in need of surgical or medical attention but who are not customarily provided with board and room or kept overnight on the premises. 
    Club: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and/organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
    Comprehensive plan: The official city plan of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
    Convalescent home: Also, a nursing home, a rest home; a home for the aged, recuperating, chronically ill, or incurable persons, in which two (2) or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept, or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury. 
    Coverage: The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs. 
    Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence of one or more persons, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer coach, mobile home, boarding or rooming house, hotel or motel. 
    Dwelling, modular: A relocatable living unit manufactured off site and transported on an independent carrier unit, to a permanent site which has been constructed in accordance with an "Engineering Bulletin" issued by the Office of Technical Standards, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, D.C. 
    Dwelling, multifamily: A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units and designed for or used by three (3) or more families; also includes the word "apartments." 
    Dwelling, row house or townhouse: Three (3) or more dwelling units attached at the side or sides, each unit of which has a separate outdoor entrance and is designed to be occupied by one family per dwelling unit, and may be owned. 
    Dwelling, single-family: A building containing one dwelling unit and designed for or used exclusively by one (1) family. 
    Dwelling, two-family: A building containing two dwelling units and designed for or used exclusively by two (2) families; also includes the word "duplex." 
    Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms arranged, intended or designed as a habitable unit, containing kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities for not more than one family living independently of any other family. 
    Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories thereof, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. 
    Family: A person living alone or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit, using a single facility in a dwelling unit, for culinary purposes, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, hotel, motel, fraternity house, or sorority house. 
    Flood (one hundred year frequency): A flood having an average frequency of occurrence once in 100 years although the flood may occur in any year, based on statistical analyses of stream flow records available for the watershed and analyses of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the watershed, as determined by the City Engineer, or as determined by the U.S. Corps of Engineers and confirmed by the City Engineer or as determined by a registered professional engineer and certified by the City Engineer. 
    Flood control works: Any natural or manmade configuration, structure, feature or facility, individually or in combination, that functions as a control device in the manipulation of stormwater. 
    Flood hazard area: The land area adjoining a floodway which is not reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood but which would be inundated by the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood based on full urbanization of the watershed. 
    Floodway: The channel of a watercourse or drainway and those portions of the adjoining lands which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater of the 100-year frequency flood. 
    Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center lines of walls separating two buildings. 
    Frontage: The lineal [linear] measurement of a lot boundary which is abutting a street. 
    Garage apartment: A dwelling for one (1) family erected as a part of a private garage. 
    Garage, parking: Any building or portion thereof used for the storage of four or more automobiles in which any servicing which may be provided is incidental to the primary use for storage purposes, and where repair facilities are not provided. 
    Garage, private: A detached building or a portion of the principal building used by the occupants of the premises for storage of passenger vehicles or trailers. 
    Garage, public: The structure or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used for the storage, sale, hire, care, repairing or refinishing of any vehicles. 
    Group homes for the handicapped: Group homes for the handicapped include situations where two (2) or more handicapped individuals, related or nonrelated, receive food, lodging and supervision by a nonrelated person or persons for a monthly fee or charge. 
    Height: The vertical measurement of any structure on any parcel of land measured from the average elevation of the lot or parcel to the uppermost point of the structure. 
    Home occupation: Any occupation carried on solely by the inhabitants of a dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory building; provided that no trading and merchandising is carried on and in connection with which there is no display of merchandise or advertising sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate, not more than two (2) square feet in area, attached to the main or accessory building, and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is customarily used in purely domestic or household purposes. A tearoom, restaurant, rest home, clinic, barbershop, beauty parlor, doctor's or dentist's office, child care center, tourist home or cabinet shop, metal shop, lawn mower repair, or auto repair garage shall not be deemed a home occupation. 
    Hospital: See "Medical facilities." 
    Hotel: A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing six or more sleeping rooms occupied or intended or designed to be occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including trailer parks or camps, hospitals, asylums, orphanages, or buildings where persons are housed under restraint. 
    Industry: Storage, repair, manufacture, preparation or treatment of any article, substance, or any commodity for commercial use. 
    Institutional uses: Those uses organized, established, used or intended to be used for the promotion of a public, religious, educational, charitable, cultural, social, or philanthropic activity and normally operated on a nonprofit basis. 
    Junk or salvage yard: A place where waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, bailed, packed, disassembled or handled, including all wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used cars in operable condition, or salvage material incidental to manufacturing operations. 
    Kennel: Any structure or premises on which three (3) or more dogs over four (4) months of age are kept. 
    Livability space: The open space of a lot which is not allocated to or used for off-street parking or loading areas or for paved access to the off-street parking or loading area. 
    Loading space: A space on the same lot as the principal use of at least ten (10) feet in width and thirty (30) feet in length and having a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet, designated for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot: A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such open spaces as required by this Ordinance, and having access on a public street. 
    Lot, corner: A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Lot, depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line: Any boundary of a lot. 
    Lot line, front: The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street. Where the lot abuts more than one street, the owner may select the front lot line. 
    Lot line, rear: The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot, wedge-shaped: A lot situated so that the front is either wider or narrower than the rear of the lot. 
    Lots of record: A separate and distinct parcel designated on a legally recorded subdivision plat or a legally recorded deed filed in the records of Canadian County, State of Oklahoma. 
    Mean lot elevation: The average elevation of a lot. 
    Medical facilities: 
a.  Nursing home, rest or convalescent homes: See "Convalescent home." 
b.  Dental or medical clinic: A building used for the examination and treatment of the physically ill, provided that no facilities are provided for patients remaining overnight except under emergency conditions except as provided for in Section 405.2. 
c.  Dental or doctor's office: The same as dental or medical clinic, including the various dental and medical specialties. 
d.  Hospital: An institution providing physical and mental health services primarily for human in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, and including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
e.  Public health center: A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health services, including related facilities. 
    Mobile [manufactured] home: A detached residential dwelling unit designed for long-term occupancy and containing sleeping accommodations and designed for transportation, after fabrication, on its own wheels with the carriage frame for transportation being an integral part of the construction of the unit including axles, wheels and hitch, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, and connection to utilities. 
    Mobile [manufactured] home lot: A portion of a mobile home park allocated to the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home. 
    Mobile [manufactured] home park: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for placement of mobile homes to be occupied as residences. 
    Motel: An area containing one (1) or more buildings designed or intended to be used as temporary sleeping facilities of one (1) or more transient persons. 
    Open space: Area included in any side, rear, or front yard, or any other unoccupied space on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices and eaves of porches. 
    Parcel: A lot as defined herein. 
    Parking space: A permanently surfaced area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or access drives, for the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Planning commission: See "City planning commission." 
    Restaurant, conventional: Any establishment where food, frozen dessert and/or beverage is sold to the consumer and where through design and function such food, frozen dessert and/or beverage is consumed by the customer while seated at a table or counter within a structurally delineated space of the establishment. 
    Restaurant, drive-in: Any establishment where food, frozen dessert and/or beverage is sold to the consumer either by means of counter service, curb service or self-service and where through design and function of the establishment such food, frozen dessert and/or beverage may be consumed in a motor vehicle parked upon the premises of the establishment. 
    Roominghouse: See "Boardinghouse." 
    Sadomasochistic practice : Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
    Sexually oriented businesses: are defined as follows: 
(1)  Adult amusement or entertainment. Amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, including but not limited to topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainment. 
(2)  Adult bookstore. An establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, videocassettes, compact disks, or other visual reproductions, which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, or instrument, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed or marketed for use in sexual conduct. 
(3)  Adult motion picture arcade: Any establishment to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater: An establishment designed to accommodate more than five persons where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, compact disks, digital recordings or other similar photographic or visual reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  Massage parlor: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration or fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Model studio: Any place other than university or college art classes where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specific anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity. 
(7)  Sexual encounter center: Any building or structure which contains, or is used for commercial entertainment where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or allow personal contact by employees, devices or equipment or by personnel provided by the establishment which appeals to the prurient interest of the patron, to include, but not to be limited to, bath houses, massage parlors, and related or similar activities. 
    Sexual conduct includes the following: 
(1)  The stimulation, fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, vulva, or female breasts; 
(2)  Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or anal copulation; 
(3)  Sadomasochistic practices; and 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above. 
    Sign: Any word, lettering, part of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, pictures, trade names or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, a service, a commodity or product, which are visible from any public street or right-of-way and designed to attract attention. "For Sale" and "For Rent" shall be deemed signs within the meaning of this definition, but the term "sign" shall not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or other political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious, or like campaign, drive, movement, or event used for a public purpose in the public interest. 
    Sign, display surface area: The net geometric area of the surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated, including the outward extremities of all letters, figures, characters and delineations, provided that only one face of a double-faced sign shall be included in the computation of display surface area. 
    Sign, illuminated: A sign designed to give forth any artificial light, or designed to reflect light from one or more sources, natural or artificial. 
    Sign, projecting: A sign erected on the face or outside wall of a building which projects out at any angle therefrom. 
    Sign, temporary: Signs of temporary nature used to advertise the premises for sale, rent, or lease. 
    Specified anatomical areas includes the following: 
(1)  Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street: A public right-of-way more than thirty (30) feet in width which provides the primary public means of access to abutting property and used primarily for vehicular circulation. 
    Street, arterial: Any street designated by the City Council and/or as may be designated on the Thoroughfare Plan as an arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial, major street, etc. 
    Street, collector: A street collecting traffic from minor streets and serving as the most direct route to an arterial street or a community facility. Any street may be designated by the City Council as a collector street when it serves, or when extended, may serve more than fifty (50) dwelling units. 
    Street, minor: Any street not designated on the Thoroughfare Plan as an arterial. 
    Structural alteration: Any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure: Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground (not including sidewalks, driveways and similar improvement areas). 
    Swimming pool, private: A structure constructed either above the ground level or below the ground level to be used by the inhabitants of a private residence for swimming. 
    Thoroughfare Plan: The part of the Comprehensive Plan referring to transportation development goals, principles, and standards; also includes use of the words "Major Street Plan" and "Trafficways Plan." 
    Trailer: A portable or mobile unit, other than a mobile home, used or designed to carry or transport material or animals. 
    Yard: A required space on a lot unobstructed except as expressly permitted. 
    Yard, front: A yard extending across the full width of a lot from side lot line to side lot line abutting on a street, into which a building may not protrude. 
    Yard, rear: A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured from side lot line to side lot line. 
    Yard, side: A yard extending from front yard to the rear yard abutting the side lot line, into which no building may protrude. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 1, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 745, § 3, 6-19-1984; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 8-2-2005) 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLYING TO ALL OR TO SEVERAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 401. - Limitation on use. 
401.1.  Application of regulations in districts authorized. No land, building, structure, or improvement shall be used and no building, structure, or improvement shall be made, erected, constructed, moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used or maintained for any purpose or in any manner except in accordance with the use, height, area, coverage, yard, space, and other requirements established in the district in which such land, building, structure, or improvement is located, and such use is authorized, except as provided by Article 5, Nonconformities. 
401.2.  Application of regulations to the uses of a more restricted district. Whenever the specific district regulations pertaining to one district permit the uses of a more restricted district, such uses shall be subject to the conditions set forth in the regulations of the more restricted district, unless otherwise specified. 
401.3.  Residential uses restricted to residential lots. It is intended that these regulations be interpreted as not permitting a dwelling unit to be located on the same lot with or within a structure used or intended to be used primarily for nonresidential purposes, with exceptions for one accessory residential unit provided for a night watchman, motel manager, or similar purpose where essential to the main use of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 1316, § 2, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 1345, § 2, 7-18-2017) 
401.4.  Height exceptions. The following structures shall not be subject to the height limitations of the district in which they are located: 
    Farm buildings not intended for human occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 1, 6-18-1974; Ord. No. 986, 7-1-1997) 
401.5.  Location of package stores, mixed beverage establishments, bottle clubs and beer and wine establishments. The location of a retail package store, mixed beverage establishment, bottle club, and beer and wine establishment shall be subject to the zoning ordinances of the city. The location of a retail package store, mixed beverage establishment, bottle club, and beer and wine establishment is specifically prohibited within three hundred (300) feet of any church property primarily and regularly used for worship services and religious activities, or public school; provided that, if any such church or school shall be established within three hundred (300) feet of any package store after such store has been licensed, this shall not be a bar to the renewal of such license so long as it has been in continuous force and effect. The distance indicated in this section shall be measured from the nearest property line of such church or school to the nearest public entrance door of the premises of such package store, mixed beverage establishment, bottle club, and beer and wine establishment along the street right-of-way line providing the nearest direct route usually traveled by pedestrians between such points. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street from such church or school shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with such church or school. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no package store, mixed beverage establishment, bottle club, and beer and wine establishment shall be located on any city block where a school or church is already located. 
(Code 1975, § 3-7; Ord. No. 965, 12-3-1996) 
Editor's note- As a part of the 1995 recodification and per the instructions of the city, 1975 Code § 3-7 was relocated to this appendix as § 401.5. 
Sec. 402. - Division of lots. 
    402.1. An improved lot shall not hereafter be divided into two or more lots unless all lots resulting from such division comply with all the applicable yard, space, area, parking and loading regulations of the zoning district in which located. 
Sec. 403. - Use of yards. 
403.1.  Use of yards. 
(A)  No building, structure, or improvement shall be permitted to encroach upon required yard spaces set forth in the provisions of this Ordinance; provided, however, that surfaced parking facilities, signs, fences, and gasoline pumping service units may be permitted to occupy required yard space unless otherwise prohibited in those districts permitting such improvements and provided that no inoperative vehicle may be stored in the front yard of a lot in a Residential District. 
(B)  A private swimming pool shall not occupy any portion of a lot which has been delineated in a recorded plat as a front yard space, or dedicated easement for public access, and shall require a permit issued by the City of Yukon prior to construction. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 2, 6-18-1974; Ord. No. 657, § 2, 10-20-1981) 
403.2.  Front yard exceptions. 
(A)  In Commercial and Industrial Districts where lots comprising forty (40) percent or more of all frontage on the same side of the street and within the same block are developed with buildings, the minimum front yard depth shall be the average of the existing front yards. The same block shall mean a distance of not over three hundred fifty (350) feet where there are no intervening streets delineating a block. 
(B)  In Residential Districts where lots comprising forty (40) percent or more of all frontage on the same side of the street and within the same block are developed with buildings, the minimum front yard depth shall be the average of the existing front yards; but in no case shall a front yard be less than fifteen (15) feet. The same block shall mean a distance of not more than three hundred fifty (350) feet where there are no intervening streets delineating a block. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1, 3-5-1974; Ord. No. 507, § 3, 6-18-1974; Ord. No. 547, § 1, 7-19-1975) 
403.3.  Yards to serve one building. 
    No yard or lot area required for a building or structure shall during its life be occupied by, or counted as yard space for any other building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 4, 6-18-1974) 
403.4.  Projections into yards. 
(a)  Eaves, cornices, window sills, chimney, and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed three (3) feet. 
(b)  Open porches and unenclosed balconies may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five (5) feet. 
(c)  Open iron fire escapes may project into a required yard a distance not to exceed three (3) feet. 
(d)  Fences, walls, or latticework screen having height of not more than four (4) feet are permitted in front yards, except on corner lots where a sight triangle shall be kept unobstructed, as defined by Section 403.5. 
(e)  Rear yard fences shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 5, 6-18-1974) 
403.5.  Sight lines at intersections. On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, structure, or any plant growth which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two (2) feet and six (6) feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway shall be placed or maintained within a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of twenty-five (25) feet along said front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. 
(Ord. No. 507, § 6, 6-18-1974; Ord. No. 657, § 4, 10-20-1981) 
Sec. 404. - Street access. 
    404.1. No principal building shall hereafter be constructed on a lot which does not abut a public dedicated street unless such construction is permitted under the terms of a PUD. 
Sec. 405. - Reserved. 
405.1.  Repealed. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 4, 1-21-1992) 
405.2.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 4, 1-21-1992) 
Sec. 406. - Off-street parking. 
406.1.  Purpose and application. It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking, loading and maneuvering facilities be provided on off-the-street areas for each use of land within the City of Yukon. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each land use and will be satisfied by facilities which are functionally adequate and aesthetically pleasing. These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. 
(A)  Off-Street Parking and Loading Required: Permanent off-street parking and loading areas in the amount specified by this section for each use shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased, in the amount required for the enlargement or increase in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, or before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another. 
(B)  Use of Public Right-of-Way Prohibited: No portion of any required off-street space shall occupy or use any public street, right-of-way, alley or other public property. Parking spaces which use any street or public right-of-way as a direct means of access without the intermediate use of service aisles and entrances of at least the minimum standards specified by this section shall be prohibited. A public alley shall be the only public right-of-way area permitted for maneuvering space to reach a required parking stall. 
(C)  Required Open Space: Off-Street parking space may be a part of the required open space associated with the permitted use, unless otherwise prohibited; provided, however, the off-street parking requirements shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(D)  Location: The off-street parking lot shall be located within two hundred (200) feet, exclusive of street and alley widths, of the principal use and shall have direct access to a street or alley. 
(E)  Minimum Standards and Property Owner Responsibility: The standards contained herein represent minimum requirements. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to certify at the time he applies for a building permit that his plan is sufficient to provide sufficient spaces and facilities necessary to ensure that no activity will take place on public streets or property not under his control. Any use developed after the date of adoption of these regulations which fails to provide for its off-street parking, loading and access needs according to this provision shall be in violation of the Zoning Ordinance. Upon determination by the director that a property owner has not provided adequate parking or loading space to serve his operation, said property owner shall be required to either develop additional parking or loading space or reduce the size of the operation to fit the space available. 
(F)  Ownership or Control: The land on which the off-street parking or loading facility is located shall be owner[-controlled] or controlled by the same entity which owns or controls the land on which the principal use is located. 
(G)  Approval Procedures for Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access: 
(1)  New construction or remodeling. No building permit shall be approved until a plan has been reviewed and approved by the city staff as a part of the building and site plan review process. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all off-street parking and loading facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved building permit. 
(2)  Plan and information required. The applicant for a building permit for new construction, expansion or remodeling shall submit a plan showing the number, location and size of parking spaces. The applicant shall submit information regarding the projected number of employees, seating capacities, gross floor area, gross leasable area, number of dwelling units and any of the appropriate data necessary to verify compliance with these regulations. 
(3)  Plans for surfacing of parking areas. Plans for surfacing of all off-street parking areas, aisles and access driveways, including detailed drainage plans, shall be reviewed and approved by the city staff for compliance with city specifications. 
(H)  Interpretation and Appeal: If questions of interpretation or application of these requirements to particular uses or structures arise, the city staff shall, based on findings of fact, make a determination of the off-street parking, loading or access requirements. Any aggrieved property owner may appeal such determination to the board of adjustment under the procedure specified in Section 701 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986; Ord. No. 1316, § 3, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 1345, § 3, 7-18-2017) 
406.2.  Joint parking facilities. 
(A)  Joint Parking Facilities. The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in a joint parking facility under the following conditions: 
(1)  Multiple ownerships or structures. Where there are multiple ownerships or structures, each owner shall provide evidence of a permanent legal instrument which has been filed of record with the county clerk and which guarantees [the] permanent right to use of the parking facility. 
(2)  Churches. One-half of the required parking spaces for churches may be included in the total of required parking spaces for other uses that do not operate after 6:00 p.m. or on Sundays; provided, that the nearest property line of said parking area is located within three hundred (300) feet of the church property line. 
(B)  Shared Parking-Cumulative Effect. Where more than one facility shows evidence of joint use agreements for common access and a cross parking arrangement resulting in reduced street access points, parking requirements will be based upon the cumulative gross floor area of all structures. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986) 
406.3.  Residential parking design. 
(A)  Single-family, duplex and multifamily residential structures located on one lot may use a paved driveway to fulfill the minimum parking requirements of this section. The space for each automobile on the paved area shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length and shall not be located on the street right-of-way. The residential driveway shall conform to the driveway design requirements as specified in Section 406.4(A)(2). 
(B)  In Residential zoning districts all vehicles shall be parked on permanently hard-surfaced driveways or parking areas or shall be parked completely to the rear of the front wall of the main building on said property. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
406.4.  Parking area construction standards. 
(A)  Paving: All off-street parking areas, aisles and access driveways shall be permanently paved with hardsurface pavement. All portions of access driveways on public right-of-way connected to paved streets for which the grade has been established must be permanently paved with hard-surfaced pavement and comply with all Yukon city codes relating to driveway construction. Permanent hard-surfaced pavement shall mean a surface covering over earth, gravel or other natural or artificial base or foundation which shall meet or exceed the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Two (2) inches of hot asphaltic concrete on a four-inch base of stabilized aggregate or the equivalent thereto, which has been approved by the city staff; or 
(2)  Four inches of Portland cement concrete on a two-inch sand cushion base or the equivalent thereto, which has been approved by the city staff. 
(3)  All portions of access driveways on public right-of-way: six (6) inches of Portland cement concrete on a two-inch sand cushion or the equivalent thereto, which has been approved by the city staff. 
(B)  Size of Off-Street Parking Space: The size of a parking space for one vehicle shall consist of a rectangular area having dimensions of not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet or [which] comply with Resolution Number 74-2 and provide for adequate ingress and egress. 
(C)  Striping: Off-street parking areas shall be designed to provide systematic and/orderly circulation, traffic separation devices, and parking spaces in accordance with this section and with sound traffic engineering practices. 
(1)  All off-street parking spaces and means of ingress and egress shall be laid out on the parking surface with paint or plastic striping which provide a permanent delineation between spaces, aisles, and surrounding structures and land. 
(2)  No striping shall be required on lots having only single-family or duplex residential structures. 
(D)  Separation from Public Right-of-Way: All off-street parking areas, aisles and access driveways that abut public street right-of-way shall be separated by a six-inch Portland cement concrete header curb and shall be designed so that vehicles do not overhang public right-of-way or adjacent property. 
(E)  Lighting: All lighting equipment used in illumination of off-street parking areas shall not create a nuisance or hazard for streets or adjoining properties. 
(F)  Clearance: 
(1)  There shall be a minimum vertical clearance free of all obstructions to a height of eight (8) feet for all portions of any off-street parking space, except when off-street parking spaces are provided in a parking structure or a residential garage. No obstruction shall project into this minimum clearance. 
(2)  There shall be no obstruction within or near the bounds of any required off-street parking space which would interfere with the normal availability and use thereof. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986) 
406.5.  Off-street parking lots located within or adjacent to a residential district. Whenever off-street parking lots serving churches, schools, commercial, industrial, parks, public, or multifamily facilities are to be located within or adjacent to a residential district, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  All sides of the lot within or abutting the residential district shall be enclosed with a screening wall or fence as specified under Section 407. 
(b)  No parking shall be permitted within a front yard when the parking lot is located in a residential district. 
(c)  Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width, exclusive of curb returns, unless approved by the city staff. 
(d)  All of the lot used for parking and driveway purposes shall be paved with a sealed surface pavement and maintained in such a manner that no dust will be produced by continued use. 
(e)  Whenever lighting is provided, it shall be arranged so that all light is deflected from adjoining residential uses. 
(f)  No sign of any kind shall be erected except information signs used to guide traffic and to state the condition and terms of the use of the lots. Only nonintermittent white lighting of signs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986) 
406.6.  Handicapped parking. 
(a)  Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following table on all new construction of commercial, industrial and public buildings (this includes additions to existing buildings) within the City of Yukon. Said spaces shall be included in the computation of required spaces as specified by this section: 
TABLE 1 
Accessible Parking Spaces 
Parking Required Required Number of 
Handicapped Spaces Up to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1000 2% of total Over 1000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000  
(b)  The minimum size of a parking space for vehicles with handicapped drivers shall be nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet, plus a four-foot adjacent access aisle; however, two (2) accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. And the spaces shall be painted and striped with a four-inch striping. 
(c)  Permanent metal signs designating handicapped parking shall be placed immediately in front of each handicapped parking space. 
(d)  Location: 
(1)  At least one accessible route shall be provided from public transportation stops, accessible parking and accessible passenger loading zones, and public streets or sidewalks to the accessible building entrance they serve. 
(2)  At least one accessible route shall connect accessible buildings, facilities, elements and spaces that are on the same site. 
(3)  At least one accessible route shall connect accessible building or facility entrances with all accessible spaces and elements and with all accessible dwelling units within the building or facility. 
(4)  An accessible route shall connect at least one accessible entrance of each accessible dwelling unit with those exterior and interior spaces and facilities that serve the accessible dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986) 
406.7.  Queuing spaces. Where queuing spaces are provided, they shall conform to the following standards: 
(a)  No queuing space may occupy any portion of a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Queuing spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length. 
(c)  Queuing spaces may not be used to satisfy the off-street parking or loading requirements of this section. 
(d)  Queuing spaces may be provided in the primary access aisle leading to a drive-in or drive-through facility. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986) 
406.8.  Aisle standards. 
(a)  Aisles providing access to off-street parking areas, but not immediately adjacent to or providing direct access to an off-street parking space, shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width if designed for two-way traffic and at least fourteen (14) feet in width if designed for one-way traffic. 
(b)  Aisles located immediately adjacent to buildings or structures shall be separated by one of the following methods: 
(1)  A planted or landscaped strip not less than two (2) feet in width, excluding curb, protected by a six-inch concrete curb; 
(2)  A sidewalk of not less than four (4) feet in width, excluding curb, protected by a six-inch concrete curb. 
(c)  Parking may be located immediately adjacent to buildings or structures provided they are protected by a planted or landscaped strip or a sidewalk or a bumper guard. 
(d)  A drive-in window shall not project more than one foot into an aisle. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986) 
406.9.  Off-street loading. 
(A)  Off-Street Loading Space Required: Every new industrial, commercial, office and civic building hereafter erected or expanded shall provide space, as indicated herein, for loading and unloading of vehicles. The number of off-street loading spaces required by this section shall be considered as the absolute minimum, and the owner/applicant shall evaluate his own needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum specified by this section. 
(B)  Size of Off-Street Loading Spaces: All off-street loading spaces shall have the minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet by sixty (60) feet and fifteen (15) feet overhead clearance. In no case shall required off-street loading space encroach upon off-street parking space required under this section, or on public right-of-way. No maneuvering shall be permitted on public right-of-way. 
(C)  Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces Required: 
(1)  Retail, commercial and industrial: 0-12,000 square feet of gross floor area, none required; 12,001-48,000 square feet of gross floor area, one space required; and 48,001 and over square feet of gross floor area, two (2) spaces required. 
(2)  Office and civic: 0-48,000 square feet of gross floor area, none required; 48,000-100,000 square feet of gross floor area, one space required; and 100,001 and over of square feet of gross floor area, two (2) spaces are required. 
(D)  Design of Loading Space: Off-street loading spaces shall be designed so that vehicles shall maneuver entirely within the property lines of the premises and not on public right-of-way. Unenclosed off-street loading areas shall be permanently paved with hard-surfaced pavement. A six-inch header curb must also be constructed to separate a loading area from public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986) 
406.10.  Specific parking requirements. The following lists all use units which are included in this Zoning Ordinance. Each unit has a specific parking standard which shall be met. In certain cases where a use unit has no specific standard determined in advance by the regulations, the city staff shall make a determination of need after review of the site plan. 
Use Unit Parking Standard (A) Residential Use Unit: (1) Single-family residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus garage (2) Two-family residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus garage (3) Multiple-family residential:  Efficiency and 1 bedroom 1.5 spaces per dwelling [unit]  Two (2) or more bedrooms 2 spaces per dwelling unit (B) Civic Use Units: (1) Light public protection and utility:  General Staff approval (2) Low-impact institutional-Neighborhood related:  Kindergarten, elementary and jr. high school 1 space per 10 classroom seats  Churches, temples and synagogues 1 space per 4 seats in chapel (3) Moderate-Impact Institutional:  High schools 1 space per 4 classroom seats  Vocational schools 1 space per 4 classroom seats (4) High-impact institutional:  General college and university 1 space per 4 classroom seats  Hospitals and sanitariums 2 spaces per bed plus 1 space per 500 sq. ft. gross floor area of emergency room and outpatient care (where such care is specifically provided) (C) Library Services and Community Centers: (1) Libraries 1 space per 400 sq. ft. gross floor area (2) Community centers 1 space per 300 sq. ft. gross floor area (D) Community Recreation-General: (1) Golf courses 5 spaces per green plus 1 space per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area of building (2) Swim centers 1 space per 150 sq. ft. of pool area (3) Game courts: tennis, squash, racquetball, handball 5 spaces per court (4) Playgrounds, playfields, public park Staff approval (E) Commercial Use Units: (1) Administrative and professional office See Table II, Office (2) Agricultural supplies and services See Table I, Retail (3) Animal sales and services: Auctioning See Table I, Retail (4) Animal sales and services: Grooming See Table I, Retail (5) Animal sales and services: Horse stables Staff approval (6) Animal sales and services: Kennels and veterinary, restricted See Table I, Retail (7) Animal sales and services: Kennels and veterinary, general See Table I, Retail (8) Automotive and equipment: Storage Staff approval (9) Automotive and equipment: Cleaning and repairs, light equipment 1 space per 500 sq. ft. gross floor area; 5 spaces minimum (10) Automotive and equipment: Repairs, heavy equipment 1 space per 500 sq. ft. gross floor area; 5 spaces minimum (11) Automotive sales and rentals:  For showroom area See Table I, Retail  For outside lot See Table IV, Warehousing (substitute lot area for gross floor area)  For service area and body shop See Table III, Industrial and Manufacturing (12) Automotive and equipment: Sales and rentals, light equipment:  For showroom area See Table I, Retail  For outside lot See Table IV, Warehousing (substitute lot area for gross floor area)  For service area and body shop See Table III, Industrial and Manufacturing (13) Automotive and equipment: Sales and rentals, farm and heavy equipment:  For showroom area See Table I, Retail  For outside lot See Table IV, Warehousing (substitute lot area for gross floor area)  For service area and body shop See Table III, Industrial and Manufacturing (14) Building maintenance service See Table I, Retail (15) Business support services See Table II, Office (16) Communication services See Table II, Office (17) Construction sales and services:  For showroom area See Table I, Retail  For outside lot See Table IV, Warehousing (substitute lot area for gross floor area) (18) Convenience sales and personal services See Table I, Retail (19) Eating establishments:  Sitdown, alcohol not permitted 1 space per 100 sq. ft. gross floor area (20) Eating establishments:  Sitdown, alcohol permitted 1 space per 50 sq. ft. gross floor area (21) Eating establishments:  Fast food 1 space per 100 sq. ft. gross floor area (22) Eating establishments:  Drive-in 1 space per 100 sq. ft. gross floor area (23) Drinking establishments:  Sitdown, alcohol permitted 1 space per 50 sq. ft. gross floor area (24) Food and beverage retail sales See Table I, Retail (25) Alcoholic and beverage retail sales See Table I, Retail (26) Funeral and interment services:  Undertaking 1 space per 4 seats in chapel and 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of nonassembly area within building (27) Gasoline sales: Restricted for building area See Table I, Retail (for spaces in addition to adequate queuing and access space) (28) Laundry services See Table I, Retail (29) Medical services: General 7 spaces per doctor on duty and 2 spaces per 3 employees (30) Participant recreation and entertainment indoor:  Bowling alleys 5 spaces per lane  Billiard parlors See Table I, Retail  Dancehalls 1 space per 50 sq. ft. of club area and 1 space per 100 sq. ft. of remaining gross floor area  Gymnasiums Staff approval  Health clubs See Table I, Retail  Skating rinks Staff approval  Arcades See Table I, Retail  Theaters 1 space per 4 seats (31) Participant recreation and entertainment outdoor:  Driving Range 1 space per 2 driving stations  Miniature golf 2 spaces per 3 holes  Go-cart tracks Staff approval  Drive-in theater 6 spaces minimum and adequate spaces for viewing  Amusement park Staff approval (32) Personal services: General See Table II, Office (33) Retail sales and services: General See Table I, Retail (34) Retail sales and services: General See Table I, Retail (35) Retail sales and services: Outdoor  Swap meets Staff approval (36) Tourist accommodations: Campground Staff approval (37) Tourist accommodation: Lodging 1 space per rental plus 1 space per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area of restaurant area (including kitchen) plus 1 space per 100 sq. ft. gross floor area of club area (excluding office and meeting rooms) plus 1 space per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area for any retail area (38) Personal storage See Table IV, Warehouse (39) Day care center 1 space per 10 children enrolled plus 1 space per 20 children enrolled for queuing (loading and unloading); 2 queuing spaces minimum (40) Sexually Oriented Business Staff approval (F) Industrial Use Units: (1) Custom manufacturing See Table III, Manufacturing and industrial (2) Wholesaling, storage and distribution: General See Table IV, Warehousing (substitute total site area for gross floor area) (3) Light industrial See Table III, Manufacturing and industrial (4) Moderate industrial See Table III, Manufacturing and industrial  
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-1986; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 8-2-2005) 
406.11.  Minimum parking standards tables. 
TABLE I Retail For the first 12,000 sq. ft. GLA From 12,001 to 48,000 sq. ft. GLA Over 48,000 sq. ft. GLA PLUS PLUS 1 space/200 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/225 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/250 sq. ft. GLA TABLE II Office For the first 12,000 sq. ft. GLA From 12,001 to 48,000 sq. ft. GLA Over 48,000 sq. ft. GLA PLUS PLUS 1 space/200 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/300 sq. ft. GLA 1 space/350 sq. ft. GLA TABLE III Manufacturing and Industrial For the first 20,000 sq. ft. GFA Over 20,000 sq. ft. GFA PLUS 1 space/500 sq. ft. GFA 1 space/1000 sq. ft. GFA TABLE IV Warehousing For the first 20,000 sq. ft. GFA Over 20,000 sq. ft. GFA PLUS 1 space/1000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space/5000 sq. ft. GFA  
GLA = Gross Leasable Area GFA = Gross Floor Area 
Note 1: For mixed uses containing any combination of retail, office, manufacturing and industrial, or warehousing activity parking requirements shall be tabulated separately for each use within the development using the list of specific standards or the tables above. Mixed uses regulated under separate parking requirements shall not be combined to achieve a larger square footage total that would result in a reduced parking requirement. Where any part of a mixed use is converted to another use category, then the parking requirements shall be recalculated based on the new square footage figure. 
Note 2: Where a manufacturing and industrial use has more than one working shift of employees, parking facilities shall be adequate to accommodate overlap requirements during transition periods. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-7-86) 
Sec. 407. - Screening wall or fence. 
407.1.  Specifications. When the provisions of this Ordinance require the construction of a screening wall or fence as a condition for the initiation and subsequent continuance of a use, the screening wall or fence: 
A.  Shall be constructed, designed, and arranged to provide visual separation of uses, irrespective of vegetation; 
B.  Shall not be less than five (5) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height; and 
C.  Shall be constructed with all braces and supports on the interior. 
407.2.  Maintenance. The screening wall or fence shall be maintained by the owner of the zoning lot containing the use requiring the construction of the screening. Failure to maintain after notice by the Zoning Administrator shall constitute an offense hereunder. 
Sec. 408. - Sewer service. 
    408.1. No structure or use in any district shall be erected or commenced which does not have a connection to the public sewer system, unless and until the County Public Health Officer certifies that a septic tank or any substitute disposal system can be installed and operated effectively. As a basis for making his decision, the Public Health Officer may require such percolation tests as he deems to be necessary. Such tests are to be made at the expense of the property owner. 
Sec. 409. - Group housing projects. 
    409.1. In the case of a housing project consisting of a group of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two (2) acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements of this Ordinance to the individual buildings in such housing project, the application of such requirements to such housing project may be changed by the Board of Adjustment, in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, will ensure a density of land use no higher and a standard of open space at least as high as required by this Ordinance in the district in which the proposed project is to be located. In no case shall a use or building height or density of population be permitted which is less than the requirement of the district in which the housing project is to be located. 
ARTICLE 5. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 501. - Intent. 
    501.1. Within the districts established by this Ordinance or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 502. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    502.1. In any district in which a lot exists of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance which does not conform in size or area to the provisions of this Ordinance, buildings for the uses permitted in such district may be erected on such lot, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 503. - Nonconforming structures. 
    503.1. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
B.  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, except in the floodway supplement district as provided in Section 606.5, and except for multifamily dwellings containing more than two (2) units built prior to February 19, 1974, which may reconstruct within two (2) years to equal [the] number of units it contained prior to the destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
C.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Ord. No. 789, § 1, 8-5-1986) 
Sec. 504. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
    504.1. If a lawful use of a structure, or of [a] structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
B.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
C.  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
D.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
E.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
Sec. 505. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    505.1. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, lawful uses of land exist that are no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or amended, such uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No such conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 
B.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 
C.  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
Sec. 506. - Changes in nonconformity. 
    506.1. A nonconforming use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination, shall not be changed unless changed to a use permitted in the district in which located; except that the Board of Adjustment may permit a change to a more restricted nonconforming use and such change shall be construed as an abandonment of the former permitted nonconforming use. 
ARTICLE 6. - SPECIFIC DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 601. - A-Agricultural District. 
601.1.  General description. The regulations for the Agricultural Zoning District are designed to protect undeveloped areas from intensive uses until a use pattern is approved. 
601.2.  Uses permitted. The permitted uses in the Agricultural District are set forth in the table below. Where the letter "x" appears on the line of a permitted use and in the proper column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district subject to the general provisions of the Zoning Ordinance as set forth in the preceding sections. Where the letter "p" appears instead of the letter "x," this use is permitted subject to acquiring a Conditional Use Permit as set forth in Section 803. 
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES IN AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
Permitted Uses Zoning District A Agricultural activities of a traditional and customary extensive nature including the raising of livestock; field crop farm; fruit tree, nut tree or vegetable farm; tree farms; and horticulture specialty farm, but not including the operation of commercial feed yards or agricultural activities of an intensive nature such as commercial feed yards, poultry ranch and other intensive agricultural type uses x Agricultural activities of a nontraditional, noncustomary and intensive nature including commercial feed pens, poultry ranch, or other intensive agricultural activities where livestock is concentrated in enclosures of such limited size that the major portion of the necessary food supply for the livestock must be imported p Aircraft transportation (special permit requirement shall apply only to establishing and enlarging of airports, flying fields and heliports and to establishing, relocating and lengthening of runways) p Airway beacon or marker x Animal hospital (with or without outside runs) x Apiary x Arboretum or botanical garden x Boarding or training animals x Carnival, circus, tent revival or similar temporary open-air enterprise p Cemetery p Child care center, family x Child care center, institutional p Child care institution: Other than day nursery p Church, synagogue or temple, including Sunday School facilities x Civil defense and related activities facility p College, junior college, professional school, or university: Public or equivalent private: Stadium or field house: Other facilities p Community center: Public p Construction facilities, accessory p Convalescent, maternity or nursing home p Dairy farm; egg farm x Drilling, operating, equipping and maintaining of wells for oil and gas including the storage of equipment and supplies by a drilling company to support active drilling, but not an operation of a retail outlet or a salvage operation p Electric regulating substation p Farm for raising dogs, cattle, goats, horses, sheep, rabbits, or poultry x Field crop farm x Fire protection and related activities facility p Fishery x Flood control works p Fruit, tree nut, or vegetable farm x Gas pipeline right-of-way p Gas pressure control station p Golf course: Public or private p Greenhouse x Growing and harvesting of trees x Horticultural specialty farm x Hospital, general p Hospital restricted to mental, narcotics or alcoholic patients; sanatorium p Library: Private, nonprofit other than branch p Mental institution p Mobile [manufactured] home (freestanding)* p Monastery, convent or novitiate p Motion picture theater: Drive-in p Museum p Newspaper distribution station p Nursery school or day nursery x Nursery (trees and shrubs) x Park, playground or tot lot: Public x Parish house, parsonage or rectory x Petroleum products transporting facilities including, but not limited to, pipeline right-of-way, pipeline and all pressure modification and regulating facilities p Pipeline right-of-way or pressure control station, NEC p Police protection and related activities facility p Postal services facility p Public facilities and works to be owned, operated or managed by the City of Yukon including, but not limited to, the following: Baseball or softball field Civil defense and related activities facility Community center Fire protection and related activities facility Flood-control works Golf course Library Museum Park Police protection and related activities facility Sewage pressure control station Swimming pool Tennis courts Water pipeline right-of-way, treatment plant, storage facility or pressure station Wildlife area Zoological garden Public stable x Racing facilities including facilities for vehicles, horses and motorcycles p Radio transmitting station or tower, other than amateur p Railroad right-of-way (excluding switching and marshalling yards) p Religious facility, other than a church, synagogue or temple, that is used to support, advance and/or enhance a religious endeavor including, but not limited to, such operations as a retreat, campground, meditation center, ritual grounds, and indoctrination center p Religious retreat facility p Retail sale of farm products sold on premises x School, elementary: Public or equivalent private x School, secondary: Public or equivalent private x Sewage pressure control station p Sewage treatment plant or sludge drying bed p Single-family detached dwelling x Skating rink: Public p Skeet and/or trap shooting range p Solid waste disposal facility p Swimming pool: Public p Taxicab stand/or dispatching station p Telegraph transmitting or receiving station or right-of-way x Telephone exchange station p Telephone relay tower or right-of-way p Television transmitting station or relay tower p Tennis courts: Public p Veterinarian treating animals on premises x Water pipeline right-of-way, treatment plant, storage facility or pressure control station p Wildlife area: Public x Zoological garden: Public p  
See Chapter 66 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 537, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-1975; Ord. No. 558, § 1, 5-18-1976; Ord. No. 657, § 8, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 958, 9-17-1996; Ord. No. 988, 7-1-1997) 
601.3.  Area and height regulations. 
Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot Frontage Maximum % 
Coverage Maximum 
Height 5 acres 330' 10% 35' Minimum
Front Yard
Setback Minimum Side Yard SetbackMinimum
Rear Yard
Setback 50' 30' 50'  
All lots and improvements within the A District shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  All lots shall have not less than five (5) acres of land including street dedications, and not more than one (1) principal building shall be placed on any one (1) lot. 
B.  Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than three hundred thirty (330) feet; provided, however, that right-of-way dedications may be included in calculating lot frontage. 
C.  Not more than ten (10) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision. 
D.  No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot except upon the approval of the Board of Adjustment. 
E.  All structures shall have not less than a fifty (50) foot front yard setback. 
F.  All principal structures shall have not less than a thirty (30) foot side yard setback. Accessory buildings may have side yards of not less than ten (10) feet. 
G.  All structures shall have not less than a fifty (50) foot rear yard setback. 
601.4.  Signs and billboards. No signs, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays shall be permitted in the A District except as follows: 
A.  One bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious, institutional, or similar use requiring an announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
B.  One identification sign may be erected on each street frontage of a single-family subdivision or permitted nonresidential use. The sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
C.  A real estate sign advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premises may be erected on each street frontage of the parcel. The sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
Sec. 602. - Residential Districts. 
602.1.  General description. The regulations for the Residential Zoning Districts are designed to: 
(1)  Protect the residential character of areas so designed from the noise, congestion and heavy traffic of commercial and industrial activities; 
(2)  Encourage a suitable environment for family life by providing for openness of living areas and permitting appropriate neighborhood facilities and compatible community facilities. 
   R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts. The R-1 Districts are designed to provide quiet, low density areas for single-family living with related recreational, religious and educational facilities protected from all commercial and industrial activity. 
   R-2 Combined Residential Districts. The R-2 Districts encourage similar basic restrictions of the R-1 Districts and permit a quiet, slightly higher population density area for family living protected from all commercial and industrial activity. 
   R-3 Multifamily Residential Districts. The R-3 Districts provide low and medium population density zone areas, containing a mixture of duplex, town house and multifamily dwellings along with a limited home occupations and limited private and public community uses where lots are large enough for family living, but small enough to afford low development costs, economy of streets and utilities, and proximity to schools, churches and shopping. 
    [RR District]: This RR District is a rural-style development of a single-family residential dwelling on a lot intended for areas where a community sewer and water are not planned in the near future, but where other public services may be available and topography and soil conditions allow development at a low population density that can rely on on site water supply and waste disposal systems without creating public health hazards. This RR district is intended primarily for areas devoted to large-lot suburban residential use. The regulations and restrictions in this RR District are intended to protect the residential character of these areas and conserve their environmental resources. 
The RR district provides single-family residential housing with rural amenities. Special attention should be given to overall design and location of lots within this district to ensure adequate light, air and open space are provided and to protect the area from being subject to intensified zoning once the district has been established and developed. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 3, 7-21-2015) 
602.2.  Uses permitted. The permitted uses in the Residential Districts are set forth in the table below. Where the letter "x" appears on the line of a permitted use and in the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district subject to the general provisions of the Zoning Ordinance as set forth in the preceding sections. Where the letter "p" appears instead of the letter "x," this use is permitted subject to acquiring a Conditional Use Permit as set forth in Section 803. 
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Zoning District Permitted Uses R-1 R-2 R-3 Apartment house x Apartment hotel x Arboretum or botanical garden p p x Boarding or rooming house p Cemetery; crematory; columbarium; mausoleum p p p Child care center, family x x x Child care center, commercial care taking p Child care center, institutional p Child care institution: Other than day nursery p Church, synagogue or temple, including Sunday School facilities p p x Civil defense and related activities facility p p p College, junior college: not including trade school p p x Community center: Public p p x Convalescent, maternity, nursing home or group home for the handicapped p p Dormitories x Dwelling, multifamily x Dwelling, single-family detached x x x Dwelling, townhouse or rowhouse not exceeding six (6) units per dwelling x Dwelling, two-family x x Electric regulation substation p p p Fire protection and related activities facility p p p Fraternity or sorority house x Golf course: Excluding miniature and commercial driving range separate from a golf course p p p Greenhouses: No products sold on premises x x x Hospital, general p Hospital restricted to mental, narcotics or alcoholic patients; sanatorium p Library: Private, nonprofit and public p p p Mobile home parks p Multiple-family dwelling x Museum or art gallery p p p Nursery school or day nursery p p p Nursery (trees and shrubs): No products sold on premises p p p Nursery (trees and shrubs): Sale of products on premises p Parish house, parsonage or rectory x x x Park, playground or tot lot: Public x x x Petroleum pipeline or pressure control station p p p Police protection and related activities facility p p p Postal services facility p p p Public facilities and works to be owned, operated or managed by the City of Yukon including, but not limited to the following: x x x Civil defense and related activities facility Community center Fire protection and related activities facility Golf course Hospital Library Park, playground or tot lot Police protection and related activities facility Sewage pressure control station Swimming pool Tennis courts Water pipeline right-of-way, treatment plant, storage facility or pressure control station Public off-street parking lot p p x Radio transmitting station or tower other than amateur p p p School, elementary: Public or equivalent private x x x School, secondary: Public or equivalent private x x x Sewage pressure control station p p p Single-family detached dwelling x x x Swimming pool: Public p p p Telephone exchange station, relay tower p p p Television transmitting station or relay tower p p p Tennis courts: Public p p x Town house x Truck gardens: No products sold on premises x x x Two-family dwelling x x Utility rights-of-way x x x Water treatment plant, storage facility or pressure control station p p p Zoological garden: Public p p x  
(Ord. No. 657, § 9, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 745, §§ 1, 2, 6-19-1984) 
602.30.  Lot, yard and height regulations. No lot or yard shall be established or reduced in dimension or area in any Residential District that does not meet the minimum requirements set forth in the following sections. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged that will cause maximum lot coverage or maximum height regulations to be exceeded for such district as set forth in the following sections. 
602.31  Area and height regulations for R-1. Single-Family Districts. 
Minimum
Lot Area Minimum
Lot
Frontage Maximum %
Coverage Maximum
Height Maximum
Density
per Acre 6,600 sq. ft. 60' 35% 35' 7 units  
Minimum Front
Yard Setback Minimum Side
Yard Setback Minimum Rear
Yard Setback 25' 5' interior lots 20% depth of lot 15' street side of corner lots  
All lots and improvements within the R-1 District shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  All lots shall have not less than six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet of lot area, and not more than one principal building shall be placed on any one lot, except that not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet shall be required for uses other than single-family residences. 
B.  Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than sixty (60) feet. The frontage of any wedge-shaped lot which meets the requirements of minimum lot size may be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet, and the front building line shall be as it appears on the recorded plat. 
C.  Not more than thirty-five (35) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision. 
D.  No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
E.  All structures shall have not less than a twenty-five (25) foot front yard setback. 
F.  For a single family dwelling of one story, the minimum width of the side yard shall be five (5) feet for interior lot lines and fifteen (15) feet for the side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot. For buildings of more than one story, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines shall be not less than five (5) feet, provided, however, that (a) the area of exterior wall openings lying or constructed within ten feet (10') of the interior lot line shall be ten percent (10%) or less of the total exterior wall opening area of the structure; and, (b) all interior walls shall have a minimum of one (1) layer of 5/8 8" thickness of sheetrock installed. For buildings of more than one story that have (a) exterior wall openings lying or constructed with ten feet (10') of the interior lot line which exceed ten percent (10%) of the total exterior wall opening area of the structure; or, (b) interior walls which have less than one (1) layer of 5/8 " thickness of sheetrock installed, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines shall be not less than ten feet (10'). For a principal building other than a single-family dwelling, the minimum width of the side yard shall be not less than the height of the building, but in no case less than fifteen (15) feet. 
G.  A rear yard of twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal building. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building; provided, however, that no accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot line. 
H.  In the case of a detached garage, the sum of the square footage of the detached garage and primary structure shall not exceed the maximum percentage of lot coverage. 
I.  Except as otherwise provided, all measurements for lot coverage, front yard setback, rear yard setback and side yard setback shall include roofs, eaves, overhangs and covered porches. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 10, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 667, § 1, 1-19-1982; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 5-4-1982; Ord. No. 727, § 1, 12-20-1984; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 4-7-1992; Ord. No. 1029, § 1, 2-16-1999; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 3-21-2000) 
602.32.  Area and height regulations for R-2. Combined Residential District. 
Minimum
Lot Area Minimum
Lot Frontage Maximum %
Coverage 10,000 sq. ft. 80' 35%  
Maximum
Height Front Yard
Setback Side Yard
Setback Rear Yard
Setback 35' 25' interior lots 5'-15' street side of corner lots 20% depth of lot  
All lots and improvements within the R-2 Combined Residential District shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  All lots shall have not less than 10,000 square feet for two-family dwellings and other uses, and not more than one (1) principal building shall be placed on any one lot except as otherwise specified. 
B.  Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than eighty (80) feet. The frontage of any wedge-shaped lot which meets the requirements of minimum lot size may be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet, and the front building line shall be as it appears on the recorded plat. 
C.  Not more than thirty-five percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision. 
D.  No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
E.  All structures shall have not less than a twenty-five (25) foot front yard setback. 
F.  For dwellings of one story, the minimum width of the side yard shall be five (5) feet for interior lot lines and fifteen (15) feet for the side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot. For buildings of more than one story, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines shall be not less than five (5) feet, provided, however, that (a) the area of exterior wall openings lying or constructed within ten feet (10') of the interior lot line shall be ten percent (10%) or less of the total exterior wall opening area of the structure; and, (b) all interior walls shall have a minimum of one (1) layer of 5/8 8" thickness of sheetrock installed. For buildings of more than one story that have (a) exterior wall openings lying or constructed with ten feet (10') of the interior lot line which exceed ten percent (10%) of the total exterior wall opening area of the structure; or, (b) interior walls which have less than one (1) layer of 5/8 " thickness of sheetrock installed, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines shall be not less than ten feet (10'). For a principal building other than a dwelling, the minimum width of the side yard shall be not less than the height of the building, but in no case less than fifteen (15) feet. 
G.  A rear yard of twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal building. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building; provided, however, that no accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot line. 
H.  In the case of a detached garage, the sum of the square footage of the detached garage and primary structure shall not exceed the maximum percentage of lot coverage. 
I.  Except as otherwise provided, all measurements for lot coverage, front yard setback, rear yard setback and side yard setback shall include roofs, eaves, overhangs and covered porches. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 11, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 5-4-1982; Ord. No. 727, § 1, 12-20-1984; Ord. No. 863, § 1, 4-7-1992; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 3-21-2000) 
602.33.  Area and height regulations for R-3. Multifamily Districts. 
Minimum
Lot
Area Minimum
Lot
Frontage Maximum %
Coverage Maximum
Height Maximum
Density
per Acre Townhouse 12,000 sq. ft. + 4,000 sq. ft. each unit 66' 35% 35' 8 units Multifamily 12,000 sq. ft. + 4,000 sq. ft. each unit 100' 35% 35' 9 units  
Minimum
Side
Yard
Setback Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback Minimum
Rear
Yard
Setback Townhouse 1/2 height of building (measured at highest point), 10' minimum 25' 1' per foot of building height (measured at highest point) minimum 20% of lot depth. Multifamily 1' per foot of building height (measured at highest point), 15' minimum 1' per foot of building height (measured at highest point), 25' minimum 20% of lot depth  
All lots and improvements within the R-3 Multifamily Residential Districts shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  All lots shall have an area of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet plus four thousand (4,000) square feet for each dwelling unit. For uses other than dwelling purposes, the lot area shall not be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet except as otherwise specified. There shall be a lot area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet per dwelling unit including private and common area. In determining lot size for dwelling units, any common area shall be allocated equally per dwelling unit by dividing the total square footage of the common area by the number of dwelling units which it serves. 
B.  Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than sixty-six (66) feet for townhouse dwellings, and one hundred (100) feet for multifamily dwellings and all other uses. For a townhouse dwelling unit, there shall be a minimum lot width of twenty-two (22) feet at the front building line, and the front lot line shall abut a street for a distance of not less than twenty-two (22) feet. 
C.  Not more than thirty-five (35) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision. 
D.  No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean elevation of the lot. 
E.  A minimum front yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided on all dwellings. One (1) foot of setback for each one (1) foot of building height (measured at the highest point) shall be provided for all uses other than single-family, duplex and townhouses, but not less than a twenty-five-foot front yard shall be provided. 
F.  For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. One (1) foot of setback for each one (1) foot of building height (measured at the highest point) shall be provided. 
G.  A rear yard of twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal building with one (1) foot of setback for each one (1) foot of building height (measured at the highest point). Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building; provided, however, that no accessory building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the rear lot line. 
H.  For unattached sides of townhouse dwellings on an interior lot, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet or one-half (1/2) the height of the townhouse, whichever is the greatest, shall be provided. 
I.  The rear lot lines of all townhouse lots shall abut either an unobstructed common space or a public way in order to provide access to emergency personnel. 
J.  All measurements for lot coverage, front yard setback, rear yard setback and side yard setback shall include roofs, eaves, overhangs and covered porches. 
(Ord. No. 499, § 1, 2-19-1974; Ord. No. 657, § 12, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 3-21-2000) 
602.34.  [Use] area and height regulations and uses permitted for RR-Rural Residential. 
A.  Only one single-family detached residential dwelling shall be allowed. 
B.  Raising of animals and poultry. The raising of animals or poultry shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the city and in accordance with the following provisions: 
i.  There shall be provided a fenced area of not less than 20,000 square feet, exclusive of the area covered by the main buildings and required front and side yards, for each large animal, including horses, cattle and sheep, and all structures and buildings for the care and protection of animals shall be located not closer than 200 feet to other structures and residential dwellings. 
ii.  Livestock and poultry may not be kept on any lot which does not contain an occupied dwelling. 
C.  Parks, playgrounds, and non-commercial recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms and libraries shall be allowed. 
D.  Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or performance of a governmental function shall be allowed. 
E.  There shall be a minimum lot area is 43,560 square feet (1 acre). 
F.  There shall be a minimum lot width of 120' feet at the front building line and such lot shall abut on a street for a distance of not less than 60 feet. 
G.  All buildings in the RR district shall be set back from street right-of-way lines to comply with the following yard requirements: 
1.  Front yard. 
a.  The minimum depth of the front yard shall be 30 feet. 
b.  When a yard has double frontage, the front yard requirements shall be provided on both streets. 
2.  Side yard. 
a.  There shall be a side yard setback of not less than 25-feet within which no structure may be located. 
b.  For dwellings and accessory buildings located on corner lots, there shall be a side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 30-feet in case such lot is back-to-back with another corner lot, and 30-feet in every other case; provided, however, that the side yard setback adjacent to a federal, state or county highway and section line road shall be the same as the front yard setback. 
3.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard setback for a main building of not less than 20 percent of the depth of the lot. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building, but shall not encroach on any easements. 
H.  Main and accessory buildings in the RR district shall not cover more than 20 percent of the lot area. Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 20 percent of the rear yard. 
I.  No building in the RR district shall exceed 45 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 4, 7-21-2015) 
602.4.  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures that are incidental and subordinate to permitted uses in residential districts are permitted subject to the applicable city codes and the following requirements: 
1.  Unless modified by section A.2.[subsection 2.] hereof accessory structures: 
a.  Shall conform to the setback requirements of the residential district within which it is constructed; 
b.  Shall not exceed in total square footage ten (10) percent of the square footage of the primary structure or four (4) percent of the square footage of the lot, whichever is greater; 
c.  Shall not exceed the height of the residential structure, provided that an additional setback from the front and rear setback requirement of one (1) foot for every foot of height over ten (10) feet is required; 
d.  Shall not exceed a maximum height of thirty (30) feet; and 
e.  Shall be consistent with adjacent structures and property, and shall preserve the character of the zone. 
2.  Carports. 
a.  Carports are permitted to be added to an existing single-family or two-family residential structure subject to the code of the City of Yukon and the following requirements. Applications for carports proposed to be erected or constructed in multifamily residential zones shall be considered by the planning commission, which shall make a recommendation to the city council. The city council may allow the erection of carports in multifamily residential zones under such circumstances and with such restrictions as it deems advisable. Requirements for erection or construction of carports in single-family or two-family residential zones are: 
i.  Fee and permit. The [There] is hereby imposed a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to be paid to the city clerk upon filing an application for a permit for the erection or construction, in whole or in part, of a carport. Any person erecting or constructing a carport, in whole or in part, shall obtain a building permit and pay the permit fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct, in whole or in part, a carport without having first obtained a permit and paid the appropriate fee. 
ii.  Application. Application for a permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the planning and zoning department and shall be made by the owner or lessee of the subject property, or agent of either, or by a licensed contractor employer in connection with the proposed work. The application shall contain: 
a.  Address of the applicant and the subject property; 
b.  A detailed drawing showing the specifications for the carport and compliance with other requirements or ordinances; and 
c.  Any other information deemed necessary by the planning and zoning department. 
iii.  Existing carports. Where a lawful carport exists at the effective date of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance for any reason, such carport may continue to exist so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No such carport may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; or 
b.  Should such carport be damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost it shall be removed or replaced or repaired in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
iv.  Setback. All carports must comply with side yard and rear yard setback requirements of the district within which it lies. A carport may extend beyond the required front yard setback provided that, of the front yard setback, no part of the carport may extend into the five (5) feet nearest the street and no part thereof extends into any sight triangle. 
v.  All carports shall be permanently open on two (2) sides from grade surface to the eave line provided that all carports that extend into the front yard setback shall be permanently open on three (3) sides from grade surface to the eave line. 
vi.  All carports shall be located over a permanent hard surface. 
vii.  Carports constructed in conjunction with a single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in width for a single garage and/or driveway, and shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width for a double garage and/or driveway. No carport shall exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width nor twenty (20) feet in length when measured from eave line to eave line. 
viii.  There shall be no more than one (1) carport per dwelling unit. 
ix.  Carports shall be designed, constructed, erected and installed in accordance with the codes and regulations as from time to time adopted by the City of Yukon. 
x.  Carports shall be kept in an attractive state in good repair, and in a safe and sanitary condition. 
xi.  Carports shall be supported by columns that are not less than two and one-half (21/2) inches in diameter and from material that is no less than fourteen (14) gauge steel set in concrete not less than twelve (12) inches in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches in depth. The concrete shall have a relative strength of two thousand (2000) pounds per square inch or greater. Any support column may be used which meets or exceeds the equivalent strength of the materials above described. 
xii.  Carports shall be designed to support a live load of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square foot plus the weight of the structure. 
xiii.  Metal carports shall be constructed of material not less structurally sound than twenty-six (26) gauge steel or twenty-five (25) gauge aluminum decking with baked-on enamel finish to be compatible with the exterior finish of the dwelling. 
xiv.  Carport roof slopes shall meet minimum manufacturer's requirements, but shall not be less than a pitch of one-quarter (1/4) inch rise per twelve (12) inches of run. 
xv.  All eaves shall be enclosed and have rain guttering installed to divert water into the street and away from adjacent properties unless the roof pitch diverts the flow of rain water to the street. 
xvi.  The underside of the carport shall be enclosed with materials as approved by the building code. 
xvii.  No part of the interior of the carport shall be less than seven feet six inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 13, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 5-18-1982; Ord. No. 1020, § 1, 9-15-1998) 
602.5.  Signs and billboards. No signs, billboards, posters, bulletin boards, or other similar displays shall be permitted in the Residential District except as follows: 
A.  Official public notices may be erected on affected property. 
B.  One (1) nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and not containing lettering other than the name of the owner or occupants or name or address of the premises may be erected on any single- or two-family residential structures. 
C.  In any R-1, R-2 or R-3 District, a temporary bulletin board or sign not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area, pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises may be temporarily erected on any lot which board or sign shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased, hired or sold, provided, however, that a temporary project sign not exceeding one hundred and sixty (160) square feet in area, pertaining to the lease or sale of lots and/or improvements within a subdivision may be temporarily erected within the subdivision upon a conditional use permit which sign shall be removed as soon as eighty-five (85) percent of the lots within the subdivision have been sold. 
D.  In any R-1 and R-2 District one bulletin board may be erected on each street frontage of an educational, religious, institutional or similar use requiring announcement of its activities. The bulletin board shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in surface area nor fifteen (15) feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light. 
E.  In any R-3 District one (1) nonilluminated nameplate not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in area, identifying the name and use of the premises may be erected on any structure other than a single- or two-family structure or an accessory building to such a structure. 
Sec. 603. - Commercial Districts. 
603.1.  General description. The regulations for the Commercial Districts are designed to: 
(1)  Encourage stable and efficient commercial areas to meet the needs for commercial goods and services of the trade area; 
(2)  Minimize the adverse effects of commercial uses on other land uses; and 
(3)  Provide opportunities for investment with development of residential areas and thoroughfares. 
    CB, Central Business District. The regulations for the Central Business District are designed to provide for orderly redevelopment of the Central Business District as defined on the zoning map of the city; minimize adverse effects of commercial uses upon other land uses being conducted within said district; and provide opportunities for development so that the real property within this district may be efficiently utilized. 
    C-1, Office District. This Commercial District is for the conduct of general and professional office and related activity to meet the needs of the community in such a manner as to not be offensive to a general neighborhood containing residential, religious, recreational and educational elements. It is intended that this district be located so as not to introduce traffic onto solely residential streets or become an intrusion into a Residential District, but to serve as a buffer between residential and more intensive commercial activities. 
    C-2, Convenience Commercial District. This Commercial District is intended for a unified grouping in one or more buildings of retail shops and stores and personal services of limited size and service area that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods where retail shops and personal services are not otherwise readily available. It is intended that the suburban convenience center be developed as a unit with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening. 
    C-3, Restricted Commercial District. This Commercial District is established for major retail and service activity removed from the central business district with major thoroughfare access and provided with adequate open space and parking. 
    C-4, Planned Shopping Center District. This Commercial District is intended for a unified grouping, in one or more buildings, of retail shops and stores that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the people residing in the community. It is intended that the planned shopping center be developed as a unit, with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate landscaping and screening materials. 
    C-5, Automotive and Commercial Recreation District. This Commercial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for establishments offering accommodations, motorist supplies and services, and recreation services and supplies. 
    C-6, Special Use District. This Commercial District is established for those uses which, because of special concerns related to the activity, require more detailed analysis and review, and implementation of special requirements protecting the interests of those in surrounding districts. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 14, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 8-2-2005) 
603.2.  Uses permitted. The permitted uses in the Commercial Districts are set forth in the table below. Where the letter "x" appears on the line of a permitted use and in the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district, subject to the general provisions of the Zoning Ordinance as set forth in the preceding sections. Where the letter "p" appears instead of the letter "x," this use is permitted subject to acquiring a Conditional Use Permit as set forth in Section 803. 
Zoning District Permitted Uses C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 CB Advertising agency x x x x Addressing, duplicating, mailing list, stenographic, telephone messages and similar office services x x x Ambulance service p p x x Amusement park, commercial p p Animal hospital serving household pets and similar small animals p Antique store x x x Apartment hotel x x Apparel and accessories store x x x x Appliance store, sales and service x x x Armature rewinding shop x x x Artist's or photographer's studio not including the processing of film for others x x x x Arts and crafts store x x x x Art gallery x x x x Auctioneer's office x x x Auction, not including livestock, automobiles, trucks or large machinery and equipment p x Auditorium or arena p p Automobile parking or storage, as a principal use x x x Automobile wash or automatic car wash x x p Automobile, truck and trailer sales (new and used) and service x x p Automobile parts, accessories and supply store x x x x x Automobile, truck and trailer rental x x x Automobile paint and body shop x x Automobile repair, major x x Automobile repair, minor x x x Automobile service station, not including body or motor repair or painting x x Armored car service x x Bakery goods, candy, bread, dairy and ice cream manufacturing p x Bank x x x x Bar p p p p Barber or beauty shop p x x x x Beer sales for consumption off the premises x x x x x Beverages, nonalcoholic, manufacturing x Bicycle store x x x x Billiard or pool parlor x x x x Blueprinting, photocopying and similar reproductive services x x x x Boat and marine rental, repair, sales x Bookstore x x x x Body piercing/body piercing parlor p Bowling alley x x x Broadcasting or recording studio p x x x Building supplies (no outside storage) x x Bus station x x x Business college x Business machines; sales, service, repair or rental x x x Camera and photographic supply store x x x x Candy store x x x x Carnival, circus or similar temporary amusement enterprise x x x Carpentry, custom woodworking x Carting, crating, express handling, moving or storage x Catering establishment x x Child care center, family x x x x Child care center, commercial caretaking p x x Child care center, institutional p x Church, synagogue or temple, including Sunday school facilities x x x x County jail p Clinic, dental, medical, osteopathic, or chiropractic x x x x Clothing: Custom dressmaking or altering for retail, including tailoring and millinery x x x x Clothing, secondhand p x x x Cold storage plant x x College, junior college, professional school: Public or equivalent private x x Computing, data processing or similar service x x x Contractor (special trade): Facilities other than office p x Convalescent, maternity or nursing home p x x Courier service p x x Custom ceramic products, manufacturing x Dairy products or ice cream store, not including a drive-in x x x x x Dancehall x x Delicatessen x x x x Delivery service x x Department store x x x Detective or protective service x x Diaper service p p Direct selling organization x x x Disinfecting, deodorizing or exterminating service x x Drafting service x x x Drive-in restaurant with curb service not serving beer x x Driving school, private x x Drugstore or proprietary store x x x x x Dry cleaning shop (pickup or self-service) x x x x Dry cleaning shop (processing) P Dry goods store x x x x Electrical supplies x x x Employment service x x x Equipment rental: Hand tools, household and garden tools and equipment and light maintenance equipment x x x Farm equipment sales, service, rental, repair x Feed and fertilizer sales x x Financial institution, other than pawnshop x x x x Fire extinguisher service x x Flea market p x Florist shop x x x x Food locker plant x x Food store, including bakery (retail only) x x x x x Fraternal organization x x Freight depot, railroad or truck x x Freight forwarding service x x Funeral home, mortuary or undertaking establishment x x Fur repair and storage x x x Furniture and home furnishings, sales and repair x x x Garage or parking for commercial or public utility vehicles p x x Garden supply store x x x x Gasoline service station x x x p General store: General merchandise store x x x p x Gift, novelty or souvenir shop x x x x x Golf course, including commercially operated driving range or miniature golf course x Golf driving range, commercial x Greenhouse x x Grocery store x x x x x Gunsmith shop x x x Hardware store x x x x Hat cleaning or repair shop x x x x Heating equipment sales x x Hospital x x x Hospital health center, institution for aged or children x x Hospital, restricted to mental, narcotics or alcoholic patients sanatorium p Hotel x x Household appliance store x x x Ice vending x x x x x Interior decorating shop x x x Jewelry sales and repair x x x x Jewelry, watchmaking x x x Key shop x x x x Laboratory: Dental, medical or optical x x Laboratory: Research, development or testing p p Laundry, pickup station only x x x x Laundry, self-service x x x x Leather goods or luggage store x x x x Liquor store x x x x x Locksmith, key shop x x x x x Lodge hall x x Lumber yard p p Mail-order house: Catalog office or retail store x x x Meat market, retail only x x x x Meat market, retail and processing, but not including slaughtering x p Medical or dental clinic x x x x Ministorage warehouse p Mobile [manufactured] homes or travel trailers, sales and service x Monument sales x x Motel p x x Motion picture distribution and services x x Motion picture theater x x x x x Motion picture theater, drive-in x x Multifamily dwellings p Museum x x x Music, musical instruments or phonograph record store x x x x Newspaper distribution station x x x Newspaper offices, print shop x x Newsstand x x x x x Night club p p p Office equipment and supplies, retail sales, service, rental or repair x x x Offices: General x x x Offices of nonprofit membership association x x x Offices: Professional and governmental x x x Oil and gas wells, drilling p p p p p Optician or optometrist x x x x x Outdoor advertising plant p x Packing or crating service p x Paint, glass or wallpaper store x x x Parish house or rectory x Pawnshop x x x Pet shop x x x Petroleum products transporting facilities including, but not limited to, pipeline right-of-way, pipeline and all pressure modification and regulating facilities p p p Photography studio x x x x x Photofinishing service x x Picture framing x x x x Pharmacy x x x x x Plumbing fixtures, sales and service x x x Postal service facilities x x x x x x Public facilities and works to be owned, operated or managed by the City of Yukon including, but not necessarily limited to, the following: x x x x x City jail Civil defense and related activities facilities Community center Fire protection and related activities facility Library Police protection and related activities facilities Sewage treatment plant Sewage pressure control Station Solid waste disposal facilities Swimming pool Tennis courts Water filtration plant, pump stations, elevated storage or reservoir Printing or publishing, including engraving or photo engraving x x Private club permitting the consumption of alcoholic beverages p p p Radio, television, phonograph or other household electronics equipment store x x x Radio, studio (commercial) x x Railroad passenger terminal x x Recreation center p x x x Religious goods store x x x x Repair service limited to equipment (wholesale is permitted use in the district in which the repair service is located) x p Restaurant as defined by the state health department, but excluding drive-in type x x x x x Rug cleaning x x Sales, service, repair or rental of business machines x x x School, elementary: Public or equivalent private x x x x School, private: Barber, beauty, business, commercial art, correspondence, stenographic, trade or vocational x x School, secondary: Public or equivalent private x x x x Sewing machine service x x x Sexually oriented businesses p Shoe sales and repair x x x x Sign painting x x Skating rink x x Solid waste disposal facilities owned, operated or managed by a Title 60 Oklahoma Public Trust which accepts solid waste from the City of Yukon x Sporting goods sales x x x x x Stadium, arena or similar facility p p p Stationery store x x x x Stock and bond broker x x x x x Storage warehouse p Store selling architects', artists', or engineers' supplies and equipment or dental, optical, medical or office supplies or equipment x x x Studio, photographic, musical, fine arts x x x x x Supermarket x x x x x Tailor shop x x x x Tattooing/tattoo parlor p Tavern p p p p Taxicab dispatching station, garaging and maintenance p x Taxicab stand x x x x x x Taxidermist x x x x Telegraph transmitting or receiving station x x Telephone exchange, including garage, shop or service facilities p x Television studio x x Theater x x x p x Tobacco store x x x x Tool sharpening x x Toy store x x x x Trailer rental x x x Transportation ticket service x x x x x x Travel arranging service x x x x x x Truck sales x x Truck stop x x Variety store x x x x Vending machines: Sales, service, rental or repair x Venetian blind cleaning x x Veterinarian, office only x x x x Veterinarian hospital with inside runs only p x Warehousing, inside storage only p x Warehousing, outside storage p Wholesale establishment, stock limited to floor samples p x Wholesale establishment with stocks not limited to floor samples p x Window cleaning service x x  
(Ord. No. 625, § 1, 4-17-1979; Ord. No. 657, §§ 15, 18, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 1078, § 1, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 1091, § 1, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 1097, § 1, 4-16-2002; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 8-2-2005; Ord. No. 1190, § 1, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 1198, § 1, 11-21-2006) 
603.3.  Lot, yard and height regulations. No lot or yard shall be established or reduced in dimension or area in any Commercial District that does not meet the minimum requirements set forth below. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged that will cause the maximum lot coverage or maximum height regulations to be exceeded for such districts as set forth in the following table. 
Zoning District Lot 
Regulations C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 C-6 CB Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) 1 12,000 24,000 to 48,000 12,000 200,000 15,000 15,000 10,500 Minimum lot width at building line (feet) 2 100 100 100 300 150 150 - Maximum lot coverage (percent) 3 30 40 50 25 30 40 - Yard Regulations (in Feet) Minimum front yard 4 50 50 50 50 50 50 Ave. of 
Exist. Minimum rear yard 5 10 10 10 10 10 20 20' from 
cntr. Alley Minimum side yard 6 - - - - - - - Height 7 35 35 35 35 35 35 35  
1.  The lot area of lots in the Commercial Districts shall be not less than that as set forth above, provided that the area of any lot in a C-2 District shall not exceed 48,000 square feet. 
2.  The width of lots in the Commercial Districts shall not be less than that set forth above. 
3.  The total building coverage of any lot shall not exceed that specified above; provided, however, that paving, landscaping, lighting fixtures, and similar improvements shall not be considered as a part of the total building coverage. 
4.  The front yard of any lot in the Commercial Districts shall be not less than that specified in the table above; provided that automatic teller machines (ATM) are permitted to be installed within the front yard setback upon approval of the City Council and further provided, however, that gasoline pump islands may be permitted within the front yard as herein required. 
5.  The rear yard of any lot in the Commercial Districts shall be not less than that specified above; provided, however that the rear yard of any lot adjoining a Residential District on the rear shall have a rear yard setback of two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of building height, plus a screening wall or fence as provided in Section 407 of this Ordinance. 
6.  There are no side yard requirements on lots within the Commercial Districts except where such lot abuts a Residential District, in which case there shall be a side yard setback of two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of building height, plus a screening wall or fence as provided in Section 407 of this Ordinance. In all cases, accessibility must be provided to the rear of the building. Where it is not a side yard will be required on at least one side of the building equal to two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of building height. 
7.  No building or structure in any Commercial District shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet except upon the approval of the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 657, §§ 16, 19, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 692, § 1, 9-7-1982; Ord. No. 982, 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 8-2-2005) 
603.4.  Additional regulations for the central business district. 
(1)  The fire limits of the City of Yukon are hereby extended to include all property within the Central Business District. 
(2)  Minimum front setback in the Central Business District shall be not less than the average building line of adjacent development. 
(3)  Minimum rear lot setback shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from the center of the alley in the Central Business District. 
(4)  A minimum of ten (10) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each ten thousand five hundred (10,500) square feet of area developed in the Central Business District. A twenty (20) foot minimum width maneuvering lane shall be provided for each row of parking. 
(5)  All alleys shall be paved to city standards. 
(6)  All sidewalks shall be paved with four (4) inches of concrete in accordance with city standards. 
(7)  Central Business District zoning will include the right to build to the side property lines without setback. 
(8)  The zoning map is hereby amended to include the area within the Central Business District as per Planning Commission recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 20, 10-20-1981) 
603.5.  Legal description of the central business district. 
Beginning at 11th Street on the south side of Main: 
    West Highland Addition: 
    Block 3, Lots 16 through 30 
    Block 2, Lots 27 through 40 and Lots 1 through 6 
    Block 1, Lots 1 through 12 
    Spencer Addition: 
    Block 79, Lots 1 through 12 
    Block 80, Lots 1 through 12 
    Block 81, Lots 1 through 12 
    Block 82, Lots 1 through 16 
    Lake Addition: 
    Block 102, Lots 1 through 16 
    Block 103, Lots 1 through 16 
Beginning at 11th Street on the north side of Main: 
    George Addition: 
    Block 11, Lots 9 through 16 
    Original Townsite: 
    Block 10, Lots 17 through 32 
    Block 9, Lots 17 through 32 
    Block 8, Lots 17 through 32 
    Block 7, Lots 17 through 32 
    Block 6, Lots 17 through 32 
    Block 5, Lots 17 through 32 
    Block 4, Lots 3 through 10 
    Block 3, Lots 3 through 28 
    Block 2, Lots 17 through 32 
This is down to First Street on the north side. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 21, 10-20-1981) 
603.6.  Findings and restrictions applicable to sexually oriented business. 
(a)  The city council has found that Sexually Oriented Businesses require special supervision from the public safety agencies and community development agencies of the city in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, morals and welfare of the patrons of such businesses as well as the citizens of the city. Sexually Oriented Businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature. There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime and the downgrading of property values. It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses, due to their nature, have serious and objectionable operational characteristics that contribute to urban blight and downgrade the quality of life in the adjacent area. The city council desires to minimize and control these adverse effects and thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry. This is done to protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve the quality of life, preserve the property values and character of surrounding neighborhoods, and deter the spread of urban blight. The city council does not condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. The council recognizes that state and federal law prohibits the distribution of obscene materials, and therefore expects and encourages all law enforcement officials to enforce state obscenity statutes against any such illegal activities within the city. Based on these findings, it is the intent of the city council to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. 
(b)  The location of Sexually Oriented Businesses shall be in compliance with applicable Commercial Zoning regulations of the city and may not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of: 
(1)  Any building primarily and regularly used for worship services or religious activities; 
(2)  Any public or private educational facility, including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; a school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose such as offices and vehicle maintenance facilities and only incidentally used by students; 
(3)  Any public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, golf course, basketball or tennis courts, wilderness area, or other similar land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the parks department or any public trusts, provided that a recreation area as used in this article shall not be interpreted as including turnpikes and highways that also contain jogging or bicycle paths; 
(4)  Any public library; 
(5)  A premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state where any beverage containing alcohol is sold, distributed or served; 
(6)  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; 
(7)  Any other Sexually Oriented Business; or 
(8)  Any land zoned or used for residential purposes. 
The distance between a Sexually Oriented Business and any use named above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures, objects or political boundaries, from the nearest exterior boundary of the parcel or the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property boundary of the premises of a listed use. For purposes of determining measured distance, property situated on the opposite side of the street shall be considered as if it were located on the same side of the street with the Sexually Oriented Business. 
(c)  The following conditions shall be imposed on any Conditional Use Permit granted for a Sexually Oriented Business: 
(1)  The business may not operate between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day, and may not operate on Sunday; 
(2)  No one under the age of twenty-one (21) years may be allowed to enter or be upon, or be employed by, such business; 
(3)  No low-point beer, beer, wine, alcoholic beverage, mixed drinks, or any other similar substance which is regulated by the Oklahoma Alcoholic Beverage Law Enforcement Commission or which requires a license from local government as a condition to selling may be served or sold within or upon the premises; 
(4)  Any other conditions determined to be appropriate by city staff, the Planning Commission or the City Council. 
(d)  Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished, subject to the provisions of section 1-7. For purposes of this provision, each day that the violation occurs shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 8-2-2005) 
Sec. 604. - Industrial Districts. 
604.1.  General description. The regulations for the Industrial Districts are designed to: 
(1)  Make available a range of suitable sites for most types of manufacturing and related, nondeleterious and compatible activities as specified; and 
(2)  Protect residences by separating them from manufacturing activities and by prohibiting the use of such space for new residential development or for commercial development except for those uses specifically enumerated. 
   I-1, Light Industrial District. The purpose of the I-1, Light Industrial District, is to provide a location for industries which do not by their nature create nuisances and for commercial uses that either due to the nature of their operation are best located in the I-1, Light Industrial District, or are either supportive, or compatible or nondeleterious to the industrial activities allowed. Any use constructed, established, altered, or enlarged in the I-1, Light Industrial District, after the effective date of this ordinance shall be so operated as to comply with the following standards: 
A.  No building shall be used for residential purposes except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
B.  No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental to or accessory to a permitted use or as specifically permitted. 
C.  No noise, either continuous or intermittent, from any operation conducted on the premises, other than that emanating from vehicular traffic, shall be detectable at any boundary line of the lot. 
D.  No toxic matter, noxious matter, smoke, gas, or odorous or particulate matter shall be emitted that is detectable beyond the lot lines of the lot on which the use is located. 
E.  No vibrations shall be detectable beyond the lot lines of the lot on which the use is located. 
F.  Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light upon property located in any Residential District. 
G.  The manufacture of flammable materials which produce explosive vapors or gases is prohibited. 
H.  No outside storage of equipment and/or material, except equipment in daily use, shall be permitted in such a location where it can be viewed from any public street. 
I.  Any operation that produces intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building, and exposed sources of light shall be screened so as not to be detectable beyond the lot lines. 
   I-2, Heavy Industrial District. The purpose of the I-2, Heavy Industrial District, is to provide a location for industries which may by their nature create some nuisance. The intent is to preserve this land especially for such industry in locations with access to arterial streets as designated on the Thoroughfare Plan, as well as locations generally accessible to railroad transportation. Any use constructed, established, altered, or enlarged in the I-2, Heavy Industrial District, after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be so operated as to comply with the following standards. No use already established on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with, the following standards: 
A.  No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
B.  No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental to or accessory to a permitted use. 
C.  No storage, manufacture, or assembly of goods shall be conducted out of a building unless the nearest point of said activity is more than three hundred (300) feet from the boundary of any zoning district. 
D.  Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light upon property located in any Residential District. 
E.  All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, and testing of goods, wares, and merchandise shall be carried on in such a manner as not to be injurious or offensive by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or other particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, glare, heat, fire or explosive hazards. 
F.  No activities involving storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 657, § 22, 10-20-1981) 
604.2.  Uses permitted. The permitted uses in Industrial Districts are set forth below. Where the letter "x" appears on the line of a permitted use and in the column of a district, the listed use is permitted in that district subject to conformance to special conditions applying to the districts as set forth in Section 604.1 above. Where the letter "p" appears instead of an "x," this use is permitted subject to acquiring a Conditional Use Permit as set forth in Section 803. 
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Zoning District Permitted Uses I-1 I-2 Abattoir x Accessories for vehicles or equipment whose sale is permitted, but not including the rebuilding or recapping of tires x Advertising agency x x Aerosol containers: Filling on contract basis x x Agricultural services x Air conditioning and heating equipment p x Aircraft parts: Sales, service, rental or repair, including airframes and engines x x Aircraft transportation x x Airway beacon or marker x x Animal bones, offal or waste: Assembly, incinerator, processing or utilization p Animal hospital, including large animals x x Animal and marine fats and oils: Manufacturing or processing p Animal and poultry slaughter and processing p Apiary x Apparel and other textile products x x Armature rewinding shop x x Armored car service x Arsenal x Auditorium or arena: Public x x Auctioneer (nonanimal) x Automatic merchandising establishment x Automobile accessory, tire or battery stores without tire recapping x Automobile, bus, truck dismantling, salvaging or wrecking p Automobile paint and body shop x x Automobile parking or storage, as a principal use x x Automobile repair, major x x Automobile repair, minor x x Automobile sales, new or used x Automobile wash service including self service x x Baked goods, candy, bread, dairy and ice cream manufacturing x Beverages, nonalcoholic, manufacturing x Blueprinting, photocopying and similar reproducing services x x Boat accessory store x x Boat rental or storage x x Book bindery p x Bottling plant x x Brick, tile or clay manufacturing x Broadcasting or recording studio x x Brooms and brushes x x Building materials p x Building materials or lumber: Wholesale sales x x Building services including janitorial service, floor waxing and office cleaning x Bus garaging and equipment maintenance p x Buses: Sales, service, rental and repair p x Batching and mixing plants, asphaltic or Portland cement, concrete, mortar or plastic x Cabinetmaker x x Canvas or canvas products x x Carpentry, woodworking or furniture working x x Ceramic products x x Cesspool cleaning establishment x x Chemicals, compounding or packaging x City, county, school district, state or federal facilities x x City or county jail x x Civil defense and related activities facilities x x Coal preparation x Cold storage plant p x Commercial feed pens p Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, drugs and pharmaceutical products x x Computing, data processing or similar service x x Construction equipment repair, sales or storage x x Contract sorting, grading and packing of fruits and vegetables for grower x Contractor (general or heavy construction) facilities other than office x x Contractor (special trade) facilities other than office p x Corn shelling, hay baling and threshing services x Cotton ginning and compressing x County, school district, state or federal facilities x County jail x Creosoting or similar process x Dairy farm: Products, egg farm x Delivery service x x Detective or protective service x Direct selling organization: Retail x Disinfecting, deodorizing or exterminator service x Drafting service x Drive-in restaurant p x Dry cleaning and dyeing plant x x Eating places other than drive-in not serving beer p x Electric generating plant p x Electric regulating substation x x Electric utility maintenance facility x x Electrical appliance, equipment and supplies x Electrical equipment assembly x x Electronic equipment assembly and manufacture x x Employment service x Exploration for minerals p Explosives: Manufacture, storage, warehousing or wholesaling p Extraction of sand, gravel, clay, quarrying of rock p Fairgrounds x x Farm equipment: Sales, service, rental and repair x Farm for raising dogs, cattle, goats, horses, sheep, rabbits or poultry x Farm products, NEC, wholesaling or public warehousing x Farm supply store x Fertilizer, warehousing and blending, excluding ammonium nitrate p p Financial institution x Fire extinguisher service x Fire protection and related activities facility x x Fireworks: Manufacture, storage, warehousing or wholesaling x Food products, including bakery products, candy, fruit and vegetable processing and canning, packing and processing of meats and poultry, but not including slaughtering of animals or poultry x x Food products, including slaughtering of animals and poultry x Forestry services x x Foundries x Freight depot, railroad or truck x x Freight forwarding service x x Fur animal raising x Furniture cleaning x Furniture, home furnishings and equipment store x x Furniture manufacturing x x Gas pressure control station p x Gas utility maintenance facility x x Garbage or trash: Assembly incineration or processing x Gases or liquids, flammable, storage x Gasoline service station x Glass or glass products x Grain milling or processing x Hair, felt, feather or leather products x Hardware, industrial sales p x Hay, grain or feed store x Highway garage or similar public maintenance facility x x Hog raising p Ice plants, dry or natural x x Incinerators x Institution: Nonresidential x x Instrument and meter manufacturing x x Jewelry manufacturing x x Laboratory: Research, development or testing x x Laundry (except self-service) and laundry services p x Leather goods fabrication x x Linen supply or industrial laundry p x Livestock assembly, feeding, sales, shipment p Livestock auction sales barn and pens x Livestock breeding and slaughtering x Lumberyards x Manufacturing NEC, appropriate in the more restrictive industrial districts x x Mattresses: Rebuilding or renovating x x Medical or dental clinic x x Medical or dental laboratory x x Metals or minerals (except petroleum products or scrap) sales x x Mini-storage warehousing x x Mining of coal, metal ores and nonmetallic minerals other than fuels p Mobile [Manufactured] homes or travel trailers: Sales and service x Monument works x x Motion picture distribution and services x Motion picture theater: Drive-in x News syndicate service x x Nonmetallic mineral preparation x Office: Professional in conjunction with other industrial uses x Oil and gas wells, drilling p p Oil field equipment and supplies: Sales, service, rental or repair x x Optical goods manufacturing x x Ore dressing and beneficiating x Orthopedic or medical supplies x x Outdoor advertising plant x x Packing and crating service x Paint, enamel, lacquer, turpentine, varnish manufacturing p Paper manufacturing or processing p Paper products including envelopes, stationery, wallpaper manufacturing x x Petroleum pipeline or pressure control station p x Petroleum products, storage x Photofinishing service x x Pipeline pressure control station p x Plastic products including luggage, tableware or similar products x x Police protection and related activities facility x x Postal services facilities x x Poultry and small game dressing and packing x Prescription pharmacy x x Printing and publishing including engraving or photoengraving x x Production of crude petroleum, natural gas and natural gas liquids p Public stable p Quarrying of stone p Radioactive waste disposal p Radio transmitting station or tower x x Railroad equipment storage or maintenance x Railroad freight terminal x x Repair, renting and servicing of commodities x Retail sales of farm products sold on premises x x Rubber products, natural or synthetic manufacturing p Rug cleaning or repairing x School, commercial or trade x Scrap and waste materials handling, including building and vehicle wrecking establishments and junkyards p Scrap steel cutting on contract basis x Secondhand automotive parts, accessories, battery and tire dealer x Sewage pressure control station p x Sewage treatment plant or sludge drying bed p x Sporting or athletic equipment manufacturing x x Steel products, fabrication and assembly x Tar or tar products x Taxicab garaging and maintenance x x Taxicab stand/or dispatching station x x Telegraph transmitting or receiving station x x Telephone exchange station, relay tower p p Television transmitting tower or receiving station x x Tire recapping x Truck, bus, train terminals x x Truck sales, service, rental, repair x x Vending machines: Sales, service, rental or repair x Venetian blind, window shades, awnings x x Warehousing, NEC other than warehousing accessory to another permitted use x x Water treatment plant, storage facility or pressure control station p x Welding shop x x Wholesaling, NEC x x Wholesaling or public warehousing of farm products NEC, food NEC, grain, hides, skins, raw furs, livestock, petroleum products (bulk station or terminal), scrap or waste materials x Window cleaning service x Wood distillation x Wood or lumber processing x  
(Ord. No. 625, § 1, 4-17-1979; Ord. No. 657, §§ 23, 23a, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 691, § 1, 9-7-1982; Ord. No. 734, § 1, 4-3-1984; Ord. No. 987, 7-1-1997; Ord. No. 1185, § 1, 11-1-2005) 
604.3.  Lot, yard and height regulations. No lot or yard shall be established or reduced in dimension or area in any Industrial District that does not meet the minimum requirements set forth in the following tables. No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged that will cause the maximum lot coverage or maximum height regulations to be exceeded for such district as set forth below. 
Zoning District Lot Regulations I-1 I-2 Maximum lot coverage (percent) 1 30 50 Yard Regulations (in feet) Minimum front yard 2 50 50 Minimum rear yard 3 20 20 Minimum side yard 4 - - Height 5 50 50  
1.  The total building coverage of any lot shall not exceed that specified above; provided, however, that paving, landscaping, outside storage (where permitted), lighting fixtures and similar improvements shall not be considered as part of the total building coverage. 
2.  The front yard of any lot in the Industrial District shall be not less than that specified in the table above. 
3.  The rear yard of any lot in the Industrial Districts shall be not less than that specified above; provided, however, that the rear yard of any lot adjoining a Residential District on the rear shall have a rear yard setback of two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of building height, plus a screening wall or fence as provided in Section 407 of this Ordinance. 
4.  There are no side yard requirements on lots within the Industrial Districts except where such lots abut a Residential District, in which case there shall be a side yard setback of two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of height, plus a screening wall or fence as provided in Section 407 of this Ordinance. 
5.  No building or structure in any Industrial District shall exceed a height as set forth in the table above. 
Sec. 605. - Planned Unit Development Supplemental District. 
605.1.  Purpose. The intent of the Planned Unit Development District is to: 
1.  Encourage the unified design of housing and open space to provide for integrated developments having harmony of design and variety of function while maintaining appropriate limitations on the character and intensity of use, ensuring compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties. 
2.  Permit flexibility within the development to maximize the unique physical features of the particular site and a pattern of development that preserves trees, outstanding natural topography, geologic features, and prevents soil erosion, 
3.  Provide for a creative approach to the use of land and related physical development and provide greater flexibility in the design of buildings, yards, courts, and circulation, than would otherwise be possible through the strict application of district regulations. 
4.  Encourage efficient use of land and facilities resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lower housing costs. 
5.  Achieve a continuity of function and design within the development and encourage diversified living environments. 
6.  Provide a vehicle for negotiating modifications in standard development requirements in order to both encourage innovative development and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
7.  Maximize the type of living environment available to the public. 
The PUD District is designed to provide for small and large-scale development incorporating residential and permitted related nonresidential uses that are planned and developed as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 8-21-2001) 
605.2.  Approval. Planned unit developments (PUDs) may be allowed in any residential district upon review by Planning Commission and approval by City Council. No PUD approval shall be granted unless the development meets the use, density, and other limitations of the zoning district in which it is located, except as such requirements may be lawfully modified as provided by this code. Compliance with the regulations of this code in no way excuses the developer from the applicable requirements of a subdivision ordinance, except as modifications thereof are specifically authorized in the approval of the application for the PUD. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 8-21-2001) 
605.3.  Effect of planned unit development approval. 
1.  Approval of a PUD application by the City Council adopts the PUD Development Plan prepared by the applicant and reviewed as part of the application. The PUD Development Plan establishes new and specific requirements for amount and type of land use, residential densities, development regulations, and location of specific elements of the development such as open space and screening. 
2.  The PUD classification supplements any previous zoning district classification of the parcel. 
3.  Where there is no provision in the PUD Development Plan for special development regulations, the requirements of the most restrictive conventional zoning district in which a proposed use or a structure is permitted shall be applied to the development. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 8-21-2001) 
605.4.  Uses permitted in planned unit developments. 
605.41.  Principal Use. A PUD shall contain principally single-family detached residential use. If single-family detached residential use is not permitted in the zoning district in which the development is to be located, a change of zoning district shall be required and must be accompanied by an application for a zoning amendment. The residential use shall be governed by density, design and other requirements of the PUD Development Plan. 
605.42.  Secondary Uses. The following secondary uses may be permitted in a PUD: 
1.  Clubhouse for use by the homeowner's association. 
2.  Fire protection and related activities facility. 
3.  Library. 
4.  Postal services facility. 
5.  Recreational amenities for use by the homeowner's association (i.e., playgrounds, ball fields, courts, swimming pools, etc.). 
6.  School. 
7.  Sewage pressure control station. 
8.  Water treatment plant, storage facility or pressure control station. 
605.43.  Secondary Use Regulations. The following regulations shall govern nonresidential secondary uses in a PUD: 
1.  Nonresidential secondary uses shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the gross area of the PUD. 
2.  Nonresidential secondary uses shall be compatible in design and location with the residential uses of the PUD and with the residential use of adjacent properties. 
3.  Land set aside for public facilities (i.e., schools, libraries, firehouses, post offices, etc.) shall be excluded for the purposes of calculating the gross area of the PUD. 
605.44.  Residential Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses and structures that are incidental to the single-family detached residential use are permitted subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Accessory structures shall conform to the setback requirements of the PUD. 
2.  The use of carports within a PUD shall not be permitted. 
3.  The total square footage of an accessory building or structure shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the primary structure or four (4) percent of the lot size whichever is greater. 
4.  The height of the accessory structure shall not exceed the height of the residential structures; however, an additional setback of one (1) foot for every foot of height over ten (10) feet is required, with a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 8-21-2001) 
605.5.  Site review requirements. 
    The PUD provides the opportunity for higher densities, greater design flexibility, mixed land uses, and improved marketability; therefore, the applicant should be prepared to provide amenities and services that might not be required or possible in a conventional development. Review and approval of a PUD is a process of negotiation between the City of Yukon and the applicant to achieve the intents and purposes of these regulations. The following factors should be specifically included as criteria for the review and evaluation of a PUD application. 
    Other factors not listed herein may also be considered in the review process in order to respond to specific design and land use proposals. 
605.51.  Design Standards. 
1.  The proposed PUD shall be designed to provide for the unified development of the area in accordance with the spirit and purpose of adjacent land uses and zoning districts. 
2.  Design of the PUD may provide for modification of conventional zoning ordinance requirements for such elements as yard areas, densities, and setback on individual lots in accordance with the PUD Development Plan. 
3.  Density, land use, and intensity of use requirements shall be based on the PUD Development Plan and shall be reviewed carefully to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
4.  Building code requirements shall not be reduced. 
5.  The maximum number of dwelling units within a PUD shall be based on calculation of gross density. Gross density shall be established in the PUD Development Plan and shall be calculated by dividing the total land area to be developed for residential use by the number of dwelling units. 
6.  Location of housing shall be shown in the PUD Development Plan. 
605.52.  Arrangement. 
    Where feasible, uses with the least height, density, and impact shall be arranged around the boundaries of the development. 
605.53.  Specific Regulations. 
    Lot area, width, yard, height, density, and coverage regulations shall be determined by approval of the PUD Development Plan. 
605.54.  Landscaping. 
    Landscaping, fencing, and screening related to the use within the site shall be planned and presented to the Planning Commission for approval and as a means of integrating the proposed development into its surroundings. A planting plan showing proposed tree and shrubbery plantings shall be prepared before the entire site is developed. A grading and drainage plan shall also be submitted to the Planning Commission with the application. 
605.55.  Signs. 
    The size, location, design, and nature of any signs as well as the intensity and direction of area or floodlighting shall be detailed in the application. 
605.56.  Location Requirements. 
    A PUD may be permitted in any R-1 Single Family Residential District, R-2 Combined Residential District, or R-3 Multifamily Residential District. 
605.57.  Area. 
    No PUD shall have an area less than five (5) acres or greater than forty (40) acres. 
605.58.  Ownership. 
    The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at the time of application, or the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of the property. 
605.59.  Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
    All required parking spaces for residential uses shall be provided on the lot containing the dwelling unit they are intended to serve. All required parking spaces for nonresidential secondary uses shall be provided on the lot containing the use they are intended to serve or in a common parking area. Common parking areas serving nonresidential secondary uses shall be designed and located in an accessible manner to the uses they serve. The use of public right-of-way for parking shall be prohibited. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common parking that will ensure its continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the subdivision plat, in compliance with the provisions of Section 406 of the Zoning Ordinance and Article IV of the Subdivision and Platting Regulations. 
605.510.  Open Space. 
    Common open space constitutes an essential ingredient in a PUD and is one of the most important design elements. Open space should be distributed more or less equitably throughout the PUD in relationship to the dwelling units that are intended to be served by the open space. Adequate guarantees must be provided that the common open space areas are preserved and maintained for those purposes only. A property owners association shall be required to improve, operate, and maintain all such common open space areas, and other communally owned facilities. Open space shall be evaluated utilizing the following general guidelines: 
1.  A minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross area shall be allocated to common open space. 
2.  No more than one half (1/2) of the common open space shall be covered by water. 
3.  Recreation facilities or structures and their accessory uses located in common areas shall be considered as usable open space as long as paving and roofs constitute no more than ten percent of the total open space; and 
4.  A minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross area of nonresidential components of any PUD shall be designated as landscaped open space not to be used for streets or parking. 
605.511.  Streets and Alleys. 
    Proposed streets and alleyway modifications shall satisfy the following criteria: 
1.  Street right-of-way and paving widths shall be adequate to provide a traffic carrying and utility installation capacity related to the design of the overall street system, the function of the individual street, and the land uses served. 
2.  Private streets shall only be allowed in combination with the use of a gated entrance to the PUD. In the event that the gate for a gated entry is removed or not constructed, the street (or streets) within the PUD shall be dedicated to the City and the balance of any maintenance bond(s) shall be transferred to the City. 
3.  Private streets and alley modifications shall satisfy the criteria for public facility modifications. Construction must meet City standards at the time of installation and is subject to inspection by the City. 
4.  Private streets shall not be connected to an adjacent parcel that is not a part of the PUD in order to discourage the circulation of traffic into and through the private street system. 
5.  Proposed gated entrances to a PUD shall be reviewed to ensure the accessibility of emergency vehicles at all times. 
6.  The owner/applicant shall clearly demonstrate the existence and capability of a property owners' association to provide the ongoing and long-term maintenance of the private street and alley facilities that will not be provided by the City. 
7.  Street design should be innovative and restrict through traffic from residential areas as much as possible. 
8.  Encouragement should be given to design of short local streets serving limited areas, such as the residential culs-de-sac. 
9.  Reduction of design widths on street design in a conventional pattern should not be approved. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 8-21-2001) 
605.6.  Bulk and area requirements. Except as otherwise noted, all measurements for lot coverage and setbacks shall include roofs, caves, overhangs, and covered porches. 
605.61.  Lot Area. Within a PUD, a minimum lot size requirement of 5,500 square feet shall apply to all lots utilized for dwelling purposes. Within a PUD, a maximum lot size requirement of 10,890 square feet shall apply to all lots utilized for dwelling purposes. 
605.62.  Lot Width. A minimum lot width requirement of 55-feet shall apply to lots utilized for dwelling purposes. 
605.63.  Density and Number of Permitted Dwelling Units. The maximum number of dwelling units shall be based on calculation of gross density. Gross density shall be established in the PUD master plan and shall be calculated by dividing the total land area to be developed for residential uses by the number of dwelling units. Gross density shall not exceed seven (7) units per acre or be less than four (4) units per acre. 
605.64.  Setbacks. 
1.  Front yard. Off-street parking shall be provided on every residential lot with sufficient room for two vehicles without said vehicles crossing a sidewalk. The development shall allow at least fifteen (15) feet of depth at the front of the lot (and street-side of the lot in the instance of a corner lot). 
2.  Rear yard. A minimum rear yard of ten (10) feet shall be provided on every residential lot. A rear yard of twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot shall be provided for all lots developed with nonresidential uses. 
3.  Side yard. For a single-family dwelling unit on an interior lot, the minimum width of the side yard shall be zero (0) to ten (10) feet provided that there is a minimum separation between structures on adjacent lots of ten (10) feet. For a single-family dwelling unit on a corner lot, the minimum setback on the street side of the lot shall be fifteen (15) feet. Where a nonresidential accessory use abuts a residential lot, the nonresidential use shall have a minimum side yard setback equal to the height of the building with a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
605.65.  Projections Into Yards. 
1.  Eaves, cornices, window sills, chimney, and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed three (3) feet. 
2.  Open porches and unenclosed balconies may project into a front or rear yard a distance not to exceed five (5) feet. 
3.  Open iron fire escapes may project into a required yard a distance not to exceed three (3) feet. 
4.  Rear yard fences shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
605.66.  Lot Coverage. The footprints of structures shall cover a maximum of sixty (60) percent of any residential lot within a PUD. Footprint area shall include patios and other open-air or enclosed amenities excluding driveways and sidewalks. At least twenty (20) percent of all residential lots shall be covered by the footprints of structures. 
605.67.  Dwelling Unit Size Requirements. Dwelling units within a PUD shall have a minimum of 1,200 square feet not including the garage. 
605.68.  Garages. All dwelling units shall include an attached garage with a minimum of two bays. 
605.69.  Building Height. The maximum height of structures within a PUD is 35-feet. The height of all nonresidential structures shall be set in the PUD Development Plan and is determined by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 8-21-2001) 
605.7.  Administration of planned unit development. 
    Any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination thereof, owning or possessing a property right or interest in or to a tract meeting the site requirements for a PUD may make application for a PUD Development Plan and a supplemental zoning district designation PUD. 
    An application for the approval of a PUD Development Plan and the supplemental district designation (i.e., R-1 PUD) may be processed simultaneously with and contingent upon an application for an amendment to the zoning map. 
605.71.  Pre-application Conference. 
    Before submitting an application to rezone property to the PUD District, the applicant shall confer with the Zoning Administrator in order to become familiar with the PUD review process. The Zoning Administrator will inform the applicant of potential problems that might arise and information required for filing the application. 
    At the pre-application conference, the applicant should provide the following: 
1.  Boundaries of the property involved. 
2.  Existing roadways, easements, and waterways. 
3.  A general plan of development at a level of detail sufficient to indicate the nature and scope of the project including: 
a.  Its magnitude in terms of approximate number and types of dwelling units. 
b.  The location and extent of nonresidential elements. 
c.  Proposed locations of major open space areas. 
d.  Location of major circulation facilities. 
e.  Proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD bordering other zoning districts. 
605.72.  Required Submissions. Following the Pre-application Conference, an application for a PUD may be filed with the Planning Commission. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of a one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) fee. The application shall be in such format and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish; provided, that three (3) copies of a PUD Development Plan shall accompany the filing of the application. The PUD Development Plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following design statement and graphic elements: 
1.  Design Statement. The design statement is a written report submitted as part of the PUD Development Plan containing a minimum of the following elements: 
a.  Title of the PUD. 
b.  An explanation of the character of the planned development. 
c.  An acreage or square foot breakdown of land use areas and density proposed. 
d.  Gross area, lot area, and open space calculated to the nearest square foot. 
e.  A general description of building types, sizes, and proposed architectural style. 
f.  A general description of the building facade materials to be used within the PUD. 
g.  A description of the general location and relationship to the surrounding area and adjoining uses, both existing and proposed. 
h.  Covenants and restrictions for the development establishing perpetual maintenance and improvement responsibilities for all common areas, drainage improvements, development entrance landscaping, gated entryways, and other amenities. All amenities that serve the development as a whole should have their perpetual maintenance and improvements provided for in the covenants and restrictions. 
i.  Assurances that the City of Yukon shall be entitled to enforce covenants pertaining to maintenance of common areas, drainage, structures, landscaping, gates, entrances, streets, alleys and other improvements. 
j.  A list of all special development regulations or the conventional zoning district regulations that will be applicable, plus a list of requested variations to the subdivision regulations or other applicable development regulations. 
k.  A statement on the existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way standards and street design concepts. 
l.  Maintenance plan pertaining to all common areas, drainage improvements, landscaping, entry gates, and other amenities serving the development. 
2.  Graphics. The applicant shall provide graphic representation of the following: 
a.  Proposed land uses including public uses and common open space. 
b.  Location of all setback lines and maintenance easements required. 
c.  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan. 
d.  Parking, loading, and paving plan. 
e.  Stormwater drainage plan. 
f.  Landscaping plan. 
g.  Delineation of any proposed construction phasing of the PUD. 
h.  Proposed signage. 
i.  Right-of-way, easements, and utility locations. 
j.  Indication of existing natural features of the property, including water features, floodplains, unique natural features, and vegetation. 
k.  Topography (if deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator during the pre-application conference). 
l.  Building elevations (if deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator during the pre-application conference.) 
3.  Phased Development Schedule. The applicant shall provide a description of the proposed sequence and schedule of development. The PUD Development Plan shall include sufficient text and graphics for the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, and City Council to determine if all of the requirements of this Section are met. Information not listed above but deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator during the pre-application conference shall be put in writing and be required for inclusion in the PUD Development Plan. 
605.73.  Public Hearing and Planning Commission Action. 
    The Planning Commission, upon the filing of an application for the supplemental district designation PUD, shall set the matter for public hearing and give twenty (20) days of notice thereof by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in addition to other notice requirements. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, additional notice shall be given by the posting of a sign or signs on the property. Within thirty (30) days after the filing of an application, the Planning Commission shall conduct the public hearing and shall determine: 
1.  Whether the PUD is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Whether the PUD harmonizes with the existing and expected development of surrounding areas; 
3.  Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site; 
4.  Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and standards of this section. 
    After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to: 
1.  Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or 
2.  Deny the application. 
    An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to modification, shall be transmitted to the City Council along with the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days from the date of Planning Commission action. 
    An application that has been denied by the Planning Commission shall not be considered further unless the applicant files a written request with the City Council for a hearing within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission action. A fee of fifty dollars ($50) shall accompany the request. Upon notice of such request and receipt of the required fee, the Planning Commission shall transmit the application, recommendation, and a copy of Planning Commission minutes on the hearing to the City Council. The City Clerk shall notify all interested parties of record before the Planning Commission proceedings of the time and place of the consideration of the appeal. 
605.74.  City Council Action. 
    Upon receipt of the application, PUD Development Plan, and Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall hold a hearing, review the PUD Development Plan, approve, disapprove, modify, or return the PUD Development Plan to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
    Upon approval, the Zoning Map shall be amended and the applicant shall be authorized to process a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions of the PUD Development Plan. 
605.75.  Planned Unit Development Subdivision Plat. 
    A PUD subdivision plat shall be filed with the Planning Commission and processed in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations. In addition to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, the PUD subdivision plat shall include: 
1.  Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement; 
2.  Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space to reasonably ensure its continuity and conservation. Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the City Council; 
3.  Covenants to reasonably ensure continued compliance with the approved PUD Development Plan. Covenants shall provide that the City of Yukon may enforce compliance. 
605.76.  Issuance of Building Permits. 
    No building permits shall be issued on lands within the PUD except in accordance with the approved subdivision plat filed of record with the County Clerk. 
605.77.  Deviations from Approved PUD. 
    No deviation from the approved PUD is authorized without one of the following: 
1.  If, in the opinion of the building inspector, the proposed deviation from the approved PUD is minor and does not have the potential to detrimentally affect the citizens of Yukon or the residents of the development, a written application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. An application for deviation shall be accompanied by a fee set by the City Council of the City of Yukon by resolution. 
    At its next regularly scheduled meeting, the Planning Commission shall consider the application. The Planning Commission shall: 
A.  Approve the application as submitted; 
B.  Approve the application as it may be amended; 
C.  Approve the application subject to conditions, modifications or subsequent review; or 
D.  Deny the application. 
    An application which has been denied or approved, subject to conditions, modifications or subsequent review to which the applicant takes exception may, upon written request of the applicant, received not more than ten (10) days after such action, be heard by the City Council. The City Council shall hold a hearing on each application transmitted pursuant to this section and shall: 
A.  Approve the application as submitted; 
B.  Approve the application as it may be amended; 
C.  Approve the application subject to conditions, modifications or subsequent review; or 
D.  Deny the application. 
2.  If, in the opinion of the building inspector, the Planning Commission or the City Council, the proposed deviation from the PUD is a significant departure therefrom, there shall be a new PUD application filed, pursuant to the terms of § 605.7 hereof. 
605.78.  Abandonment. 
    Abandonment of a PUD shall require the City Council's approval, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, repealing the supplemental designation of PUD. 
605.79.  Revocation. 
    The Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council and the City Council may revoke any previous PUD approval under the following conditions: 
1.  If the applicant has not begun construction of improvements within three (3) years from the date of the adoption of the Ordinance by the City Council, except where a time extension has been granted by the City Council; 
2.  If the applicant does not adhere to the design statement approved by the City Council as part of the PUD Development Plan; or 
3.  If the applicant does not adhere to the phased development schedule as approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1088, § 1, 8-21-2001; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
Sec. 605.9. - Planned Unit Development Supplemental District-Commercial. 
    The Planned Unit Development, herein referred to as PUD, is a special zoning district category that provides an alternative approach to conventional land use controls. The PUD may be used for particular tracts or parcels of land that are under common ownership and are to be developed as one unit according to Master Design Statement and a Master Development Plan. The PUD is subject to special review procedures and, once approved by the City Council, it becomes a special zoning classification for the property it represents. 
605.91.  Purpose. 
    The intent of the Planned Unit Development District-Commercial is: 
1.  Encourage the unified design of commercial facilities and to provide for integrated developments having harmony of design and variety of function while maintaining appropriate limitations on the character and intensity of use, assuring compatibility with adjoining and proximate properties. 
2.  Permit flexibility within the development to maximize the unique physical features of the particular site and a pattern of development that preserves outstanding natural topography, geological features, and prevents soil erosion. 
3.  Provide for a creative approach to the use of land and related physical development and provide greater flexibility in the design of buildings, courts, and circulation, that would not otherwise be possible through the strict application of zoning district regulations. 
4.  Encourage efficient use and re-use of land, and facilitate economic arrangement of buildings and circulation systems. 
5.  Achieve a continuity of function and design within the development that results in an economically feasible project which conforms to the comprehensive plan and is compatible with development patterns in the surrounding neighborhood. 
6.  Provide a tool for negotiating modifications in design regulations in order to achieve innovative design solutions that will protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens. 
    The PUD District is designed to provide for small and large-scale development incorporating commercial and permitted related noncommercial uses that are planned and developed as a unit. 
605.92.  Approval. 
    Commercial planned unit developments (PUDs) may be allowed in any commercial district upon review by Planning Commission and approval by City Council. No PUD approval shall be granted unless the development meets the use, density, and other limitations of the zoning district in which it is located, except as such requirements may be lawfully modified as provided by this code. Compliance with the regulations of this code in no way excuses the developer from the applicable requirements of a subdivision ordinance, except as modifications thereof are specifically authorized in the approval of the application for the PUD. 
605.93.  Effect of commercial planned unit development approval. 
1.  Approval of a commercial PUD application by the City Council adopts the commercial PUD Master Development Plan prepared by the applicant and reviewed as part of the application. The commercial PUD Master Development Plan establishes new and specific requirements for the amount and type of land use, development regulations, and location of specific elements of the development such as screening and points of entry. 
2.  The commercial PUD classification supplements any previous zoning district classification for the parcel. 
3.  Where there is no provision in the commercial PUD Master Development Plan for special development regulations, the requirements of the most restrictive conventional zoning district in which a proposed use or a structure is permitted shall be applied to the development. 
605.94.  Uses permitted in commercial planned unit developments. 
    A commercial PUD may include commercial uses allowed in the Office Districts, Restricted Commercial District, Planned Shopping Center District, and Convenience Commercial District, however no use is permitted in a commercial PUD unless it is a permitted use within the underlying zoning district designated for the property on which the commercial PUD is being proposed. If commercial use is not permitted in the zoning district in which the development is to be located, a change of zoning district shall be required and must be accompanied by an application for a zoning amendment. The commercial uses allowed within the proposed PUD shall be further governed by the requirements of the commercial PUD Master Development Plan. 
605.95.  Site review requirements. 
    Because the PUD provides the opportunity for higher densities, greater design flexibility, mixed land uses, and improved marketability; the applicant should be prepared to provide amenities and services that might not be required or possible in a conventional development. Review and approval of a PUD is, therefore, a process of negotiation between the City of Yukon and the applicant to achieve the intents and purposes of these regulations and the comprehensive plan. The following factors should be specifically included as review criteria for the evaluation of a PUD application. Other factors not listed herein may also be considered in the review process in order to respond to specific design and land use proposals. 
605.951.  Design Standards. 
1.  The proposed commercial PUD shall be designed to provide for the unified development of the area in accordance with the spirit and purpose of adjacent land uses and zoning districts. 
2.  Design of the commercial PUD may provide for modification of conventional zoning ordinance requirements for such elements as yard areas, densities, setback and height on individual lots in accordance with the commercial PUD Master Development Plan. 
3.  Density, land use, and intensity of use requirements shall be based on the Master Development Plan and shall be reviewed carefully to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
4.  Building code requirements shall not be reduced in the design of a PUD. 
5.  Location of all buildings and improvements shall be shown in the PUD Master Development Plan. 
6.  Screen undesirable views, such as service areas and trash receptacles, from pedestrian views and public streets. 
605.952.  Arrangement. 
    Where feasible, uses with the least height, density, and impact shall be arranged around the boundaries of the development. 
605.953.  Specific Regulations. 
    Lot area, width, yard, height, density, and coverage regulations shall be determined by the approval of the PUD Master Development Plan. 
605.954.  Landscaping and signs. 
1.  Landscaping, fencing, and screening related to the use within and along the perimeter of the site shall be planned and a concept plan presented to the Planning Commission for approval and as a means of integrating the proposed development into its surroundings. A planting plan showing proposed tree and shrubbery plantings shall be prepared and a schedule for planting included in the PUD Master Development Plan. The Property Owners Association Agreement shall provide for maintenance and upkeep of the landscaping. A grading and drainage plan shall also be submitted to the Planning Commission with the application. Consideration should be given to the location of trees and shrubs, so that when they reach mature height and size they do not interfere with utility services. Property owners shall keep vegetation trimmed so that it does not obstruct the free, convenient and safe travel over and along streets and sidewalks. 
2.  The size, location, design, and nature of any signs as well as the intensity and direction of area or floodlighting shall be detailed in the application. 
605.955.  Location Requirements and Area Requirements. 
1.  A PUD may be permitted in any commercial district set forth in 605.94. 
2.  No PUD shall have an area not less than two (2) acres. 
605.956.  Ownership. 
    The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at the time of application, or the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of the property. 
605.957.  Site Illumination. 
    Provide site illumination that is designed, located, and installed to achieve specific average footcandles in order to provide safe pedestrian and vehicle circulation as well as minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. This standard shall apply to light poles and/or wall mounted luminaries for all areas within the site to achieve the following standards: 
1.  Provide site illumination to achieve maintained average of three footcandles (not less than .75 footcandles) throughout all parking areas; 
2.  Provide site illumination to achieve a maintained average of six footcandles (not less than 1.5 footcandles): 
a.  Along pedestrian walkways and common areas; 
b.  Within areas of concealment in need of visual access; 
c.  At all building entries and exits. 
3.  Provide site illumination that is designed, located, and installed in a manner to minimize light trespass on adjacent properties by utilizing cutoff luminaries, house-side shields, and/or light-limiting accessories where needed. 
605.958.  Offstreet Parking Requirements. 
    All required parking spaces for commercial uses shall be provided on the lot containing the use they are intended to serve or in a common parking area. Common parking areas serving commercial uses shall be designed and located in an accessible manner to the uses they serve. The use of public right-of-way for parking shall be prohibited. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of common parking that will ensure its continuity and conservation shall be incorporated in the PUD Master Development Plan, Property Owners Association Agreement and subdivision plat, in compliance with the provisions of Section 406 of the Zoning Ordinance and Article IV of the Subdivision and Platting Regulations. 
605.959.  Open Space. 
    Common open space constitutes an essential ingredient in a PUD and is one of the most important design elements. Open space should be distributed more or less equitably throughout the PUD in relationship to the commercial buildings that are intended to be served by the open space. Adequate guarantees must be provided that the common open space areas are preserved and maintained for those purposes only. A property owners association shall be required to improve, operate, and maintain all such common open space areas, and other communally owned facilities. 
    A minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross area of commercial property of any PUD shall be designated as landscaped open space not to be used for streets or parking. 
605.960.  Streets and Alleys. 
    Proposed streets and alleyway modifications shall satisfy the following criteria: 
1.  Street right-of-way and paving widths shall be adequate to provide traffic carrying and utility installation capacity related to the design of the overall street system, the function of the individual street, and the land uses served. 
2.  Private streets shall be clearly marked "Private street not maintained by the City of Yukon." 
3.  Private streets and alley modifications shall satisfy the criteria for public facility modifications. Construction must meet City standards at the time of installation and is subject to inspection by the City. 
4.  Private streets shall not be connected to an adjacent parcel that is not a part of the PUD in order to discourage the circulation of traffic into and through the private street system. 
5.  Proposed gated entrances to a PUD shall be reviewed to ensure the accessibility of emergency vehicles at all times. 
6.  The owner/applicant shall clearly demonstrate the existence and capability of a property owners' association to provide the ongoing and long-term maintenance of the private street and alley facilities that will not be provided by the City. 
7.  Street design should be innovative and restrict through traffic from other areas as much as possible. 
8.  Encouragement should be given to design of short local streets serving limited areas. 
9.  Reduction of design widths on street design in a conventional pattern should not be approved. 
605.97.  Bulk and Area Requirements. 
    Except as otherwise noted, all measurements for lot coverage and setbacks shall include roofs, eaves, and overhangs. 
605.971.  Setbacks. 
    All lot line set backs shall be addressed in the PUD Master Development Plan. 
605.972.  Building Height. 
    The height of all commercial structures shall be set in the PUD Master Development Plan and as determined by the Planning Commission. 
605.98.  Administration of Planned Unit Development. 
    Subject to § 605.956 hereof, any person, corporation, partnership, association, or combination thereof, owning or possessing a property right or interest in or to a tract meeting the site requirements for a PUD may make application for a PUD Master Development Plan and a supplemental zoning district designation PUD. 
    An application for the approval of a Master Development Plan and the supplemental district designation (i.e., C-1 PUD) may be processed simultaneously with and contingent upon an application for an amendment to the zoning map. 
605.981.  Pre-application Conference. 
    Before submitting an application to rezone property to the PUD District, the applicant shall confer with the Community Development Director and/or his designee in order to become familiar with the PUD review process. The Community Development Director and/or his designee will inform the applicant of potential problems that might arise and information required for filing the application. 
    At the pre-application conference, the applicant should provide the following: 
1.  Boundaries of the property involved. 
2.  Existing roadways, easements, and waterways. 
3.  A general plan of development at a level of detail sufficient to indicate the nature and scope of the project including: 
a.  The location and extent of commercial elements. 
b.  Proposed locations of major open space areas. 
c.  Location of major circulation facilities. 
d.  Proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD bordering other zoning districts. 
605.982.  Required Submissions. 
    Following the Pre-application Conference, an application for a PUD may be filed with the Planning Commission. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of a one thousand five hundred-dollar ($1,500.00) fee. The application shall be in such format and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish; provided, that three (3) copies of a PUD Master Development Plan shall accompany the filing of the application. The Master Development Plan shall include but not be limited to the following design statement and graphic elements: 
1.  Design Statement. The design statement is a written report submitted as part of the PUD Master Development Plan containing a minimum of the following elements: 
a.  Title of the PUD. 
b.  List of the Property Owners and/or developers (including all contact information, including e-mail address(es)). 
c.  Specific location of the proposal, and a legal description of the property, and the approximate phases and sequence in which the development is proposed to be built, if any. 
d.  Reference to the comprehensive plan policy for the subject property, including a map showing zoning and land uses within a minimum of 300 feet of the subject property. 
e.  An explanation of the character of the planned development. 
f.  An acreage or square foot breakdown of land use areas and density proposed. 
g.  Gross area, lot area, and open space calculated to the nearest square foot. 
h.  A general description of building types, sizes, and proposed architectural style. 
i.  Existing and Proposed Land Uses. 
j.  A description of the following physical characteristics of the existing site: elevation, slope analysis, soil characteristics and tree cover. 
k.  Drainage information delineating F.E.M.A. 100-year flood plain levels. 
l.  A statement of utility lines and services to be installed, including which lines will be dedicated to the City and which will remain private. 
m.  A description of lighting for the development. 
n.  A description of trash collection facilities for the development. 
o.  A description of sidewalks and pedestrian paths within the development. 
p.  A description of screening and landscaping for the development, including any required buffering. 
q.  Covenants and restrictions for the development establishing perpetual maintenance and improvement responsibilities for all common areas, drainage improvements, development entrance landscaping, gated entryways, and other amenities. All amenities that serve the development as a whole should have their perpetual maintenance and improvements provided for in the covenants and restrictions. 
r.  Assurances that the City of Yukon shall be entitled to enforce covenants pertaining to maintenance of common areas, drainage, structures, landscaping, gates, entrances, streets, alleys and other improvements. 
s.  A statement on the existing and proposed streets, including right-of-way standards and street design concepts. 
t.  Maintenance plan pertaining to all common areas, drainage improvements, landscaping, entry gates, and other amenities serving the development. 
u.  A schedule setting forth the size, location and contents of all street signs. 
v.  A schedule of proposed street names and mailing addresses. 
2.  Graphics. The applicant shall provide graphic representation of the following: 
a.  Proposed land uses including public uses and common open space. 
b.  Location of all setback lines and maintenance easements required. 
c.  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan. 
d.  Parking, loading, and paving plan. 
e.  Stormwater drainage plan. 
f.  Landscaping plan. 
g.  Delineation of any proposed construction phasing of the PUD. 
h.  Proposed signage. 
i.  Right-of-way, easements, and utility locations. 
j.  Indication of existing natural features of the property, including water features, floodplains, unique natural features, and vegetation. 
k.  Topography (if deemed necessary by the Community Development Director during the pre-application conference.) 
l.  Building elevations. 
3.  Phased Development Schedule. The applicant shall provide a description of the proposed sequence and schedule of development. 
    The PUD Master Development Plan shall include sufficient text and graphics for the Community Development Director, Planning Commission, and City Council to determine if all of the requirements of this Section are met. Information not listed above but deemed necessary by the Community Development Director during the pre-application conference shall be put in writing and be required for inclusion in the PUD Master Development Plan. 
605.983.  Public Hearing and Planning Commission Action. 
    The Planning Commission, upon the filing of an application for the supplemental district designation PUD, shall set the matter for public hearing and give twenty (20) days of notice thereof by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in addition to other notice requirements. Additional notice shall be given by the posting of a sign or signs on the property. Within a reasonable time from the filing of an application, the Planning Commission shall conduct the public hearing and shall determine: 
1.  Whether the PUD is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Whether the PUD harmonizes with the existing and expected development of surrounding areas; 
3.  Whether the PUD is a unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site; 
4.  Whether the PUD is consistent with the stated purposes and standards of this section. 
    After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to: 
1.  Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or 
2.  Deny the application. 
    An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to modification, shall be transmitted to the City Council along with the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days from the date of Planning Commission action. 
    An application that has been denied by the Planning Commission shall not be considered further unless the applicant files a written request with the City Clerk for a hearing within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission action. A fee of fifty dollars ($50) shall accompany the request. Upon notice of such request and receipt of the required fee, the Planning Commission shall transmit the application, recommendation, and a copy of Planning Commission minutes on the hearing to the City Council. The City Clerk shall notify all interested parties of record before the Planning Commission proceedings of the time and place of the consideration of the appeal. 
605.984.  City Council Action. 
    Upon receipt of the application, PUD Master Development Plan, and Planning Commission recommendation, the City Council shall hold a hearing, review the PUD Master Development Plan, approve, disapprove, modify, or return the PUD Master Development Plan to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
    Upon approval, the Zoning Map shall be amended and the applicant shall be authorized to process a subdivision plat incorporating the provisions of the PUD Master Development Plan. 
605.985.  Planned Unit Development Commercial Plat. 
    A commercial PUD plat shall be filed with the Planning Commission and processed in accordance with the Commercial District Regulations. In addition to the requirements of the Commercial District Regulations, the PUD commercial plat shall include: 
1.  Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement; 
2.  Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space to reasonably ensure its continuity and conservation. Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to the public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the City Council; 
3.  Covenants to reasonably ensure continued compliance with the approved PUD Master Development Plan. Covenants shall provide that the City of Yukon may enforce compliance. 
605.986.  Issuance of Building Permits. 
    No building permits shall be issued on lands within the PUD except in accordance with the approved commercial PUD plat filed of record with the County Clerk. 
605.987.  Deviations from Approved PUD. 
    No deviation from the approved PUD is authorized without one of the following: 
1.  If, in the opinion of the Community Development Director and/or his designee, the proposed deviation from the approved PUD is minor and does not have the potential to detrimentally affect the citizens of Yukon or the proprietors in the development, a written application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission. An application for deviation shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). 
    At its next regularly scheduled meeting, the Planning Commission shall consider the application. The Planning Commission shall: 
A.  Approve the application as submitted; 
B.  Approve the application as it may be amended; 
C.  Approve the application subject to conditions, modifications or subsequent review; or 
D.  Deny the application. 
    An application which has been denied or approved, subject to conditions, modifications or subsequent review to which the applicant takes exception may, upon written request of the applicant, received not more than ten (10) days after such action, be heard by the City Council. The City Council shall hold a hearing on each application transmitted pursuant to this section and shall: 
A.  Approve the application as submitted; 
B.  Approve the application as it may be amended; 
C.  Approve the application subject to conditions, modifications or subsequent review; or 
D.  Deny the application. 
2.  If in the opinion of the Community Development Director, the Planning Commission or the City Council, the proposed deviation from the PUD is a significant departure therefrom, there shall be a new PUD application filed, pursuant to the terms of § 605.98 hereof. 
605.988.  Abandonment. 
    If the property owner determines to abandon the PUD zoning, he shall make application for rezoning either to the original status or to a new classification. Said application shall be heard according to regular procedures by the planning commission and the city council. 
605.989.  Revocation. 
    The Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council and the City Council may revoke any previous PUD approval under the following conditions: 
1.  If the applicant has not begun construction of improvements within three (3) years from the date of the adoption of the Ordinance by the City Council, except where a time extension has been granted by the City Council; 
2.  If the applicant does not adhere to the design statement approved by the City Council as part of the PUD Master Development Plan; or 
3.  If the applicant does not adhere to the phased development schedule as approved by the City Council. 
605.980[605.990] through 605.999.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 1, 5-6-2003; Ord. No. 1268, § 1, 8-2-2011) 
Sec. 606. - Floodway Supplemental District. 
606.1.  Purposes of the floodway supplemental district. 
    The Floodway Supplemental District is designed to: 
A.  Protect life; 
B.  Reduce and prevent flood damage; 
C.  Reduce public expenditures in areas subject to flooding; 
D.  Permit reasonable use of land in areas subject to flooding; 
E.  Promote the general welfare of the community; and 
F.  Prevent or reduce flood damage by keeping floodways free of manmade obstructions to permit the free flow and discharge of floodwaters. 
606.2.  District boundaries. 
    The initial boundaries of the Floodway Supplemental District shall be established only after notice and public hearing before the Planning Commission and by approval of the City Council. This boundary shall be an approximation of the hundred-year flood with the exact boundaries of the Floodway Supplemental District being determined after the developer has submitted a preliminary plat showing detailed topographic information as required in Part 3, Article IV, Section 4.01 of this Ordinance. The exact boundary shall be established by the City Engineer according to the best available flood data compiled from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Geological Survey. Lands within the Floodway Supplemental District shall be identified on the Official Zoning Map by the suffix FD following the general zoning district designation. The boundaries of the Floodway Supplemental District may be amended so as to maintain uniformity with the purposes of this Ordinance upon a finding that: 
A.  A flood control project of the federal, state, county or city government, or a private person, has substantially altered the boundaries of the floodway; 
B.  Flood data compiled subsequent to the enactment of the district indicates that the boundaries of the district should be adjusted; or 
C.  Proposed improvements, such as berms, dikes, channel improvements, or flood retention reservoirs, which will substantially alter the boundaries of the floodway and the actual construction of said improvements has been assured by the submission and acceptance of bond. 
(Ord. No. 509, § 1, 6-18-1974) 
606.3.  General floodway regulations. 
    The following general regulations apply to the use of land located within an FD Floodway Supplemental District: 
A.  Structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand flood conditions. 
B.  Materials which in time of flood might float away and lodge against bridge abutments or otherwise serve to restrict the flood discharge capacity of the water channel are prohibited. 
606.4.  Permitted uses. 
    Within an FD Floodway Supplemental District the following uses are permitted as a right: 
A.  Passive agricultural uses such as: 
    cultivation 
    forestry 
    grazing 
    planting 
B.  Open land uses such as: 
    arboretum 
    flood management project 
    reservoir 
    wildlife preserve 
C.  Public uses such as: 
    fire alarm 
    historical marker 
    street sign 
    thoroughfare 
    utility line 
D.  Open air recreational uses such as: 
    golf courses 
    driving ranges 
    parks 
    picnic grounds, etc. 
Certain uses (listed below) may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment, after adherence to the procedural requirements for a special exception, and upon the Board's finding that: 
A.  The use will not substantially affect or be affected by the flow of waters during times of flood; 
B.  The use will not impair the appropriate use, present or future, of neighboring property and that the use will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance. 
The uses which may be permitted by the Board of Adjustment are: 
A.  Parking; 
B.  Temporary outside storage of materials; 
C.  Temporary amusement enterprises; 
D.  Other open air uses not requiring the erection of permanent principal structures, but which may require the erection of accessory structures. 
All other uses are prohibited within an FD Floodway Supplemental District. 
Uses approved by the Board which are not permitted within the applicable general use district shall abate within one (1) year from the date of amendment to the Official Zoning Map removing the Floodway Supplemental District designation from the land upon which the use is located. 
606.5.  Nonconformities. 
    A structure lawfully existing in a Floodway Supplemental District at the effective date of said Floodway Supplemental Zoning and which would be prohibited in said Floodway Supplemental District shall be deemed nonconforming and may continue subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged. 
B.  Should such structure be damaged or partially destroyed by any means to the extent of seventy-five (75) percent of its current replacement cost at time of damage, said structure shall not be restored. 
C.  Ordinary repairs may be made on any nonconforming structure provided said structure is not enlarged. If a nonconforming structure becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance and a final order of vacation or demolition is entered by a duly authorized official by reason of physical condition it shall not thereafter be used, restored, repaired or rebuilt. 
No construction of a permanent principal structure shall be allowed on any lot located within a Floodway Supplemental District even though said lot was filed of record or was within a subdivision approved by the City Council prior to the effective date of the Floodway Supplemental Zoning in said district. 
606.6.  Responsibility for flooding. 
    The fact that land/or property is not included within a Floodway or Flood Hazard Area as authorized by Section 606.2 of this Ordinance shall not constitute assurance that such land/or property is not subject to flooding and shall not be so interpreted. 
Sec. 607. - Repealed. 
(Ord. No. 959, §§ 1-11, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 960, §§ 1-11, 11-5-1996; Ord. No. 981, §§ 2, 3, 10, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 11-17-1998; Ord. No. 1126, § 1, 12-15-1998; Ord. No. 1156, § 1, 12-7-2004) 
Sec. 608. - Repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1316, § 4, 3-17-2015; Ord. No. 1344, 7-18-2017) 
ARTICLE 7. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 701. - Creation and procedures. 
701.1.  Board of adjustment established. 
a.  There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Adjustment consisting of five (5) members. Each appointed member shall be nominated and confirmed as provided for in section 2-9 [2-266 of the Code of Ordinances]. 
b.  Each member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold office for a term as provided for in section 2-9 [2-266 of the Code of Ordinances]. Provided, however, in 1993, the Ward I member and the Ward II member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be appointed to serve until 7:30 p.m. on the third Tuesday in June, 1994, and the Ward IV member shall be appointed to serve until that time in 1996; in 1994, the Ward III member shall be appointed to serve until that time in 1996 and the at-large member shall be appointed to serve until that time in 1995. 
(Ord. No. 785, § 3, 5-6-1986; Ord. No. 874, § 12, 11-17-1992) 
701.2.  Organization and procedures. 
    The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect one (1) of its members as chairperson. The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairperson, or, in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The Board shall keep the minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. 
701.3.  Appeals to board of adjustment. 
    Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer of the municipality affected by any administrative decision based on this Zoning Ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of such decision by filing with the City Clerk and the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record of the action from which the appeal is taken. 
701.4.  Public hearing required. 
    The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Any party may appear and be heard in person or by agent or by attorney at said hearing. 
    Notice of public hearing before the Board of Adjustment shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Yukon and by mailing written notice by the clerk of the Board to all owners of property within a three-hundred-foot radius of the exterior boundary of the subject property. Said notice shall contain: 
1.  Legal description of the property and the street address or approximate location in the City or town; 
2.  Present zoning classification of the property and the nature of the variance or exception requested; 
3.  Date, time and place of hearing. 
A copy of the published notice may be mailed in lieu of written notice; however, the notice by publication and written notice shall be published and mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
701.5.  Fees. 
    The City Council for the City of Yukon shall set all required fees for a hearing on an appeal before the Board of Adjustment and such fees shall be set by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
701.6.  Powers. 
    The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
A.  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, or other administrative officer in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
B.  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance will, in any individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of Adjustment that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography. 
(2)  The application of this Ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship, not self-imposed by the owner or developer. 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar only to the particular piece of property involved. 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Zoning Ordinance or the Comprehensive Plan; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land/or building or structure that is prohibited by this Ordinance. 
701.7.  Three votes required. 
    In exercising the above powers, the Board of Adjustment shall have the concurring vote of at least three (3) of its members in order that it may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative officer for directing the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 574, 12-21-1976) 
Sec. 702. - Appeal to district court. 
702.1.  Notice of appeal. 
    An appeal from any action, decision, ruling, judgment or order of the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person or persons, jointly or severally, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Yukon to the District Court by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk and with the Board of Adjustment within ten (10) days from the filing of the decision of the Board, which notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. Upon filing of the notice of appeal as herein provided, the said Board shall transmit forthwith to the Court Clerk of Canadian County the original or certified copy of all the papers constituting the record in the case, together with the order, decision or ruling of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 861, § 1, 3-4-1992) 
702.2.  Appeal stays proceedings. 
    An appeal to the District Court from the Board of Adjustment stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment or the administrative office from which the appeal is taken certifies to the Court Clerk, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay, in his opinion, would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the District Court upon application or notice to the administrative officer in charge of the enforcement of the terms and provisions of the Ordinance; and upon notice to the chairperson of the Board of Adjustment from which the appeal is taken, and, upon due cause being shown, the court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision brought up for review. 
ARTICLE 8. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 801. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    801.1. Duty of zoning administrator. 
    It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce this Ordinance. If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the persons responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and/ordering the action necessary to correct it, and shall take such other action as is authorized by law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
Sec. 802. - Zoning clearance permit required. 
802.1.  Purpose. 
    The zoning clearance permit is a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator which states that a particular development meets all of the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. It is not a building permit and does not authorize construction; it certifies that the land and/or structure is in conformance with the terms of this Zoning Ordinance. 
802.2.  New construction. 
    No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered or repaired in such a manner as to prolong the life of the building, nor shall the use of any land/or building or other structure be changed without a zoning clearance permit being issued authorizing such construction, alteration, repair, or use changes as being in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. No building permit shall be issued for any construction not conforming to a valid zoning clearance permit. 
802.3.  Change in use of land/or building. 
    No change shall be made in the use of any land/or building or structure after the passage of this Ordinance until a zoning clearance permit has been obtained, certifying that all the provisions of this Ordinance have been complied with. 
802.4.  Application. 
    An application for a zoning clearance permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator by the owner or proposed occupant of the building or land to be occupied or used, and said application shall state the location and legal description of said property and set out in detail the character and nature of the use to be conducted thereon. Within three days, the Zoning Administrator shall grant or deny said zoning clearance permit in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance. 
802.5.  Accompanying material. 
    All applications for zoning clearance permits shall be accompanied by a plat plan, drawn to scale on suitable paper, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the building to be erected, and such other information as may be necessary to satisfy the requirements of these regulations. 
802.6.  Repealed. 
(Ord. No. 546, 7-15-1975) 
Sec. 803. - Conditional use permit. 
803.1.  Procedure for authorizing conditional uses. 
    Where the letter "p" appears for certain uses in the tables of permitted uses, their use is permitted subject to acquiring a Conditional Use Permit. The uses designated under the various districts herein as "Conditional Uses" are nonconforming and temporary uses and so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district. Such conditional uses are subject to yearly review and renewal or termination. The following procedure is established to integrate properly the conditional uses with the other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
A.  An owner or his duly authorized agent or representative may make application for a Conditional Use Permit by filing with the Planning and Zoning Department a written application, in such form and content as the Planning Commission may establish. The application shall be accomplished by the payment of a fee as set by the City Council of the City of Yukon by resolution. 
B.  The Planning and Zoning Department head shall set a date for a public hearing not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of the filing said application. Twenty (20) days' notice of the public hearing shall be given by the Planning Commission by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Yukon. 
C.  An application recommended by the Planning Commission for approval, or approval subject to modification, shall be transmitted to the City Council with the report and recommendations of the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days of the commission hearing for City Council action therein. 
D.  An application, recommended for denial by the Planning Commission shall not be considered further, unless the application, within fifteen (15) days of the action by the Planning Commission, shall file with the City Council a written request for hearing before the City Council. If no such request is filed, then fifty dollars ($50.00) of the original fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Upon filing of such request for hearing before the City Council, the Planning Commission shall transmit to the City Council its report and recommendation and a copy of its minutes on the hearing. The City Clerk shall notify all interested parties of record of the time and place of the City Council meeting. 
E.  The City Council in considering an application for a Conditional Use Permit, along with the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the use of the land/or building(s) in question as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety. 
F.  The Commission and the Council, in acting upon the application, may provide that approval of a conditional use shall be contingent upon acceptance and observation of specified conditions, including, but not limited to the following matters: 
1.  Conformity to plans and drawings submitted with the application. 
2.  Special yards, open spaces, buffer strips, walls, fences, concealing hedges, landscaping. 
3.  Volume of traffic generated, vehicular movements within the site, and points of vehicular ingress and egress. 
4.  Performance characteristics, related to the emission of noise, vibration and other potentially dangerous or objectionable elements. 
5.  Limit on time of day for the conduct of specified activities. 
6.  The period within which the permit shall be exercised, or otherwise shall lapse. 
7.  Guarantees as to compliance with the terms of the approval. 
G.  All conditional uses shall be for a period of one year from the date of approval by the City Council. Such conditional uses may be renewed each year, for an additional one year, by the Building Inspector upon the payment of an annual fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) so long as the conditional use is compatible with other authorized land uses of the surrounding area. If it appears to the Building Inspector that such conditional use is losing its compatibility with other uses in the area, or violates the terms of the Conditional Use Permit, such conditional use shall be docketed on the agenda of the Planning Commission, with notice, for a public hearing as to whether the Conditional Use Permit shall be renewed for an additional one year. If the Planning Commission recommends renewal, the matter shall proceed under paragraphs C, E, and F above. If the Planning Commission recommends denial of the Conditional Use Permit, the matter shall proceed under paragraph D above. 
H.  Whenever a use classified and listed herein as a conditional use in the district lawfully exists at the effective date of this Ordinance, such use shall be renewed or terminated in accordance with paragraph G. Whenever any conditional use is abandoned or discontinued for six (6) months, such use shall not be reestablished unless it is authorized under new proceedings as provided herein. 
I.  An owner or his duly authorized agent or representative may make application for a Conditional Use Permit for the drilling of an oil and gas well by filing with the Planning and Zoning Department a written application in such form and content as the Planning Commission may establish. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of a nonrefundable fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), payable at the time the application is made, and said fee to be paid into the general fund. Upon approval of the application for Conditional Use Permit for the drilling of an oil and gas well by the City Council, the owner or his duly authorized agent or representative shall pay to the City Clerk an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) before the permit is received from the City. 
J.  An owner or his duly authorized agent or representative may make application for a Conditional Use Permit for locating a compressor station by filing with the Planning and Zoning Department a written application in such form and content as the Planning Commission may establish. The Application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). 
(1)  Any addition to a compressor station shall require the filing of a request for an amendment to the Conditional Use Permit. The request for the amendment shall be processed in the same manner as the original Conditional Use Permit application. The fee for the amendment application shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
K.  Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance, or who shall fail to comply with an order properly made in connection with the enforcement of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) including costs. Each day's failure to comply with any such provision or order shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 1, 5-20-1975; Ord. No. 590, § 1, 9-6-1977; Ord. No. 601, § 2, 4-18-1978; Ord. No. 611, § 2, 9-5-1978; Ord. No. 624, § 1, 3-20-1979; Ord. No. 653, § 1, 10-20-1981; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 11-16-1982; Ord. No. 783, § 5, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 983, 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
803.2.  Fees. 
A.  Upon the filing of an application for a Conditional Use Permit, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
B.  Upon the filing of an application for a Conditional Use Permit for the drilling of an oil and gas well, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a nonrefundable filing fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit for the drilling of an oil and gas well by the City Council, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) before the permit is received from the City. 
C.  Upon the filing of an application for a Conditional Use Permit for locating a compressor unit or compressor station, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a filing fee of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). 
D.  Upon the filing of an application for a Conditional Use Permit for locating a Sexually Oriented Business, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a filing fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
E.  The fees provided for conditional use permits for the drilling of oil and gas wells and compressor units or compressor stations will be paid into the following account: 
   Two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) of the nonrefundable fee for oil and gas wells, will be paid into the general fund. 
   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) fee for oil and gas well will be paid into the general fund. 
   Seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) fee for compressor units or compressor stations will be paid into the general fund. 
F.  The fees provided for conditional use permits for a sexually oriented business will be paid into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 511, § 1, 7-24-1974; Ord. No. 590, § 2, 9-6-1977; Ord. No. 601, § 2, 4-18-1978; Ord. No. 611, § 2, 9-5-1978; Ord. No. 624, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-1979; Ord. No. 644, § 1, 11-18-1980; Ord. No. 983, 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 1175, § 1, 8-2-2005) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 624, § 1, enacted March 20, 1979, amended the zoning ordinance by adding new subsections A and B to § 803.2. Said subsections have been redesignated B and C, respectively, inasmuch as § 803.2 already had a subsection A. In addition, § 2 of Ord. No. 624 has been added as a new subsection D. 
803.3.  Suspension and/or revocation. 
    When in the opinion of the City Council it should appear that a Conditional Use Permit's provisions and conditions are not complied with, then in that event, a hearing date shall be set before the council and the interested parties given not less than fifteen (15) days' notice thereof by the City Clerk by way of certified mail. 
    Upon the hearing of the alleged noncompliance the City Council shall have upon the finding of noncompliance the prerogative of either suspending or revoking entirely the Conditional Use Permit. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-20-1975) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 540 amended the zoning ordinance by adding 803.2, which has been redesignated as 803.3 inasmuch as Ord. No. 511 had already added 803.2. 
Sec. 804. - Platting requirement. 
    804.1. Procedure. 
    To provide documentation of intent for public record and for purposes of securing safety from fire, providing a proper arrangement of streets, assuring the adequacy of open space for traffic, utilities, and emergency vehicles, commensurate with the intensification of land use customarily incident to change in zoning, a platting requirement is established as follows: 
A.  Every zoning request shall be accompanied by a preliminary plat which complies with the Subdivision and Platting Regulations of the City of Yukon, said preliminary plat shall include any adjacent land which is fifty (50) percent or more owned or under option by the applicant. 
B.  Every zoning request for land which is already included within a plat which does not comply with the Subdivision and Platting Regulations of the City of Yukon, must be accompanied by a new preliminary plat which complies with the Subdivision and Platting Regulations of the City of Yukon. 
C.  At the time the zoning request comes on for final approval by the Council, it shall be accompanied by a preliminary plat which complies with the Subdivision and Platting Regulations of the City of Yukon. 
D.  No building permit shall be issued until that portion of the tract on which the permit is sought has been included with a subdivision plat or replat, as the case may be, submitted to and approved by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, and filed of record in the office of the County Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-20-1975; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 11-3-1981) 
ARTICLE 9. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 901. - Procedures. 
901.1.  Planning commission recommendation required. 
    The regulations, restrictions, prohibitions and limitations imposed and the districts created may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by ordinance, but no change shall be made until the Planning Commission, after notice and public hearing, files with the City Council a report and recommendation on the proposed change. 
901.2.  Application for amendment. 
    An owner or his duly authorized agent or representative may make application for the amendment of the zoning restrictions applicable to his property by filing with the Planning Commission a written application in such form and content as the Planning Commission may by resolution establish. An application for amendment shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as set by the City Council of the City of Yukon by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
901.3.  Notice and public hearing. 
    Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Commission shall set a date for public hearing not less than twenty (20) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of filing. Fifteen (15) days' notice of the public hearing shall be given by the Planning Commission by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Yukon. In addition to the notice provided above, notice of public hearing of any zoning change shall be given by a sign or signs as may be required, placed on the property affected by such proposed zoning reclassification. Such sign (or signs) and the lettering thereon shall be of sufficient size so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public street or streets toward which it faces. It shall contain information giving the date, time and place of the public hearing and by whom it shall be conducted, the desired zoning classification, the proposed use of the property, and such other information as deemed necessary to provide adequate and timely public notice. 
901.4.  Planning commission action. 
A.  After notice and public hearing, the Planning Commission shall vote to: 
(1)  Recommend to the City Council that the application be approved as submitted, or as amended, or be approved subject to modification; or 
(2)  Recommend to the City Council that the application be denied. 
B.  An application recommended for approval, or approval subject to modification, shall be transmitted to the City with the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission within fifteen (15) days from the date of Planning Commission action. 
C.  An application recommended for denial shall not be considered further and fifty dollars ($50.00) of the fee required in Article 901.2, Application for Amendment, shall be refunded to the applicant unless the applicant, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the Planning Commission action, files a written request with the City Council for a hearing whereupon a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the request for a hearing before the City Council. Upon notice of such request, and receipt of the required fee, the Planning Commission shall forthwith transmit the application and its report and recommendation and a copy of its minutes on the hearing to the City Council. The City Clerk shall notify all interested parties of record before the Planning Commission proceedings of the time and place of the consideration of the appeal hereinabove provided for. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 4, 4-1-1986) 
901.5.  City action. 
    The City Council shall hold a hearing on each application regularly transmitted, or which has been transmitted pursuant to an appeal as provided for in Section 901.4C. The City Council shall approve the application as submitted and recommended by the Planning Commission, or approve the application subject to modification, or deny the application, or return the application to the City Planning Commission for further study. 
901.6.  Protest to amendment. 
    If a written protest against an amendment, change or repeal of this Ordinance or any part thereof is presented, duly signed and acknowledged more than three (3) days prior to said public hearing by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or by the owners of fifty (50) percent or more of the area of the lots immediately abutting any side of the territory included in such proposed change, or separated therefrom only by an alley or street less than three hundred (300) feet wide, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fifths of all the members of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 1, 8-6-1974; Ord. No. 574, 12-21-1976) 
[PENALTY; REPEAL; SEVERABILITY; EMERGENCY] 

Sec. 1301. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance, or who shall fail to comply with an order properly made in connection with the enforcement of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code [the Code of Ordinances]. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 24, 1-5-1993) 
Sec. 1302. - Repealing clause. 
    That Ordinance Numbers 189, 254, 255, 316, 326, 327, 331, 355, 371, 396, 426, 429, 434, 435, and 468, same being Sections 14-1 to 14-264, both inclusive, of Chapter 14, of the Code of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, be, and the same are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 1303. - Provisions severable. 
    The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence or clause of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence or clause hereof. 
Sec. 1304. - Emergency. 
    Whereas it being immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health, safety and welfare of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, and the inhabitants thereof, that the provisions of this Ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, by reason whereof this Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and approval as provided by law. 
    PASSED AND APPROVED this 21st day of December, 1972. 
/s/ _____
  Robert N. Ward 
  Mayor  
    (SEAL) 
ATTEST: /s/ _____
  Mary Lee Huckaba 
  City Clerk  
Appendix B - SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision and platting regulations, consisting of part 3 of Ordinance No. 475, adopted by the council on December 21, 1972. The original numbering system and all titles, headings and catchlines have been retained. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from Ordinance No. 475. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of citation to state statutes as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated within brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.01. - Purpose and intent. 
    These regulations are designed to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community by establishing standards for the subdivision of land within the City of Yukon. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance are specifically designed to lessen the congestion on streets, promote the orderly layout and use of land, secure safety from fire and other dangers, provide adequate light and air, facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds and other public requirements, and protect neighborhood areas from the hazard of through traffic. 
    These regulations are designed and intended to achieve the following and should be administered so as to: 
a.  Implement the Official City Plan; 
b.  Provide for conservation of existing standard residential areas and prevent the development of slums and blight; 
c.  Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts; 
d.  Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners or developers of the tract, and that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community; 
e.  Provide the best possible design for the tract; 
f.  Reconcile any differences of interest; and 
g.  Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. 
Sec. 1.02. - Short title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
Sec. 1.03. - Authority. 
    These regulations are enacted pursuant to 11 O.S. § 41-101 et seq., and the provisions of the Charter of the City of Yukon. 
Sec. 1.04. - Jurisdiction. 
A.  These regulations shall govern the subdivision of land in the corporate limits of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
B.  These regulations shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision: 
(1)  The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels, any part of which, when subdivided, shall contain less than five (5) acres in area; or 
(2)  The division of land, previously subdivided or platted, into tracts, lots, sites or parcels of less than ten (10) acres in area; or 
(3)  The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private easement through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, including those for use by public and private utility companies; or 
(4)  The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of land regardless of the area involved. 
C.  No plat, replat or subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of the City Planning Commission shall be entitled to record unless it bears the written approval of the Commission. No deed referring to such unapproved plat shall be entitled to record, and if recorded, shall not import notice. No deed describing land by metes and bounds which conveys land within the jurisdiction of the Commission in a tract of five acres or less shall be entitled to record unless it bears the written approval of the Planning Commission, and if recorded, shall not import notice. 
Sec. 1.05. - Definitions. 
A.  Alley: A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
B.  Block: A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, rural land/or drainage channels, or a combination thereof. 
C.  Building line or setback line: A line or lines designating the area outside of which a building may not be erected. 
D.  City: The City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
E.  City Council: Means the official governing body of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
F.  City Planning Commission: See "Planning Commission." 
G.  Comprehensive plan: The official city plan of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
H.  Easement: A grant of the use of a strip of land for specific purposes by the property owner to the public, a corporation or persons. 
I.  Development density: For the purpose of this Ordinance, density in terms of gross land area are: 
(1)  Low-2 or less dwelling units per acre; 
(2)  Medium-2.1 to 6.0 dwelling units per acre; 
(3)  High-Over 6 dwelling units per acre. 
J.  Lot: A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or for development. 
K.  Lot, corner: A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two or more streets. 
L.  Lot, double frontage: A lot which runs through a block from street to street and which has two nonintersecting sides abutting on two or more streets. 
M.  Lot split: Any division of land by metes and bounds description into two or more parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, and which does not constitute a subdivision as herein defined. 
N.  Planning Commission: The Yukon City Planning Commission, as established by the statutes hereinbefore cited; also referred to as "City Planning Commission." 
O.  Plat, preliminary: A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability of the proposed subdivision of land. 
P.  Plat, final: A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications, and acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks, streets and alleys, public areas, and other dimensions of land. 
Q.  Roadway: That portion of any street so designated for vehicular traffic; and where curbs are in place, that portion of the street between curbs. 
R.  Street: The entire width of whatever nature between the property lines when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian traffic, and wherever designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, cul-de-sac, or however otherwise designated. 
S.  Street, arterial: A major street which is designated on the Thoroughfare Plan, or Official City Plan and/or as may be designed [designated] by Ordinance by the City Council and which is designed to carry intercity traffic and to relate the various neighborhoods within the City. 
T.  Street, collector: A street collecting traffic from minor streets and serving as the most direct route to an arterial street or a community facility. Any street may be designated by the City Council as a collector street when it serves, or when extended may serve, more than fifty (50) dwelling units. 
U.  Street, commercial or industrial: A commercial or industrial street is defined as a street which abuts a commercial or industrial zoned property and is designed to provide access to those parcels so designated. 
V.  Street, cul-de-sac: A minor street having one end open to vehicular traffic and having one closed end terminated by a turnaround. 
W.  Street, frontage or service: A minor street auxiliary to and located on the side of an arterial street for service to abutting properties and adjacent areas and for control of access. 
X.  Street, marginal access: A service road or other roadway normally running parallel to or with an arterial street for the purpose of intercepting traffic from abutting property and/or intersecting streets for the purpose of limiting access to the arterial street main roadway. 
Y.  Street, minor: Any street not specifically classified on the Thoroughfare Plan whose primary purpose is to provide access to adjacent properties. 
Z.  Subdivider: Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation or other entity acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined. 
AA.  Subdivision: The division or redivision of land by map into two or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for development, or the dedication or vacation of a public or private right-of-way or easement. 
BB.  Thoroughfare Plan: The part of an official city plan referring to street development goals, principles and standards. 
Sec. 1.06. - Driveways on primary thoroughfares and collector streets. 
    That the construction of driveways on all primary thoroughfares and collector streets within the corporate limits of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, is hereby limited to those lots whose only frontage is on a collector street or primary thoroughfare. A primary thoroughfare or collector street for the purpose of this Ordinance being the same as designated and defined by the Comprehensive General Plan of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, and such other thoroughfares and collector streets as the council by ordinance may designate and define. 
Editor's note- Section 7.01 was moved per instructions from the city to follow section 1.05 and has been numbered as section 1.06. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 2.01. - Street plan and relation to adjoining street system. 
A.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the Official City Plan and these regulations. 
B.  All such streets shall be related to existing and proposed streets in the area, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and existing and proposed land uses along such streets. 
C.  All streets shall be platted in such a manner that all resulting lots shall conform to the applicable zoning regulations. 
D.  Where such streets are not shown in the Official City Plan, the arrangements of these streets in the subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in the surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a neighborhood plan approved or adopted by the Planning Commission. 
E.  Minor and collector streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic. 
F.  Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial [street], the Planning Commission shall require: 
(1)  Marginal access streets; 
(2)  Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line; 
(3)  Deep lots with rear service streets; or 
(4)  Such other treatment as may be necessary for the adequate protection and stabilization of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
Sec. 2.02. - Relation to other limited rights-of-way. 
    Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway, the Planning Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way. 
Sec. 2.03. - Reserve strips prohibited. 
    Reserve strips designed and used for the primary purpose of controlling access to minor streets by parties or persons other than a public agency shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 2.04. - Street alignment. 
A.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
B.  A tangent of not less than one hundred (100) feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
C.  Sight distance. Minimum clear sight distance, measured along the chord of the centerline, shall be provided on all streets as follows: 
Arterial streets 400 feet Collector streets 350 feet Minor streets 250 feet  
Sec. 2.05. - Street rights-of-way and roadway widths. 
A.  Street rights-of-way and roadway widths shall conform to the Official City Plan. 
B.  All streets shall be paved according to the established standards adopted by the City Council. 
C.  The following minimum standards shall apply: 
Street Type Right-of-Way 
Width Roadway Expressway 250' Two 36' 
roadways Primary arterial 130' Two 24' 
roadways Secondary 
arterial 100' 44' roadway Commercial street 80' 58' roadway Collector 60' 34' roadway Minor 50' or 60'* 26' or 34' 
roadway*  
* Use where abutting development is high density. 
D.  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations. 
E.  In no event shall lots facing a one-half minor residential street be permitted. 
F.  Wherever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
Sec. 2.06. - Arterial street frontage access control. 
A.  No access on an arterial street shall occur within minimum intervals of five hundred (500) feet, measured from the nearest intersecting right-of-way lines (except as modified by Sections 2.06B and 2.06G); said distance may be increased if traffic conditions as determined by the Planning Commission warrant such extension. 
B.  In commercial and industrial subdivisions, specifically designated "one-way turn only" access may be provided in the direction of the adjacent traffic lane at a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet between major street intersections or a minimum of three hundred (300) feet between each access point. 
C.  Commercial or industrial subdivisions should have access to an arterial or commercial street, if traffic conditions as determined by the Planning Commission warrant such extension, but shall not have access to a residential street. 
D.  To ensure traffic safety, appropriate nonaccess provisions shall be designated and dimensioned along all abutting streets in commercial and industrial subdivisions, and along major streets in residential subdivisions. A description of such nonaccess provisions shall appear upon the plat. 
E.  Access to property occurring within the minimum distance prescribed for arterial street access, five hundred (500) feet, shall only be by the closest service or frontage road entrance onto the arterial street. 
F.  Individual driveways will be so located on each lot to avoid direct vehicular access to or from any expressway or arterial street. Driveways in new additions should be located to enable direct access primarily to or from a minor street or, if necessary, to the collector streets which serve as feeders to or distributors from the major streets. The construction of driveways on all arterial and collector streets within the corporate limits of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, in existing additions is limited to those lots whose only frontage is on a collector street or arterial [street]. An arterial or collector street for the purpose of this Ordinance being the same as designated and defined by the Comprehensive General Plan of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, and such other arterial and collector streets as the Council, by ordinance, may designate and define. 
G.  Whenever individual commercial and industrial lots front on a collector street or arterial street, the Planning Commission shall determine the distance of the driveway or driveways to said lot from the nearest intersection. 
(Ord. No. 779, § 1, 1-21-1986) 
Sec. 2.07. - Street and subdivision names. 
A.  No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. 
B.  Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and the City Council. 
C.  Subdivision names shall not duplicate existing subdivisions of record. 
Sec. 2.08. - Street grades. 
A.  The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.4 percent. 
B.  Except where unusual topographic conditions justify an exception, the maximum grade of all streets shall not be greater than the following: 
Street Type Grade Arterial 3% Collector 5% Service streets 7%  
Sec. 2.09. - Street intersections. 
A.  Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles and may be curved, if necessary, in order to make this possible. In no event shall a street intersect any other street at any angle of less than 75 degrees. 
B.  Street corners on local residential streets shall have a minimum radius of 30 feet at curbline or its equivalent. 
C.  Street corners on commercial and industrial streets shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet at the curbline or its equivalent. 
D.  Street intersections involving arterials shall have a minimum street corner radius of 40 feet at the curbline or its equivalent. 
E.  All street corner radii shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats. 
F.  Corner dedications shall be provided at the intersections of all streets which are not less than twenty-five (25) feet back from the intersection of the projected right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets. 
Sec. 2.10. - Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets. 
A.  Except where topography would render impracticable the standard distance as set forth herein, the maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 1,000 feet in areas of low density and 500 feet in all other cases. 
B.  Each cul-de-sac shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet. 
C.  The road surface within the cul-de-sac right-of-way shall have a minimum radius of 38 feet. 
D.  In the case of temporarily dead-ended streets which are stub streets designed to provide future connection with adjoining unsubdivided areas, the Planning Commission may require: 
(1)  Temporary easement for a turnaround having a radius of 50 feet; or 
(2)  An appropriate area for a background. 
E.  In all instances, proper provisions shall be made for adequate storm drainage so that stormwater does not collect at the ends of these streets. 
Sec. 2.11. - Alleys. 
A.  Alleys shall be provided in all Commercial Districts except where a Commercial District will be developed as a self-contained unit; then other provisions shall be made on the site for service drives and service areas. 
B.  Alleys in residential areas shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width when provided. 
C.  Alleys in commercial areas shall not be less than thirty (30) feet in width and shall be paved. 
D.  Dead-end alleys are prohibited except where natural or other features make it impossible to continue them. Where dead-end alleys are unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turnaround areas with a minimum radius of forty (40) feet at the dead end. Backaround areas may be allowed in residential subdivisions. 
Sec. 2.12. - Easements. 
A.  Where alleys are not provided or may not be used for utility purposes, easements shall be provided as may be advisable for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, gas lines, water mains and lines, and other similar purposes. 
B.  Rear yard easements shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. In the event one-half of the easement is platted, it shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width. 
C.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width of construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. 
D.  Twenty (20) foot utility easements shall be provided at the end of culs-de-sac along major thoroughfares. 
Sec. 2.13. - Blocks. 
A.  In general, blocks should have the following dimensions: 
Minimum Maximum Length 600 feet 1,200 feet Width 220 feet 400 feet  
B.  The foregoing dimensions shall be subject to adjustment upon recommendation by the Planning Commission where topography, the character of the proposed development, or other similar conditions justify blocks of greater or lesser length and/or width. 
C.  Block lengths and widths shall be measured from the street right-of-way line. 
D.  Wherever blocks are longer than 1,000 feet, crosswalks may be required at the approximate center of the block. 
Sec. 2.14. - Lots. 
A.  The lot size, width, depth, shape orientation, and minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and the type of development and use contemplated. 
B.  Lot dimensions shall conform to the existing zoning regulations. 
C.  Each lot shall have access and front upon a public street. 
D.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where their use will produce definite advantages in meeting special situations in relation to topography and proper land use. 
E.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
Sec. 2.15. - Marginal land. 
    When a plat is filed on land that is subject to flooding or has been flooded within the last 20 years and corrective measures have not been taken to prevent reflooding, or when said land has soil conditions unsuitable for building purposes, said plat shall not be acceptable except where said property is dedicated to the City or other appropriate municipality subject to its acceptance for a water course, water drainage basin, a park or a conservancy district or for any other purpose of protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 3.01. - Preapplication conference. 
    Whenever any subdivision of a tract of land is proposed to be made, the subdivider or his agent shall submit to the staff, sketch plans and data concerning existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity, and which shall convey the intentions of the subdivider as to the proposed layout and type of development. 
    No fees shall be collected for preapplication consideration, the purpose being to acquaint the subdivider with the plans and policies in effect that would be significant to the proposed subdivision. 
    Within fifteen (15) days, the Planning Commission staff shall inform the subdivider that the plans and data as submitted or as modified do or do not meet the objectives of these regulations. When the Planning Commission finds the plans and data do not meet the objectives of these regulations, it shall express its reasons therefor. 
Sec. 3.02. - Preliminary plats. 
A.  The subdivider shall submit at least fourteen (14) copies of the preliminary plat to the City Manager or his designated agent, who shall review the plat for conformity with these regulations. 
B.  The Manager or his duly designated agent shall submit the plat to the Planning Commission together with his report and recommendations. After receipt of the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission shall, within thirty (30) days of its submission to the City by the subdivider, approve, conditionally approve, or reject the plat. 
C.  After its consideration the Planning Commission shall return one (1) copy of the preliminary plat to the subdivider and forward one (1) copy to the City Council together with its report on any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection. 
D.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall not, in all cases, entitle the subdivider to approval of the final plat. After preliminary approval, if any conditions arise which would cause the preliminary plat to become unsatisfactory due to health, safety, or welfare of the community, the Planning Commission shall recommend that the final plat be rejected. 
Sec. 3.03. - Final plat. 
A.  The developer shall submit eleven (11) paper copies and one (1) copy on stable base tracing medium of Mylar or comparable Cronaflex of the proposed subdivision, drawn to a scale of 1" = 100'; such final plat shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or surveyor. The final plat of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for final approval within five (5) years of the date on which the preliminary plat was approved by the City Council. If not submitted for final approval within such time, the preliminary plat approval shall be considered as null and void, and resubmission of all plats, along with the appropriate filing fees, to the Planning Commission and City Council shall be necessary. 
    In addition, should the final plat not be submitted to the City Council within one (1) year from the approval or disapproval of the Planning Commission, then in that event, all action concerning the final plat shall be considered as null and void, and resubmission of the plat, along with appropriate filing fees, to the Planning Commission and City Council shall be necessary. 
B.  The Planning Commission shall review the final plat for conformance with the preliminary plat and shall prepare a set of written recommendations to be submitted to the City Council at the time the final plat is considered. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall within forty-five (45) days of the submission of the plat to the City of Yukon hold a public hearing to examine the final plat. The Planning Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days after the closing of the public hearing, approve or disapprove the plat. The applicant may waive the forty-five-day requirement and consent to an extension of the period. If the final plat is approved with the modification or waiver of certain requirements, the Planning Commission shall specify the reasons therefor. If the final plat is disapproved, the grounds for refusal, including citation of the applicable regulations or general plan, shall be stated on the records of the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to act and the applicant does not consent to an extension of time, a certificate by the City Clerk as to date of submission of plat for final approval and failure of the Planning Commission to act thereon within such specific time shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement of approval. 
D.  The action of the Planning Commission shall be shown on the final plat, with the date of action, over the signature of the chairperson or vice-chairperson. 
E.  The Planning Commission shall transmit to the City Council the tracing and two (2) paper copies of the final plat, together with copies of the restrictive covenants, and a listing of all required improvements indicating that they have been installed, or that a contract and bond insuring their installation, satisfactory to the City Council, has been executed and received by the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 1, 1-6-1976; Ord. No. 948, 6-4-1996) 
Sec. 3.04. - Recording of plat. 
    Before recording the final plat, it shall be submitted to the City Council for approval and for acceptance of public ways, service and utility easements, and land dedicated to public use. This approval of the plat shall be shown over the signature of the Mayor and attested to by the City Clerk or his deputy. The disapproval of any plat by the City Council shall be deemed a refusal of the proposed dedication shown thereon. 
    After final approval of the plat by the City Council and the affixing of all required signatures on the original tracing, the subdivider shall provide the Planning Commission with two (2) dark line prints thereof and one (1) contact reproducible tracing on stable base material. One (1) dark line print shall be retained in the permanent file of the Planning Commission and one (1) shall be sent to the office of the City Clerk. 
    After the Planning Commission and City Council have approved the final plat, no change shall be made therein unless said plat is resubmitted for approval of the Planning Commission and City Council. 
    Should the original plat and necessary copies thereof not be recorded in the County Clerk's office within sixty-five (65) days from City Council approval, the Council and Planning Commission approval shall be null and void as to all plats. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 2, 1-6-1976; Ord. No. 1112, § 1, 1-21-2003) 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4.01. - Preliminary plat data. 
A.  The following procedures shall apply to the filing for preliminary approval of any subdivision. The preliminary plat shall conform to the minimum requirements of the Comprehensive Plan for the City of Yukon (which shall have been previously ascertained by the subdivider), and shall also reflect and show all contiguously owned lands of the developer, notwithstanding that all of said land may never be finally platted. 
B.  The plat shall be drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date, scale, and north point. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision name and all intended street names. 
(3)  The name of the subdivider, the engineer, and/or surveyor preparing the plat. 
(4)  Legal description showing location of plat. 
(5)  Topographic survey map of the area being subdivided, showing contours at two (2) foot intervals. 
(6)  A key map showing the location of the plat in the section, township and range in which the plat is located. 
(7)  Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(8)  Location, widths, and names of all existing platted or dedicated streets, alleys, or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges, and other pertinent data as required by the Planning Commission. 
(9)  The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high and low water elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall refer to the established U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum. 
(10)  When a subdivision borders a lake or stream, the distance and bearings of a meander line shall be established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high watermark of the lake or from the bank of the stream. 
(11)  Layout and width of all new streets and rights-of-way, including alleys, highways, and easements, whether private or public, and for public and private utilities. 
(12)  The proposed street names and system of numbering lots and blocks. 
(13)  The exact length of the exterior boundaries of the land to be subdivided. 
(14)  Approximate dimensions of all lots. 
(15)  Approximate radii of all curves and lengths of all tangents. 
(16)  Approximate location and area of property to be dedicated for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision, with any conditions of such dedication or reservation. 
(17)  The location, size and type of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other surface and subsurface structures and pipelines existing within or immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and the location, layout, type and proposed size of the following structures and utilities: 
1.  Water mains and storage facilities; 
2.  Sanitary sewer mains, submains, and laterals; 
3.  Storm sewers, culverts and drainage structures; 
4.  Street improvements. 
(18)  The location of all drainage channels and subsurface drainage structures, and the proposed method of disposing of all runoff from the proposed subdivision, and the location and size of all drainage easements relating thereto, whether they are located within or outside of the proposed plat. 
(19)  Where deed restrictions are to be recorded on the plat, a brief description of the proposed restrictions should accompany the preliminary plat. 
(20)  A description of the improvements such as grading, paving, tree planting, walks, and installation of utilities which the subdivider proposes to make, and the time when they are proposed to be made, shall accompany the preliminary plat. 
Sec. 4.02. - Final plat data. 
A.  The final plat shall be a print or series of prints 24 × 36 inches in size on a stable base tracing medium of Mylar, Cronar, and other suitable durable material or linen tracing cloth. When more than one sheet is used in connection with the plat, each additional sheet shall be numbered consecutively and shall contain a notation indicating the total number of sheets. 
B.  The final plat shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 100' and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision and the name of the owner, the subdivider, and the engineer or land surveyor. 
(2)  Date, north point, scale (written and graphic). 
(3)  Boundaries of the subdivided area with accurate distances and bearings noted thereon. 
(4)  Exact location of the subdivision and the description of all monuments found or placed in making the survey. 
(5)  The lines, names, and width or dimensions of all proposed street rights-of-way. 
(6)  The lines, widths, and purposes of all easements. 
(7)  Numbered designation of all lots in the subdivision with their lines and dimensions accurately shown. 
(8)  The names of all adjacent subdivisions. 
(9)  Exact dimensions of all lots. 
(10)  The following, which shall be made and shown on the original reproducible: 
(a)  Owner's certificate and dedication, signed; 
(b)  Engineer's certificate of survey, signed, and his seal; 
(c)  Certificate for release of mortgage for any portion dedicated to the public, signed; 
(d)  Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive covenants, filed in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds which directly affect the land being subdivided; 
(e)  Certificate of Planning Commission action; 
(f)  Certificate of Council acceptance of streets, alleys, easements, and public land dedications; 
(g)  Tax receipt showing all taxes payable on all property within the limits of the tract as paid in full for the last five years, or in lieu thereof, a statement that such taxes have been paid, signed by the County treasurer; 
(h)  A receipt for the payment of all special assessments to which the subdivision is subject. These shall either be paid in full or, in lieu thereof, a letter from the City Clerk shall be submitted stating that a surety bond has been filed with him insuring the payment of all interest and principal payments until the assessment is paid in full. 
(11)  Exact radii of all curves and length of all tangents. 
(12)  Plans and specifications on all required improvements. 
(13)  Any additional data as may be required by the Planning Commission. 
Sec. 4.03. - Fees. 
    All such required fees regarding preliminary and final plats shall be set by the City Council of the City of Yukon by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 552, § 3, 1-6-1976; Ord. No. 601, § 3, 4-18-1978; Ord. No. 611, § 3, 9-5-1978; Ord. No. 1077, § 1, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 6-18-2013) 
ARTICLE V. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 5.01. - Monuments. 
1.  Each block corner shall be marked with iron pipes or pins not less than three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch in diameter and eighteen (18) inches long and placed at least one (1) inch below finished grade. 
2.  Monuments marking property lines and corners shall not be disturbed; or if such disturbance is necessary, the monuments shall be replaced at the exact spot from which they were removed. 
(Code 1995, app B, § 5.01; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 5.02. - Improvements. 
1.  Any final plat or subdivision located within the corporate limits shall not be approved unless the subdivider or developer shall provide the following: 
A.  File a surety bond with the city clerk in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of the required improvements as estimated by the city manager and/or city engineer. Said bond shall specify that the improvements shall be fully completed within a period of time not to exceed two (2) years from date of final plat approval and said bond shall be subject to approval by the city attorney and acceptance by the city council; or, 
B.  In lieu of a subdivision bond, the city council may at its discretion allow the subdivider or developer to deposit with the city clerk a cashier's check, certificate of deposit, irrevocable letter of credit from an approved bank, savings and loan association or authorized trust company, or other acceptable certified funds with the city named as payee in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of the required improvements as estimated by the city manager and/or city engineer. 
    An agreement shall be entered into between the city, subdivider or developer and the issuer of any letter of credit which shall specify that the improvements shall be fully completed within a period of time not to exceed two (2) years from date of final plat approval, and said negotiable instrument and agreement shall be subject to approval by the city attorney and accepted by the city council; or 
C.  In lieu of or in conjunction with subsections 1. and 2. above, the city council may, in its discretion, accept a cash payment to the city clerk for an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the improvements as estimated by the city manager and/or city engineer. Said funds shall be released to the contractor/subcontractor upon the city's acceptance of each improvement and upon written direction of the subdivider/developer. 
D.  Upon the city engineer's recommendation, that certain improvement not be completed at the time, the city council may waive the requirements for improvements. Upon waiving the requirements, the developer shall post an adequate cash bond to secure to the municipality the actual construction and installation of the improvements at a future date as determined by the city. The amount of the bond shall be fixed by the city council and should be equal to the cost of the required improvement. 
In the event the required improvements are not completed as specified in subsections 1. and 2. above, the city may cproceed with the work and in any event hold the subdivider or developer and/or the bonding company jointly and/or severally liable and responsible for the costs thereof; and in no event shall a bond or deposit be released until the improvements are approved by the city engineer and/or city manager and the city council; and in no event shall a building(s) be occupied until all such improvements have been completed. 
2.  The following improvements shall be provided by the subdivider or developer: 
A.  Water mains properly connected with public water supply system provided to ensure adequate water flow for fire protection in accordance with standard City of Yukon specifications governing water improvements construction. If a public water system is not reasonably accessible and not within 1/4 mile as determined by the city engineer, the subdivider may install an individual water well system, upon the recommendation of the city engineer and approval of the city council. Such water well system shall be installed in accordance with the recommendations and requirements of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
B.  A sanitary sewer system properly connected with the existing system, in accordance with standard City of Yukon specifications governing sanitary sewer construction and in accord with requirements of state and county health departments. If a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible and not within 1/4 of a mile as determined by the city engineer, the subdivider may install a private sewage disposal system, upon the recommendation of the city engineer and approval of the city council. Such private sewage disposal system shall be installed in accordance with the recommendations and requirements of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality. 
C.  Streets graded to the full roadway width and to the established grade and paved in accordance with the city's approved paving standards. 
D.  Storm drainage facilities, curbs and gutters to provide adequate surface water drainage for the area being drained. Said storm drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with the approved City of Yukon drainage standards and requirements attached hereto as Appendix A. 
E.  Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the sidewalk standards and requirements of the City of Yukon attached hereto as Appendix B. 
    EXCEPTION: Sidewalks are not required to be installed on Agriculture and RR zoned properties in the rural areas. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 10-21-1975; Ord. No. 771, § 1, 7-2-1985; Ord. No. 787, § 1, 6-17-1986; Ord. No. 804, § 1, 10-20-1987; Ord. No. 964, 12-3-1996; Ord. No. 1236, § 1, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 7-21-2015) 
Sec. 5.03. - Public sites and open spaces. 
A.  Where a site for a proposed park, playground, playfield, school, library, fire station, or other public use is proposed by the Official City Plan, or is deemed to be necessary by the agency involved, and is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the City Council upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission may require the reservation of such area within the subdivision. 
B.  The developer shall give the public agency involved sixty (60) days' written notice of the proposed subdivision, with a copy of such notice to be mailed to the Planning Commission. During the 60-day period, the agency may or may not express its interest in the proposed subdivision in connection with the provision of appropriate public site. Should such interest be expressed, that agency shall have a period of an additional thirty (30) days within which to arrange for the acquisition of the public site under construction. 
C.  Where the proposed subdivision is too small to provide space of suitable size for the public site intended, the site provided may be combined with that provided or to be provided in adjoining areas; thus, in the aggregate, there will be provided a site of suitable size for the purpose intended. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT 

Sec. 6.01. - Variances and exceptions. 
    Whenever it would be inadvisable to apply a provision of this Ordinance because a tract is of such unusual size, shape, or character as would render an extraordinary hardship not created or imposed by the owner or developer, the planning commission may modify such provisions only to provide that substantial justice may be done, the public interest secured, and the intent and spirit of these regulations fulfilled; provided that in no event shall the requirements of procedure or improvements be waived. Such modifications thus granted shall be made at the written request of the developer stating the reasons for such modification and shall be waived only by 3/5 vote of the regular membership of the planning commission. Any such modifications thus granted shall be duly entered and recorded in the minutes of the planning commission, with the reasons justifying the modifications set forth therein. In the case of planned unit development, these regulations may be varied in terms with the outline development plan as recommended by the city planning commission and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 508, § 1, 6-18-1974) 
Sec. 6.02. - Amendment. 
    The city council may, from time to time, adopt, amend, and make public rules and regulations for the administration of these regulations to the end that the public be informed and that approval of plats be expedited. 
Sec. 6.03. - Regulations-building permits. 
    Residential, commercial and industrial. The planning and zoning department or public works director may approve and issue a building permit prior to the installation or completion of the improvements set forth in Section 5.02(b), provided all requirements of Section 5.02(a) have been met. However, no structure shall be occupied prior to all improvements being installed, approved, and accepted by the city council, with proper maintenance bonds. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 3, 7-2-1985; Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
APPENDIX B. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SIDEWALKS IN YUKON, OKLAHOMA 

Sec. 1. - Sidewalks along arterial and collector streets. 
    That from and after the time of the adoption of this Resolution [Ordinance], all arterial streets as defined in the Subdivision Regulations and any street with a width of in excess of 26 feet, dedicated to the public use, shall have sidewalks on both sides of said street. 
Sec. 2. - Sidewalks along minor streets. 
    That from and after the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, all streets within a new subdivision in the corporate limits of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, dedicated to the public use, not falling in the above category, to be known as minor streets, shall have sidewalks on both sides of said minor street four (4) feet in width. 
Sec. 3. - Sidewalks in commercial zones. 
    That all sidewalks in commercially zoned areas shall be wide enough to accommodate pedestrian traffic. 
Sec. 4. - Specifications. 
    That said sidewalks shall have a four (4) foot width of 3,000-pound test concrete over a two (2) inch sand base on a properly prepared subgrade to be approved by the City Inspector of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma. 
Sec. 5. - Location and grade. 
    That the said sidewalk shall be twelve (12) inches from the property line and shall have not less than a two (2) percent grade nor more than a five (5) percent grade from sidewalk to curb. 
Sec. 6. - Specifications adopted by reference. 
    That there is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, maintenance and testing of all sidewalks within the corporate limits of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, the Federal Housing Administration sidewalk specification, of which no less than three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the office of the City Clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 7. - Plans to be submitted. 
    That sidewalk plans shall be submitted at the same time the street paving plans are submitted by the developer of the subdivision. 
Sec. 8. - Deposit to be made. 
    The City Inspector shall withhold his final inspection until said sidewalk is constructed to City standards; or a cash deposit equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the amount of the estimated cost of the construction of the sidewalks is submitted to the City of Yukon. 
[PENALTY; REPEAL; SEVERABILITY; EMERGENCY] 

Sec. 1301. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance, or who shall fail to comply with an order properly made in connection with the enforcement of this Ordinance, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of this Code [the Code of Ordinances]. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 24, 1-5-1993) 
Sec. 1302. - Repealing clause. 
    That Ordinance Numbers 189, 254, 255, 316, 326, 327, 331, 355, 371, 396, 426, 429, 434, 435, and 468, same being Sections 14-1 to 14-264, both inclusive, of Chapter 14, of the Code of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, be, and the same are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 1303. - Provisions severable. 
    The provisions hereof are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence or clause of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence or clause hereof. 
Sec. 1304. - Emergency. 
    Whereas it being immediately necessary for the preservation of the peace, health, safety and welfare of the City of Yukon, Oklahoma, and the inhabitants thereof, that the provisions of this Ordinance be put into full force and effect, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, by reason whereof this Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and approval as provided by law. 
    PASSED AND APPROVED this 21st day of December, 1972. 
/s/ _____
  Robert N. Ward 
  Mayor  
    (SEAL) 
ATTEST: /s/ _____
  Mary Lee Huckaba 
  City Clerk  
Appendix C - ELECTRIC FRANCHISE[1] 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 1081 
    AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO THE OKLAHOMA GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY, AN OKLAHOMA CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT TO PRODUCE, TRANSMIT AND DISTRIBUTE ELECTRICITY WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS AND TO SELL ELECTRICITY THEREIN FOR ALL PURPOSES FOR WHICH IT MAY BE USED, TO THE CITY OF YUKON, CANADIAN COUNTY, OKLAHOMA, ITS INHABITANTS AND THE PUBLIC GENERALLY, AND THE RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE A SYSTEM OF POLES, WIRES, CONDUITS AND OTHER FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT IN, UPON, ACROSS, UNDER AND OVER THE STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC GROUNDS AND OTHER PLACES IN THE CITY FOR SUCH PURPOSES FOR A PERIOD OF TWENTY-FIVE (25) YEARS FROM THE APPROVAL AND ACCEPTANCE OF THIS ORDINANCE; PROVIDING COMPENSATION TO THE CITY; ORDERING AN ELECTION; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF YUKON, OKLAHOMA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the electric franchise, as adopted by Ordinance No. 1081, enacted June 19, 2001. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Definitions.] 
    The word "City" as hereinafter used shall mean and designate the City of Yukon, Canadian County, Oklahoma, and the word "Company" as hereinafter used shall mean and designate the Oklahoma Gas and Electric Company, a corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of Oklahoma and its successors and assigns. 
Sec. 2. - [Granted.] 
(a)  The City hereby grants to the Company the right, privilege and authority to produce, transmit, distribute and sell electricity within the corporate limits of the City for all purposes for which it may be used, to the City, its inhabitants and the public generally, and the right, privilege and authority to construct, maintain and operate a system of poles, wires, conduits, transformers, substations, and other facilities and equipment in, upon, across, under and over the streets, alleys, public grounds and other places in each and every part of said City for the purpose of producing, transmitting, distributing and selling electricity to the City, its inhabitants, and to the public generally. 
(b)  The franchise hereby granted shall be effective from and after the date of approval of this Ordinance by the qualified electors of the City and acceptance by the Company, and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of twenty-five (25) years. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the City from granting an electric franchise to any other person, firm, or corporation. 
Sec. 3. - [Construction; operation; maintenance.] 
    The Company shall construct, operate and maintain its property in such manner as will, consistent with necessity, not obstruct not impede traffic unduly. 
Sec. 4. - [Indemnification.] 
    The Company shall defend and indemnify the City against all liability for injury to any person or property caused by the negligence of the Company in the construction, operation and maintenance of its property within the City. 
Sec. 5. - [Service in accordance with governmental authority.] 
    Electric service provided hereunder to the City, its inhabitants, and to the public generally, and rates charged therefor shall be in accordance with orders, rules and regulations of the Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma or other governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
Sec. 6. - [right to assign.] 
    The Company shall have the right to assign this franchise and the assignee by written acceptance thereof shall be bound by all the provisions hereof. An authenticated copy of such assignment and acceptance shall be filed with the Clerk of the City. 
Sec. 7. - [Franchise fee.] 
(a)  From and after the approval and acceptance of this franchise, and in consideration of the granting of this franchise, the Company agrees to pay and shall pay to the City an annual franchise fee in an amount equal to three percent (3%) of its gross revenues arising from the sale of electricity within the corporate limits of the City, such payment to be made on or before the 25th day of July of each year, after deducting therefrom any amount due the Company from the City. 
(b)  The Company shall abide by any order, rule or regulation of the Corporation Commission of the State of Oklahoma requiring the listing separately of all or any portion of such franchise fee on electric bills to customers. 
(c)  Such franchise fees paid by the Company to the City shall be in lieu of all other franchise, excise, license, occupation, privilege, inspection, permit, or other fees, taxes or assessments, except ad valorem taxes. 
Sec. 8. - [Service furnished to city.] 
    The Company shall furnish to the City without charge each fiscal year during the term hereof electric current to be used exclusively by the City for operation of traffic signal lights and buildings occupied and operated by the City for municipal purposes, to be applied by the Company as a credit to billings to the City, provided that such electric current shall not exceed one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the kilowatt-hours sold by the Company to customers within the corporate limits of the City during the preceding fiscal year. 
Sec. 9. - [Submission of ordinance to electors; approval.] 
    A special election is hereby called for the purpose of submitting this Ordinance to the qualified electors of the City residing within its corporate limits for their approval or disapproval, provided the Company shall pay the cost of such election. The election shall be held on the 9th day of October, 2001, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The Mayor of the City Council is authorized and directed to issue an election proclamation calling such election and is further directed to take all steps that may be necessary for holding the election and for the submission of this Ordinance to the qualified electors of the City. If a majority of the qualified electors of the City voting thereon fail to approve this franchise at said election, no rights shall accrue hereunder. 
Sec. 10. - [Acceptance.] 
    In case the franchise hereby granted is approved at said election, the Company shall, within thirty (30) days from the date of such approval, file with the Clerk of the City, in writing, its acceptance. In the event the Company fails to accept within the said period, such failure shall be deemed a rejection of the franchise. 
Sec. 11. - [Termination of previous franchise.] 
    The franchise hereby granted shall, on its effective date, supersede and terminate any previous franchise granted to or held by the Company. 
Sec. 12. - [Emergency.] 
    An emergency is hereby deemed and declared to exist whereby it is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Yukon that this Ordinance take effect immediately from and after its approval, adoption and publication as provided by law. 
    PASSED AND APPROVED this 19th day of June, 2001. 
    CITY OF YUKON, OKLAHOMA 
BY /s/ _____
    Genie Vinson 
    Mayor  
ATTEST: Patricia G. Hargis _____
City Clerk  
    (SEAL) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1975 CODE TO 1995 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the 1995 Code of those sections of the 1975 Code, as updated through Supplement No. 29, consisting of ordinances enacted through Ord. No. 899, dated July 5, 1994. 
1975 Code 
Section Section 

in 1995 Code 1-1 1-1 1-4 1-2 1-5, 1-6 1-9, 1-10 1-7 1-5 1-9 1-7 1-10, 1-11 1-11, 1-12 1-12 1-8 2-1-2-3 2-31-2-33 2-4 2-66 2-5 2-56 2-6, 2-7 2-5, 2-6 2-8 38-2 2-9 2-266 2-10 22-131 2-11 90-1 2-12 38-1 2-13 2-131 2-13.1 2-132 2-14 2-67 2-15 2-133 2-16 2-136 2-17 2-68 2-18 2-137 2-19-2-30 2-216-2-227 2-34-2-37 2-241-2-244 2-48, 2-49 2-151, 2-152 2-50 2-81 2-153 2-51 2-82 2-52 2-96 2-53, 2-54 2-134, 2-135 2-65, 2-66 2-106, 2-107 2-77-2-79 2-166-2-168 2-89-2-91 2-181-2-183 2-114-2-126 90-26-90-38 2-140-2-146 62-26-62-32 2-173-2-176 2-1-2-4 2-221-2-227 2-276-2-282 2-229, 2-230 2-283, 2-284 21/2-1-21/2-7 22-46-22-52 3-1-3-4 6-1-6-4 3-6 6-5 3-7 App. A, § 401 3-8-3-19 6-6-6-17 3-30(a), 3-30(b) 6-41, 6-42 3-31-3-34 6-43-6-46 3-95-3-101 6-66-6-72 3-106-3-111 6-86-6-91 4-11-4-13 10-26-10-28 4-15-4-22 10-29-10-36 4-33-4-37 10-56-10-60 5-1 14-1 5-2-5-4 14-36-14-38 5-5(a)-5-5(c) 14-66-14-68 5-5(d)-(f) 14-69 5-5(g), 5-5(h) 14-70, 14-71 5-5(i), (j) 14-72 5-6 14-73 5-7, 5-8 14-2, 14-3 5-9, 5-10 14-5, 14-6 5-11 14-8 5-12 14-14 5-13 14-12 5-14, 5-15 14-9, 14-10 5-16 14-7 5-17 14-11 5-18 14-39 5-19 14-13 5-21-5-23 14-40-14-42 6-1 18-1 6-2, 6-3 50-1, 50-2 6-14-6-16 18-26-18-28 6-18-6-20 18-29-18-31 6-32-6-35 18-51-18-54 6-37-6-41 18-56-18-60 6-56-6-59 18-81-18-84 6-71-6-75 18-106-18-110 6-76(a), (b) 18-111 6-76(c), (d) 18-112 6-77, 6-78 18-113, 18-114 6-114 18-146 6-123, 6-124 18-147, 18-148 6-173-6-176 18-171-18-174 7-2-7-10 30-2-30-10 8-26-8-29 50-26-50-29 8-45(a), 8-45(b) 50-51, 50-52 8-46 50-53 8-51, 8-52 50-54, 50-55 81/2-1 54-26 81/2-2-81/2-4 54-28-54-30 81/2-5 54-27 81/2-20, 81/2-21 54-31, 54-32 81/2-22 54-48 81/2-23-81/2-26 54-33-54-36 81/2-27 54-51 81/2-40, 81/2-41 54-46, 54-47 81/2-42, 81/2-43 54-49, 54-50 81/2-50-81/2-54 54-61-54-65 9-16-9-21 58-27-58-32 9-23 58-26 10-1-10-5 98-1-98-5 10-5.1-10-5.4 98-6-98-9 10-6, 10-7 98-10, 98-11 10-7.1 98-13 10-8-10-15 98-14-98-21 11-1, 11-2 22-31, 22-32 11-3, 11-4 22-37, 22-38 11-5-11-8 22-33-22-36 11-9, 11-10 22-1, 22-2 12-1 74-2 12-7 74-3 12-13-12-15 74-5-74-7 12-21 74-111-74-118 12-22 74-119 12-27 14-4 12-38 74-4 12-39-12-42 74-31-74-34 12-55-12-59 74-56-74-60 12-60(a) 114-1 12-60(b) 114-3 12-61-12-63 74-61-74-63 12-74-12-78 74-86-74-90 12-81-12-84 102-112-102-115 13-1-13-6 66-1-66-6 13-7 66-7 
110-280 13-17-13-20 66-31-66-34 13-26-13-34 66-46-66-54 13-44-13-60 66-76-66-92 13-66-13-70 66-106-66-110 13-76-13-83 66-121-66-128 13-90-13-101 66-141-66-152 13-107-13-110 66-166-66-169 13-115-13-118 66-181-66-184 13-124-13-137 66-196-66-209 13-148-13-153 66-231-66-236 14-1, 14-2 34-26, 34-27 14-4 34-28 14-6 34-29 14-8-14-21 34-30-34-43 14-21.1 34-44 14-22-14-29 34-45-34-52 14-31(1), (2) 34-53 14-31(4) 34-54 14-32-14-34 34-55-34-57 15-1-15-3 46-26-46-28 15-4, 15-5 46-30, 46-31 15-17-15-28 46-41-46-52 15-31 46-53 16-1-16-5 78-1-78-5 16-15-16-19 78-26-78-30 17-11 86-27 17-12 86-26 17-26 86-28 17-51-17-55 86-51-86-55 18-21 26-26 18-22-18-26 26-36-26-40 19-1, 19-2 110-396, 110-397 19-3, 19-4 110-399, 110-400 19-5 110-398 20-1 94-1 20-2 94-3 20-3 94-9 20-4 94-6 20-5 94-8 20-6 94-2 20-7 94-61 20-8(c) 94-62 20-9 94-63 20-10 94-41 20-11 94-4 20-12 94-11 20-20, 20-21 94-31, 94-32 20-22-20-24 94-38-94-40 20-25-20-29 94-33-94-37 20-30(a) 22-101 20-30(b)-20-30(d) 22-107-22-109 20-30(e) 22-103 20-30(f) 22-102 20-30(g) 22-105 20-30(h) 22-104 20-30(i) 22-106 20-30(j) 22-110 20-40 94-5 20-41 94-7 21-1-21-28 82-1-82-28 22-1 102-1 22-2(a)-22-2(e) 102-86-102-90 22-3, 22-4 102-9, 102-10 22-5, 22-6 102-31, 102-32 22-7 102-8 22-8-22-13 102-2-102-7 22-20-22-29 102-56-102-65 23-11, 23-12 106-26, 106-27 23-13 106-29 23-14 106-28 23-15 106-33 23-16 106-32 23-17, 23-18 106-34, 106-35 23-19-23-21 106-35-106-37 23-22 106-39 23-23 106-38 23-24, 23-25 106-41, 106-42 23-26 106-45 23-27 106-40 23-28 106-44 23-29 106-46 23-30, 23-31 106-30, 106-31 23-42-23-47 106-106-106-111 23-60 106-66 23-61 106-73 23-62 106-68 23-63 106-67 23-64 106-69 23-65, 23-66 106-71, 106-72 23-67 106-74 23-68 106-77 23-69, 23-70 106-75, 106-76 23-71, 23-72 106-83, 106-84 23-73-23-77 106-78-106-82 23-78 106-70 24-2-24-7 110-66-110-71 24-12 110-8 24-14 102-111 24-15 110-16 24-16 110-12 24-17 110-10 24-18 110-15 24-19 110-11 24-20 110-14 24-21 110-9 24-22 110-126, 110-127 24-23 110-3 24-25 110-2 24-26-24-29 110-4-110-7 24-30 110-72 24-31(a) 110-101, 110-102 24-31(b) 110-103 24-32 110-152 24-42 110-151 24-43(a), (b) 110-181 24-43(c) 110-182 24-44-24-47 110-183-110-186 24-49(a), 24-49(b) 110-236, 110-237 24-50 110-217 24-51 110-216 110-315 24-52 110-220 24-53, 24-54 110-218, 110-219 24-57 110-313 24-58 110-201 24-59 110-159 24-60, 24-61 110-222, 110-223 24-62 110-221 24-63 110-157 24-64 110-187 24-65 110-170 24-66 110-314 24-67 110-202 24-68 110-13 24-69 110-203 24-70 110-312 24-71 110-158 24-72, 24-73 110-160, 110-161 24-75-24-82 110-162-110-169 24-83, 24-84 110-155, 110-156 24-85 110-154 24-88 110-316 24-89 110-153 24-99 110-305 24-100 110-303 24-101 110-306 24-102 110-302 24-103 110-301 24-104-24-107 110-307-110-310 24-108 110-304 24-109 110-311 24-120-24-137 110-261-110-278 24-139 110-279 24-148-24-154 110-331-110-337 24-155 110-339 24-156 110-338 24-157-24-162 110-340-110-345 24-172-24-177 110-421-110-426 24-179-24-186 110-427-110-434 24-197-24-205 110-366-110-374 24-208, 24-209 110-375, 110-376 24-221-24-230 110-86-110-95 25-1 118-26 25-12 118-41 25-13 118-43 25-14 118-45 25-15 118-42 25-16 118-44 25-17, 25-18 118-46, 118-47 25-29, 25-30 118-27 25-46-25-49 42-27-42-30 26-2(a), 26-2(b) 114-4, 114-5 26-3 114-126 26-4 114-111 26-5 18-86 26-6 114-2 26-7, 26-8 114-127, 114-128 26-9 114-53 26-9(c) 98-12 26-17-26-24 114-76-114-83 26-26-26-29 114-84-114-87 26-39 18-85 26-40-26-42 114-111-114-113 26-43-26-47 114-141-114-145 26-48 114-114 26-49 114-146 26-60-26-80 114-166-114-186 26-80.1 114-187 26-81-26-86 114-201-114-206 26-98, 26-99 114-34, 114-35 26-100 114-31 26-101 114-36 26-102 114-51 26-103(a) 114-52 26-103(b), (c) 114-54 26-103(d), (e) 114-32 26-104 114-33 26-105, 26-106 114-37, 114-38 27-10-27-13 70-26-70-29 27-14 70-60 27-15 70-56 27-16 70-59 27-17, 27-18 70-61, 70-62 27-19 70-65 27-22 70-63 27-23 70-41 27-24 70-43 27-25 70-42 27-26, 27-27 70-77, 70-78 27-28 70-64 27-29-27-31 70-79-70-81 27-33 70-82 27-35-27-44 70-83-70-92 27-45 70-46 27-46 70-93 27-47 70-57 27-48-27-50 70-94-70-96 27-51 70-45 27-52, 27-53 70-97, 70-98 27-54 70-104 27-55-27-59 70-99-70-103 27-60 70-76 27-61 70-44 27-62 70-58  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1975 CODE T0 2017 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the 2017 Code of those sections of the 2005 Code, as supplemented through October 21, 2014. 
1975 Code 
Section Section 
in 2017 Code 1-1 1-1 1-4 1-2 1-5 1-9 1-6 1-10 1-7 1-5 1-9 1-7 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 1-12 1-8 2-1 2-29 2-2 2-30 2-5 2-51 2-6 2-4 2-7 2-5 2-8 26-2 2-9 2-327 2-11 201-2 2-12 26-1 2-13 2-200 2-13.1 2-201 2-15 2-202 2-16 2-205 2-18 2-199 2-19 2-264 2-20 2-265 2-21 2-266 2-22 2-267 2-23 2-268 2-24 2-269 2-25 2-270 2-26 2-272 2-27 2-273 2-28 2-274 2-29 2-275 2-30 2-276 2-34 2-301 2-35 2-302 2-36 2-303 2-37 2-304 2-50 2-76 2-51 2-77 2-53 2-203 2-54 2-204 2-65 2-98 2-66 2-99 2-77 2-152 2-78 2-153 2-79 2-154 2-89 2-177 2-90 2-178 2-91 2-180 2-114 201-23 2-115 201-24 2-116 201-25 2-117 201-26 2-118 201-27 2-119 201-28 2-120 201-29 2-121 201-30 2-122 201-31 2-123 201-32 2-124 201-33 2-125 201-34 2-126 201-35 2-140 46-20 2-141 46-19 2-142 46-48 2-143 46-49 2-144 46-50 2-145 46-21 2-146 46-22 2-173 2-1 2-175 2-2 2-176 2-3 2-221 2-360 2-222 2-361 2-223 2-362 2-224 2-363 2-225 2-364 2-226 2-365 2-227 2-366 2-229 2-367 2-230 2-368 21/2-1 30-85 21/2-2 30-83 21/2-3 30-86 21/2-4 30-87 21/2-5 30-88 21/2-6 30-89 21/2-7 30-84 3-1 6-21 3-2 6-22 3-4 6-23 3-6 74-14 3-8 6-52 3-9 6-53 3-10 6-54 3-11 6-55 3-12 6-84 3-13 6-85 3-14 6-86 3-15 6-87 3-16 6-88 3-17 6-89 3-18 74-15 3-19 6-1 3-30(a) 6-107 3-30(b) 6-108 3-31 6-109 3-32 6-110 3-33 6-24 3-34 6-111 3-95 6-136 3-96 6-137 3-97 6-139 3-98 6-140 3-99 6-141 3-100 6-142 3-101 6-143 3-106 6-170 3-107 6-171 3-108 6-172 3-109 6-173 3-110 6-174 3-111 6-175 4-11 10-19 4-12 10-20 4-13 10-21 4-15 10-22 4-16, 4-17 10-23 4-18 10-24 4-19 10-25 4-20 10-26 4-21 10-27 4-22 10-28 6-1 204-1 6-14 204-27 6-16 204-28 6-18 204-29 6-19 204-30 6-20 204-31 6-32 204-66 6-33 204-67 6-34 204-68 6-35 204-69 6-37 204-70 6-38 204-71 6-39 204-72 6-40 204-73 6-41 204-74 6-56 204-91 6-57 204-92 6-58 204-93 6-71 204-106 6-72 204-107 6-73 204-108 6-74 204-109 6-75 204-110 6-76(a) 204-111 6-76(b) 204-111 6-77 204-112 6-78 204-113 6-114 204-146 6-123 204-147 6-124 204-148 6-173 204-171 6-174 204-172 6-175 204-173 6-176 204-174 7-2 30-20 7-3 30-21 7-4 30-22 7-5 30-23 7-6 30-24 7-7 30-25 7-8 30-26 7-9 30-27 8-45(a) 38-40 8-45(b) 38-41 8-46 38-42 8-51 38-43 8-52 38-44 81/2-1 207-19 81/2-2 207-21 81/2-3 207-22 81/2-4 207-23 81/2-5 207-20 81/2-20 207-24 81/2-21 207-25 81/2-22 207-49 81/2-23 207-26 81/2-24 207-27 81/2-25 207-28 81/2-26 207-29 81/2-27 207-52 81/2-40 207-47 81/2-41 207-48 81/2-42 207-50 81/2-43 207-51 81/2-50 207-78 81/2-51 207-79 81/2-52 207-80 81/2-53 207-81 81/2-54 207-82 9-16 18-149 9-17 18-150 9-18 18-151 9-19 18-152 9-20 18-153 9-21 18-154 9-23 18-148 10-1 90-1 10-2 90-2 10-3 90-3 10-4 90-4 10-5 90-5 10-5.1 90-6 10-5.2 90-7 10-5.3 90-8 10-5.4 90-9 10-6 90-10 10-7 90-11 10-7.1 90-13 10-8 90-14 10-9 90-15 10-10 90-16 10-11 90-17 10-12 90-18 10-13 90-19 10-14 90-20 10-15 90-21 11-1 18-25 11-2 18-26 11-3 18-31 11-4 18-32 11-5 18-27 11-6 18-28 11-7 18-29 11-8 18-30 11-9 18-1 11-10 18-2 12-1 74-3 12-7 74-4 12-13 74-7 12-14 74-8 12-15 74-9 12-21 74-129-74-136 12-22 74-137 12-38 74-6 12-39 74-36 12-40 74-37 12-42 74-38 12-55 74-67 12-56 74-68 12-57 74-69 12-58 74-70 12-59 74-71 12-60(a) 114-1 12-60(b) 114-3 12-61 74-72 12-62 74-73 12-63 74-74 12-74 74-96 12-75 74-97 12-76 74-98 12-77 74-99 12-78 74-100 12-81 94-132 12-82 94-133 12-83 94-134 12-84 94-135 13-1 210-1 13-2 210-2 13-3 210-3 13-4 210-4 13-5 210-5 13-6 210-6 13-7 110-433 - 210-7 13-17 210-33 13-18 210-34 13-19 210-35 13-20 210-36 13-26 210-61 13-27 210-62 13-28 210-63 13-29 210-64 13-30 210-65 13-31 210-66 13-32 210-67 13-33 210-68 13-34 210-69 13-44 210-97 13-45 210-98 13-46 210-99 13-47 210-100 13-48 210-101 13-49 210-102 13-50 210-103 13-51 210-104 13-52 210-105 13-53 210-106 13-54 210-107 13-55 210-108 13-56 210-109 13-57 210-110 13-58 210-111 13-59 210-112 13-60 210-113 13-66 210-140 13-67 210-141 13-68 210-142 13-69 210-143 13-70 210-144 13-76 210-172 13-77 210-173 13-78 210-174 13-79 210-175 13-80 210-176 13-81 210-177 13-82 210-178 13-83 210-179 13-90 210-197 13-91 210-198 13-92 210-199 13-93 210-200 13-94 210-201 13-95 210-202 13-96 210-203 13-97 210-204 13-98 210-205 13-99 210-206 13-100 210-207 13-101 210-208 13-107 210-240 13-108 210-241 13-109 210-242 13-110 210-243 13-115 210-265 13-116 210-266 13-117 210-267 13-118 210-268 13-124 210-300 13-125 210-301 13-126 210-302 13-127 210-303 13-128 210-304 13-129 210-305 13-130 210-306 13-131 210-307 13-132 210-308 13-133 210-309 13-134 210-310 13-135 210-311 13-136 210-312 13-137 210-313 13-148 210-345 13-149 210-346 13-150 210-347 13-151 210-348 13-152 210-349 13-153 210-350 14-1 50-2 14-2 50-1 14-4 50-3 14-6 50-4 14-8 50-5 14-9 50-6 14-10 50-7 14-11 50-8 14-12 50-9 14-13 50-10 14-14 50-11 14-15 50-12 14-16 50-13 14-17 50-14 14-18 50-15 14-19 50-16 14-20 50-17 14-21 50-18 14-21.1 50-19 14-22 50-20 14-23 50-21 14-24 50-22 14-25 50-23 14-26 50-24 14-27 50-25 14-28 50-26 14-29 50-27 14-31(1) 50-28 14-31(2) 50-28 14-31(4) 50-29 14-32 50-30 14-33 50-31 14-34 50-32 16-1 78-1 16-2 78-2 16-3 78-3 16-4 78-4 16-5 78-5 16-15 78-29 16-16 78-30 16-17 78-31 16-18 78-32 16-19 78-33 17-11 86-20 17-12 86-19 18-21 22-19 18-22 22-42 18-23 22-43 18-24 22-44 18-25 22-45 18-26 22-46 19-1 94-154 19-2 94-155 19-5 94-156 20-1 213-1 20-2 213-3 20-3 213-9 20-4 213-6 20-5 213-8 20-6 213-2 20-7 213-80 20-8(c) 213-81 20-9 213-82 20-10 213-53 20-11 213-4 20-12 213-11 20-20 213-43 20-21 213-44 20-22 213-50 20-23 213-51 20-24 213-52 20-25 213-45 20-26 213-46 20-27 213-47 20-28 213-48 20-29 213-49 20-30(a) 18-88 20-30(b) 18-90 20-30(c) 18-91 20-30(d) 18-92 20-30(e) 18-89 20-30(f) 18-113 20-30(g) 18-115 20-30(h) 18-114 20-30(i) 18-116 20-30(j) 18-117 20-40 213-5 20-41 213-7 22-1 1-9 22-2(a) 94-96 22-2(b) 94-98 22-2(c) 94-99 22-2(d) 94-100 22-2(e) 94-101 22-3 94-8 22-4 94-9 22-5 94-37 22-6 94-38 22-7 94-7 22-8 94-1 22-9 94-2 22-10 94-3 22-11 94-4 22-12 94-5 22-13 94-6 22-20 94-67 22-21 94-68 22-22 94-69 22-23 94-70 22-24 94-71 22-25 94-72 22-26 94-73 22-27 94-74 22-28 94-75 22-29 94-76 23-11 98-40 23-12 98-41 23-13 98-43 23-14 98-42 23-15 98-47 23-16 98-46 23-17 98-48 23-18, 23-19 98-49 23-21 98-50 23-22 98-52 23-23 98-51 23-24 98-54 23-25 98-55 23-26 98-58 23-27 98-53 23-28 98-57 23-29 98-59 23-30 98-44 23-31 98-45 23-42 98-190 23-43 98-191 23-44 98-192 23-45 98-193 23-46 98-194 23-47 98-195 23-60 98-131 23-61 98-138 23-62 98-133 23-63 98-132 23-64 98-134 23-65 98-136 23-66 98-137 23-67 98-139 23-68 98-142 23-69 98-140 23-70 98-141 23-71 98-148 23-72 98-149 23-73 98-143 23-74 98-144 23-75 98-145 23-76 98-146 23-77 98-147 23-78 98-135 24-2 110-30 24-3 110-31 24-4 110-32 24-5 110-33 24-6 110-147 24-12 110-572 24-14 94-131 24-15 110-482 24-16 110-469 24-17 110-475 24-18 110-517 24-19 110-477 24-20 110-529 24-21 110-473 24-22 110-115, 110-116 24-23 110-150 24-25 110-151 24-26 110-554 24-27 110-152 24-28 110-148 24-29 110-149 24-30 110-29 24-31(a) 110-91, 110-92 24-31(b) 110-93 24-32 110-5 24-42 110-4 24-43(a) 110-190 24-43(b) 110-190 24-43(c) 110-195 24-44 110-191 24-45 110-192 - 110-194 24-46 110-192 24-47 110-193 24-49 110-347 24-50 110-292 24-50 110-289 24-51 110-165 - 110-295 24-52 110-290 24-53 110-292 - 110-293 24-54 110-294 24-57, 24-58 110-326 24-58 110-238 24-59 110-236 24-60 110-327 24-61 110-324 24-62 110-325 24-63 110-240 24-64 110-328 24-65 110-466 24-66 110-198 24-67 110-197 24-68, 24-69 110-486 24-70 110-164 24-71 110-199 24-72 110-202 24-73 110-553 24-75 110-484 24-76 110-485 24-77 110-200 24-78 110-471 24-79 110-472 24-80 110-205 24-81 110-206 24-82 110-468 24-83 110-386 24-84 110-387 24-85 110-391 24-88 110-574 24-89 110-474 24-99 110-157 24-100 110-156 24-101 110-158 24-102, 24-103 110-155 24-104 110-159 24-105 110-161 24-106 110-160 24-107 110-163 24-108 110-166 24-109 110-168 24-120 110-416 24-121 110-417 24-122 110-422 24-123 110-418 24-124 110-419 24-125 110-423 24-126 110-424 24-127 110-425 24-128 110-426 24-129 110-291 24-130 110-427 24-131 110-428 24-132 110-429 24-133 110-430 24-134 110-431 24-135 110-432 24-136 110-414 24-137 110-2 24-139 110-421 24-148, 24-149 110-467 24-150 110-599 24-151 110-599 24-152 110-599 24-153 110-599 24-154 110-600 24-155, 24-156 110-601 24-157, 24-158 110-599 24-159 24-160 110-467 24-161 110-349 24-162 110-487 24-172 110-513 24-173 110-514 24-174 110-516 24-175 110-515 24-176 110-519 24-177 110-527 24-179 110-528 24-180, 24-181 110-518 24-182 110-520 24-183 110-522 24-184 110-523 24-185 110-524 24-186 110-525 24-197 110-261 24-198 110-34 24-199 110-263 24-200 110-268 24-201, 24-202 110-266 24-203 110-264 24-204 110-265 24-205 110-269 24-208 110-270 24-209 110-267 24-221 110-57 24-222 110-58 24-223 110-59 24-224 110-60 24-225 110-61 24-226 110-62 24-227 110-63 24-228 110-64 24-229 110-65 24-230 110-66 25-1 118-19 25-12 118-44 25-13 118-46 25-14 118-48 25-15 118-45 25-16 118-47 25-17 118-49 25-18 118-50 25-29, 25-30 118-20 25-46 30-59 25-47 30-60 25-48 30-61 25-49 30-62 26-2(a) 114-4 26-2(b) 114-5 26-3 114-156 26-4 114-133 26-5 204-97 26-6 114-2 26-7 114-157 26-8 114-158 26-9 114-67 26-9(c) 90-12 26-17 114-95 26-18 114-96 26-19 114-97 26-20 114-98 26-21 114-99 26-22 114-100 26-23 114-101 26-26 114-102, 114-103 26-27 114-104 26-28 114-105 26-29 114-106 26-39 204-96 26-40 114-133 26-41 114-134 26-42 114-135 26-43 114-185 26-44 114-186 26-45 114-187 26-46 114-188 26-47 114-189 26-48 114-136 26-49 114-190 26-60 114-246 26-61 114-247 26-62 114-248 26-63 114-249 26-64 114-250 26-65 114-251 26-66 114-252 26-67 114-253 26-68 114-254 26-69 114-255 26-70 114-256 26-71 114-257 26-72 114-258 26-73 114-259 26-74 114-260 26-75 114-261 26-76 114-262 26-77 114-263 26-78 114-264 26-79 114-265 26-80 114-266 26-80.1 114-267 26-81 114-298 26-82 114-299 26-83 114-300 26-84 114-301 26-85 114-302 26-86 114-303 26-98 114-34 26-99 114-35 26-100 114-31 26-101 114-36 26-102 114-65 26-103(a) 114-66 26-103(b) 114-68 26-103(c) 114-68 26-103(d) 114-32 26-103(e) 114-32 26-104 114-33 26-105 114-37 26-106 114-38 27-10 34-19 27-11 34-21 27-12 34-23 27-13 34-24 27-14 34-88 27-15 34-84 27-16 34-87 27-17 34-89 27-18 34-90 27-19 34-20 27-22 34-91 27-23 34-52 27-24 34-54 27-25 34-53 27-26 34-116 27-27 34-117 27-28 34-92 27-29 34-118 27-30 34-119 27-31 34-120 27-33 34-121 27-35 34-122 27-36 34-123 27-37 34-124 27-38 34-125 27-39 34-126 27-40 34-127 27-41 34-128 27-42 34-129 27-43 34-130 27-44 34-131 27-46 34-132 27-47 34-85 27-48 34-133 27-49 34-134 27-50 34-135 27-52 34-136 27-53 34-22 27-54 34-142 27-55 34-137 27-56 34-138 27-57 34-139 27-58 34-140 27-59 34-141 27-60 34-115 27-61 34-55 27-62 34-86  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1995 CODE TO 2017 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the 2017 Code of those sections of the 1995 Code, as supplemented through October 21, 2014. 
1995Code 
Section Section 
in 2017 Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-6 1-6 1-7 1-7 1-8 1-8 1-9 1-9 1-10 1-10 1-11 1-11 1-12 1-12 1-13 2-31 2-1 2-1 2-3 2-2 2-4 2-3 2-5 2-4 2-6 2-5 2-31 2-29 2-32 2-30 2-56 2-51 2-81 2-76 2-82 2-77 2-106 2-98 2-107(a) 2-99 2-131 2-200 2-132 2-201 2-133 2-202 2-134 2-203 2-135 2-204 2-136 2-205 2-137 2-199 2-166 2-152 2-167 2-153 2-168 2-154 2-181 2-177 2-182 2-178 2-183 2-179 2-184 2-180 2-216 2-264 2-217 2-265 2-218 2-266 2-219 2-267 2-220 2-268 2-221 2-269 2-222 2-270 2-222.1 2-271 2-223 2-272 2-224 2-273 2-225 2-274 2-226 2-275 2-227 2-276 2-241 2-301 2-242 2-302 2-243 2-303 2-244 2-304 2-266 2-327 2-267 2-328 2-276 2-360 2-277 2-361 2-278 2-362 2-279 2-363 2-280 2-364 2-281 2-365 2-282 2-366 2-283 2-367 2-284 2-368 6-1 6-21 6-2 6-22 6-4 6-23 6-5 74-14 6-6 6-52 6-7 6-53 6-8 6-54 6-9 6-55 6-10 6-84 6-11 6-85 6-12 6-86 6-13 6-87 6-14 6-88 6-15 6-89 6-16 74-15 6-17 6-1 6-41 6-107 6-42 6-108 6-43 6-109 6-44 6-110 6-45 6-24 6-46 6-111 6-66 6-136 6-67 6-137 6-67.1 6-138 6-68 6-139 6-69 6-140 6-70 6-141 6-71 6-142 6-72 6-143 6-86 6-170 6-87 6-171 6-88 6-172 6-89 6-173 6-90 6-174 6-91 6-175 10-1 18-3 10-26 10-19 10-27 10-20 10-28 10-21 10-29 10-22 10-30, 10-31 10-23 10-32 10-24 10-33 10-25 10-34 10-26 10-35 10-27 10-36 10-28 10-218(d) 110-293 14-1 14-1 14-2(a) 14-6 14-2(b) 14-6 14-2(d) 14-6 14-2(e) 14-6 14-2(f) 14-6 14-2(g) 14-6 14-2(h) 14-6 14-2(i) 14-6 14-2(j) 14-6 14-2(k) 14-6 14-2(l) 14-6 14-2(m) 14-6 14-2(n) 14-6 14-3 14-8 14-4 14-9 14-5 14-10 14-6 14-11 14-7 14-12 14-8 14-14 14-9 14-15 14-10 14-16 14-11 14-17 14-38 14-7 14-39 14-38 14-40 14-13 14-41 14-39 14-42 14-40 14-43 14-41 14-44 14-71 14-45 14-72 14-46 14-73 14-47 14-74 14-48(b) 14-75 14-48(c) 14-75 14-49 14-5 14-66 14-94 14-67 14-95 14-68 14-96 14-69 14-97 14-70 14-98 14-71 14-99 14-72 14-100 14-73 14-101 14-74 14-4 14-75 14-2 14-76 14-3 18-1 204-1 18-3 204-2 18-4 204-3 18-5 204-4 18-6 204-5 18-26 204-27 18-28 204-28 18-29 204-29 18-30 204-30 18-31 204-31 18-33 204-32 18-51 204-66 18-52 204-67 18-53 204-68 18-54 204-69 18-56 204-70 18-57 204-71 18-58 204-72 18-59 204-73 18-60 204-74 18-61 204-75 18-62 204-76 18-81 204-91 18-82 204-92 18-83 204-93 18-85 204-96 18-86 204-97 18-106 204-106 18-107 204-107 18-108 204-108 18-109 204-109 18-110 204-110 18-111 204-111 18-113 204-112 18-114 204-113 18-136 204-136 18-137 204-137 18-146 204-146 18-147 204-147 18-148 204-148 18-171 204-171 18-172 204-172 18-173 204-173 18-174 204-174 22-1 18-1 22-2 18-2 22-31 18-25 22-32 18-26 22-33 18-27 22-34 18-28 22-35 18-29 22-36 18-30 22-37 18-31 22-38 18-32 22-46 30-85 22-47 30-83 22-48 30-86 22-49 30-87 22-50 30-88 22-51 30-89 22-52 30-84 22-76 18-53 22-77 18-56 22-78 18-57 22-79 18-55 22-80 18-54 22-101 18-88 22-102 18-113 22-103 18-89 22-104 18-114 22-105 18-115 22-106 18-116 22-107 18-90 22-108 18-91 22-109 18-92 22-110 18-117 26-26 22-19 26-36 22-42 26-37 22-43 26-38 22-44 26-39 22-45 26-40 22-46 26-56 22-66 30-1 30-19 30-2 30-20 30-3 30-21, 30-22 30-5 30-23 30-6 30-24 30-7 30-25 30-8 30-26 30-9 30-27 34-26 50-2 34-27 50-1 34-28 50-3 34-29 50-4 34-30 50-5 34-31 50-6 34-32 50-7 34-33 50-8 34-34 50-9 34-35 50-10 34-36 50-11 34-37 50-12 34-38 50-13 34-39 50-14 34-40 50-15 34-41 50-16 34-42 50-17 34-43 50-18 34-44 50-19 34-45 50-20 34-46 50-21 34-47 50-22 34-48 50-23 34-49 50-24 34-50 50-25 34-51 50-26 34-52 50-27 34-53 50-28 34-54 50-29 34-55 50-30 34-56 50-31 34-57 50-32 34-58 50-33 34-59 50-34 38-1 26-1 38-2 26-2 42-26 30-58 42-27 30-59 42-28 30-60 42-29 30-61 42-30 30-62 46-26 54-1 46-27 54-2 46-28 54-3 46-29 54-4 46-30 54-5 46-31 54-6 46-32 54-7 46-33 54-8 46-34 54-9 46-35 54-10 46-36 54-11 46-41 54-41 46-42 54-42 46-43 54-43 46-44 54-44 46-45 54-45 46-46 54-46 46-47 54-47 46-48 54-48 46-49 54-49 46-50 54-50 46-52 54-51 46-53 54-52 46-54 54-53 46-66 54-82 46-67 54-83 46-68 54-84 46-69 54-85 46-70 54-86 46-71 54-87 46-72 54-88 46-73 54-89 46-74 54-90 46-75 54-91 50-51 38-40 50-52 38-41 50-53 38-42 50-54 38-43 50-55 38-44 54-26 207-19 54-27 207-20 54-28 207-21 54-29 207-22 54-30 207-23 54-31 207-24 54-32 207-25 54-33 207-26 54-34 207-27 54-35 207-28 54-36 207-29 54-46 207-47 54-47 207-48 54-48 207-49 54-49 207-50 54-50 207-51 54-51 207-52 54-61 207-78 54-62 207-79 54-63 207-80 54-64 207-81 54-65 207-82 54-86 207-108 54-87 207-109 54-88 207-110 54-89 207-111 54-90 207-112 54-91 207-113 54-92 207-114 54-93 207-115 54-94 207-116 54-95 207-117 54-101 207-148 54-102 207-149 54-103 207-150 54-104 207-151 54-105 207-152 54-106 207-153 54-107 207-154 54-108 207-155 54-109 207-156 54-121 207-181 54-122 207-182 54-123 207-183 54-124 207-184 54-125 207-185 54-126 207-186 54-136 207-211 54-137 207-212 54-138 207-213 54-139 207-214 54-151 207-237 54-152 207-238 54-161 207-270 54-162 207-271 54-163 207-272 54-171 207-293 54-172 207-294 54-173 207-295 54-174 207-296 54-175 207-297 54-176 207-298 54-177 207-299 54-181 207-317 54-182 207-318 54-183 207-319 58-1 42-1 58-26 18-148 58-27 18-149 58-28 18-150 58-29 18-151 58-30 18-152 58-31 18-153 58-32 18-154 59-1 42-2 59-2 42-3 59-3 42-4 62-26 46-20 62-27 46-19 62-28 46-48 62-29 46-49 62-30 46-50 62-31 46-21 62-32 46-22 66-1 210-1 66-2 210-2 66-3 210-3 66-4 210-4 66-5 210-5 66-6 210-6 66-7 210-7 66-31 210-33 66-32 210-34 66-33 210-35 66-34 210-36 66-46 210-61 66-47 210-62 66-48 210-63 66-49 210-64 66-50 210-65 66-51 210-66 66-52 210-67 66-53 210-68 66-54 210-69 66-76 210-97 66-77 210-98 66-78 210-99 66-79 210-100 66-80 210-101 66-81 210-102 66-82 210-103 66-83 210-104 66-84 210-105 66-85 210-106 66-86 210-107 66-87 210-108 66-88 210-109 66-89 210-110 66-90 210-111 66-91 210-112 66-92 210-113 66-106 210-140 66-107 210-141 66-108 210-142 66-109 210-143 66-110 210-144 66-121 210-172 66-122 210-173 66-123 210-174 66-124 210-175 66-125 210-176 66-126 210-177 66-127 210-178 66-128 210-179 66-141 210-197 66-142 210-198 66-143 210-199 66-144 210-200 66-145 210-201 66-146 210-202 66-147 210-203 66-148 210-204 66-149 210-205 66-150 210-206 66-151 210-207 66-152 210-208 66-166 210-240 66-167 210-241 66-168 210-242 66-169 210-243 66-170 210-265 66-182 210-266 66-183 210-267 66-184 210-268 66-196 210-300 66-197 210-301 66-198 210-302 66-199 210-303 66-200 210-304 66-201 210-305 66-202 210-306 66-203 210-307 66-204 210-308 66-205 210-309 66-206 210-310 66-207 210-311 66-208 210-312 66-209 210-313 66-231 210-345 66-232 210-346 66-233 210-347 66-234 210-348 66-235 210-349 66-236 210-350 70-26 34-19 70-27 34-21 70-28 34-23 70-29 34-24 70-41 34-52 70-42 34-53 70-43 34-54 70-44 34-55 70-56 34-84 70-57 34-85 70-58 34-86 70-59 34-87 70-60 34-88 70-61 34-89 70-62 34-90 70-63 34-91 70-64 34-92 70-65 34-20 70-66 34-93 70-76 34-115 70-77 34-116 70-78 34-117 70-79 34-118 70-80 34-119 70-81 34-120 70-82 34-121 70-83 34-122 70-84 34-123 70-85 34-124 70-86 34-125 70-87 34-126 70-88 34-127 70-89 34-128 70-90 34-129 70-91 34-130 70-92 34-131 70-93 34-132 70-94 34-133 70-95 34-134 70-96 34-135 70-97 34-136 70-98 34-22 70-99 34-137 70-100 34-138 70-101 34-139 70-102 34-140 70-103 34-141 70-104 34-142 74-1.1 74-2 74-1 74-1 74-2 74-3 74-3 74-4 74-3.1 74-5 74-4 74-6 74-5 74-7 74-6 74-8 74-7 74-9 74-8 74-10 74-9 74-11 74-10 74-12 74-11 74-13 74-31 74-36 74-34 74-38 74-56 74-67 74-57 74-68 74-58 74-69 74-59 74-70 74-60 74-71 74-61 74-72 74-62 74-73 74-63 74-74 74-64 74-75 74-65 74-76 74-86 74-96 74-87 74-97 74-88 74-98 74-89 74-99 74-90 74-100 74-111 74-129 74-112 74-131 74-113 74-132 74-114 74-133 74-115 74-134 74-116 74-135 74-117 74-130 74-118 74-136 74-119 74-137 74-141 74-158 74-142 74-159 74-143 74-160 74-144 74-161 74-145 74-162 74-150 74-16 74-171 74-193 74-172 74-197 74-173 74-196 74-174 74-198 74-175 74-199 74-176 74-194 74-177 74-195 78-1 78-1 78-2 78-2 78-3 78-3 78-4 78-4 78-5 78-5 78-26 78-29 78-27 78-30 78-28 78-31 78-29 78-32 78-30 78-33 82-1 82-1 82-2 82-3 82-3 82-4 82-4 82-2 82-5 82-5 82-15 82-29 82-16 82-30 82-17 82-31 82-18 82-32 82-19 82-33 82-20 82-34 82-25 82-57 82-26 82-60 82-27 82-59 82-28 82-58 86-26 86-19 86-27 86-20 90-1 201-2 90-26 201-23 90-27 201-24 90-28 201-25 90-29 201-26 90-30 201-27 90-31 201-28 90-32 201-29 90-33 201-30 90-34 201-31 90-35 201-32 90-36 201-33 90-37 201-34 90-38 201-35 94-1 213-1 94-2 213-2 94-3 213-3 94-4 213-4 94-5 213-5 94-6 213-6 94-7 213-7 94-8 213-8 94-9 213-9 94-10 213-10 94-11 213-11 94-12 213-12 94-31 213-43 94-32 213-44 94-33 213-45 94-34 213-46 94-35 213-47 94-36 213-48 94-37 213-49 94-38 213-50 94-39 213-51 94-40 213-52 94-41 213-53 94-61 213-80 94-62 213-81 94-63 213-82 98-1 90-1 98-2 90-2 98-3 90-3 98-4 90-4 98-5 90-5 98-6 90-6 98-7 90-7 98-8 90-8 98-9 90-9 98-10 90-10 98-11 90-11 98-12 90-12 98-13 90-13 98-14 90-14 98-15 90-15 98-16 90-16 98-17 90-17 98-18 90-18 98-19 90-19 98-20 90-20 98-21 90-21 98-22 90-22 98-23 90-23 102-1 1-9 102-2 94-1 102-3 94-2 102-4 94-3 102-5 94-4 102-6 94-5 102-7 94-6 102-8 94-7 102-9 94-8 102-10 94-9 102-31 94-37 102-32 94-38 102-33 94-39 102-56 94-67 102-57 94-68 102-58 94-69 102-59 94-70 102-60 94-71 102-61 94-72 102-62 94-73 102-63 94-74 102-64 94-75 102-65 94-76 102-86 94-96 102-86.5 94-97 102-87 94-98 102-88 94-99 102-89 94-100 102-90 94-101 102-111 94-131 102-112 94-132 102-113 94-133 102-114 94-134 102-115 94-135 106-26 98-40 106-27 98-41 106-28 98-42 106-29 98-43 106-30 98-44 106-31 98-45 106-32 98-46 106-33 98-47 106-34 98-48 106-35 98-49 106-37 98-50 106-38 98-51 106-39 98-52 106-40 98-53 106-41 98-54 106-42 98-55 106-43 98-56 106-44 98-57 106-45 98-58 106-46 98-59 106-47 98-77 106-48 98-78 106-49 98-79 106-66 98-131 106-67 98-132 106-68 98-133 106-69 98-134 106-70 98-135 106-71 98-136 106-71.1 98-167 106-71.2 98-168 106-72 98-137 106-73 98-138 106-74 98-139 106-75 98-140 106-76 98-141 106-77 98-142 106-78 98-143 106-79 98-144 106-80 98-145 106-81 98-146 106-82 98-147 106-83 98-148 106-84 98-149 106-106 98-190 106-107 98-191 106-108 98-192 106-109 98-193 106-110 98-194 106-111 98-195 106-112 98-214 106-113 98-215 106-114 98-216 106-115 98-217 106-116 98-218 106-117 98-219 106-118 98-220 106-119 98-221 106-120 98-222 106-121 98-223 106-122 98-224 106-123 98-225 106-124 98-226 106-125 98-227 106-126 98-228 106-127 98-229 106-128 98-230 106-129 98-231 106-130 98-232 106-131 98-233 106-132 98-234 106-133 98-235 106-134 98-236 106-135 98-237 106-136 98-238 106-137 98-239 106-138 98-240 110-1 110-1 110-2 110-151 110-3 110-150 110-4 110-554 110-5 110-152 110-6 110-148 110-7 110-149 110-8 110-572 110-9 110-473 110-10 110-475 110-11 110-477 110-12 110-469 110-13 110-486 110-14 110-529 110-15 110-517 110-16 110-482 110-17 110-483 110-66 110-30 110-67 110-31 110-68 110-32 110-69 110-33 110-70 110-147 110-72 110-29 110-86 110-57 110-87 110-58 110-88 110-59 110-89 110-60 110-90 110-61 110-91 110-62 110-92 110-63 110-93 110-64 110-94 110-65 110-95 110-66 110-101 110-91 110-102 110-92 110-103 110-93 110-126 110-115 110-127 110-116 110-151 110-4 110-152 110-5 110-153 110-474 110-154 110-391 110-155 110-386 110-156 110-387 110-157 110-240 110-158 110-199 110-159 110-236 110-160 110-202 110-161 110-553 110-162 110-484 110-163 110-485 110-164 110-200 110-165 110-471 110-166 110-472 110-167 110-205 110-168 110-206 110-169 110-468 110-170 110-466 110-171 110-573 110-181 110-190 110-182 110-195 110-183 110-191 110-184(a) 110-192 - 110-194 110-185 110-192 110-186 110-193 110-187 110-328 110-201(a) 110-238 110-201(b) 110-238 110-201(c) 110-326 110-202 110-197 110-203 110-486 110-216 110-295 110-217(a) 110-292 110-217(b) 110-289 110-217(c) 110-289 110-218(a) 110-292 110-218(b) 110-292 110-218(c) 110-292 110-219 110-294 110-220 110-290 110-221 110-325 110-222 110-327 110-223 110-324 110-236, 110-237 110-347 110-238 110-552 110-261 110-416 110-262 110-417 110-263 110-422 110-264 110-418 110-265 110-419 110-266 110-423 110-267 110-424 110-268 110-425 110-269 110-426 110-270 110-291 110-271 110-427 110-272 110-428 110-273 110-429 110-274 110-430 110-275 110-431 110-276 110-432 110-277 110-414 110-278 110-2 110-279 110-421 110-280 110-433 110-281 110-3 110-301 110-155 110-302 110-155 110-302.1 110-154 110-303 110-156 110-304 110-166 110-305 110-157 110-306 110-158 110-307 110-159 110-308 110-161 110-309 110-160 110-310 110-163 110-311 110-168 110-312 110-164 110-313 110-326 110-314 110-198 110-315 110-165 110-316 110-574 110-317 110-575 110-331, 110-332 110-467 110-333 110-599 110-334 110-599 110-335 110-599 110-336 110-599 110-337 110-600 110-338, 110-339 110-601 110-340, 110-341 110-599 110-342, 110-343 110-467 110-344 110-349 110-345 110-487 110-366 110-261 110-367 110-34 110-368 110-263 110-369 110-268 110-370, 110-371 110-266 110-372 110-264 110-373 110-265 110-374 110-269 110-375 110-270 110-376 110-267 110-396 94-154 110-397 94-155 110-398 94-156 110-421 110-513 110-422 110-514 110-423 110-516 110-424 110-515 110-425 110-519 110-426 110-527 110-427 110-528 110-428, 110-429 110-518 110-430 110-520 110-431 110-522 110-432 110-523 110-433 110-524 110-434 110-525 110-435 110-526 114-1 114-1 114-2 114-2 114-3 114-3 114-4 114-4 114-5 114-5 114-6 114-6 114-31 114-31 114-32 114-32 114-33 114-33 114-34 114-34 114-35 114-35 114-36 114-36 114-37 114-37 114-38 114-38 114-51 114-65 114-52 114-66 114-53 114-67 114-54 114-68 114-70 114-250 114-76 114-95 114-77 114-96 114-78 114-97 114-79 114-98 114-80 114-99 114-81 114-100 114-82 114-101 114-83 114-102 114-84 114-103 114-85 114-104 114-86 114-105 114-87 114-106 114-88 114-107 114-89 114-108 114-110 114-132 114-111 114-133 114-112 114-134 114-113 114-135 114-114 114-136 114-126 114-156 114-127 114-157 114-128 114-158 114-141 114-185 114-142 114-186 114-143 114-187 114-144 114-188 114-145 114-189 114-146 114-190 114-147 114-191 114-148 114-192 114-149 114-193 114-150 114-225 114-151 114-226 114-166 114-246 114-167 114-247 114-168 114-248 114-169 114-249 114-171 114-251 114-172 114-252 114-173 114-253 114-174 114-254, 114-255 114-176 114-256 114-177 114-257 114-178 114-258 114-179 114-259 114-180 114-260 114-181 114-261 114-182 114-262 114-183 114-263 114-184 114-264 114-185 114-265 114-186 114-266 114-187 114-267 114-201 114-298 114-202 114-299 114-203 114-300 114-204 114-301 114-205 114-302 114-206 114-303 118-26 118-19 118-27 118-20 118-41 118-44 118-42 118-45 118-43 118-46 118-44 118-47 118-45 118-48 118-46 118-49 118-47 118-50  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1995 CODE-ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within the 1995 Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1975 Code, as updated through Ord. No. 899, enacted July 5, 1994. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
this Code 75 7-1 30-1 499  2-19-74 1 App. A, § 602 504  3- 5-74 1 App. A, § 403 507  6-18-74 1 App. A, § 401 2-6 App. A, § 403 508  6-18-74 1 App. B, § 6.01 509  6-18-74 1 App. A, § 606 511  7-24-74 1 App. A, § 803 517  8- 6-74 1 App. A, § 201 518  8- 6-74 1 App. A, § 901 537  4-15-75 1, 2 App. A, § 601 539  5-20-75 1 App. A, § 803 540  5-20-75 1 App. A, § 803, 
App. A, § 804 547  7-19-75 1 App. A, § 403 548 10-21-75 1 App. B, § 5.02 552  1- 6-76 1, 2 App. B, § 3.03, 
App. B, § 3.04 3 App. B, § 4.03 558  5-18-76 1 App. A, § 601 573 12-21-76 App. A, § 201 574 12-21-76 App. A, § 701 App. A, § 901 590  9- 6-77 1, 2 App. A, § 803 601  4-18-78 2 App. A, § 803 3 App. B, § 4.03 611  9- 5-78 2 App. A, § 803 3 App. B, § 4.03 618 12-19-78 App. A, § 201 624  3-20-79 1, 2 App. A, § 803 625  4-17-79 1 App. A, § 603, 
App. A, § 604 644 11-18-80 1 App. A, § 803 653 10-20-81 1 App. A, § 803 657 10-20-81 1 App. A, § 301 2 App. A, § 403 4 App. A, § 403 8, 9 App. A, § 601, 
App. A, § 602 10-13 App. A, § 602 14-16 App. A, § 603 18-21 App. A, § 603 22 App. A, § 604 23, 23a App. A, § 604 659 11- 3-81 1 App. A, § 804 667  1-19-82 1 App. A, § 602 683  5- 4-82 1 App. A, § 602 685  5-18-82 1 App. A, § 602 691  9- 7-82 1 App. A, § 604 692  9- 7-82 1 App. A, § 603 694 10-19-82 1 App. B, § 5.04 698 11-16-82 1 App. A, § 803 707  5- 3-83 1 App. A, § 104.1 727 12-20-84 1 App. A, § 602 734  4- 3-84 1 App. A, § 604 745  6-19-84 1, 2 App. A, § 602 3 App. A, § 301 753 12-18-84 1 App. A 771  7- 2-85 1 App. B, § 5.02 3 App. B, § 6.03 779  1-21-86 1 App. B, § 2.06 783  4- 1-86 1 App. A, § 605 2, 3 App. A, § 605 4 App. A, § 901 5 App. A, § 803 785  5- 6-86 3 App. A, § 701 787  6-17-86 1 App. B, § 5.02 789  8- 5-86 1 App. A, § 503 792 10- 7-86 App. A, § 406 804 10-20-87 1 App. B, § 5.02 861  3- 4-92 1 App. A, § 702 863  4- 7-92 1 App. A, § 602 874 11-17-92 12 App. A, § 701 876  1- 5-93 24 App. A, § 1301 App. B, § 1301 893 10- 5-93 appendix 86-79 art. I, 86-66, 86-67 art. II art. III- 86-69-86-73 art. VII art. VIII 86-74 art. IX 86-68 art. X- 86-75-86-78 art. XIII 901  8- 2-94 art. 1, § 12-21(A)- 74-111-74-114 art. 1, § 12-21(D) art. 1, § 12-21(E), (F) 74-115 art. 1, § 12-21(G) 74-116, 74-117 art. 1, § 12-21(H) 74-118 902 10- 4-94 3-7 22-76-22-80 903 11- 1-94 114-31 905  1-17-95 1 38-2(a)(3), (4) 907  4-18-95 1       Added 54-86-54-95 908  5- 2-95       Added 102-86.5 909  6- 6-95 1       Rpld App. A of App. B 910  6- 6-95 1-7 Adopting 
Ordinance, 
p. ix 911  6-20-95 1-6 86-51 913  8- 1-95 1, 2       Added 6-41(12) 914  8- 1-95 1, 2 110-432 915  8- 1-95 1 110-434 916  8- 1-95 1, 2 114-38 917 10- 3-95 1 94-11 919 11- 7-95       Added 110-302.1 920 11- 7-95 1       Added 74-3.1 921 11-21-95 1       Added 6-67.1 922 11-21-95 1 6-68 923 11-21-95 1 6-69 924 11-21-95 1 6-70 925 11-21-95 1 6-71 926 11-21-95 1 6-72 927 11-21-95 1 6-86 928 11-21-95 1 6-88 929 11-21-95 1       Added 74-1.1 930 12- 5-95 1       Added 74-8 931 12- 5-95 1       Added 74-9 932 12- 5-95 1 2-277 933  1- 2-96 98-13 937  2- 6-96       Added 110-17 939  3- 5-96 1, 2       Added 110-281 940  3- 5-96 1, 2 110-278 943  3-19-96       Added 46-66-46-75 944  4-16-96 1       Added 106-71.1 945  4-16-96 86-67(a)(8) 946  5- 7-96 110-86-110-95 947  5-21-96       Added 26-56-26-60 948  6- 4-96 App. B, § 3.03.C 949  6- 4-96 2-219, 2-222, 
2-223       Added 2-222.1 952  7- 2-96 2-267 953  7- 2-96 90-32 956  9- 3-96       Added 102-33 958  9-17-96 App. A, § 601.2 959 10-15-96 1-11       Added App. A, 607.1-607.11 960 11- 5-96 1-11 App. A, 607.1-607.11 961 11-19-96 I       Added 26-56 II       Rpld 26-56-26-60 962 12- 3-96 1-6 86-51 963 12- 3-96       Rpld 14-36, 14-37 964 12- 3-96 App. B, § 5.02 965 12- 3-96 App. A, § 401.5 967  1- 7-97       Added 2-169 968  1- 7-97 22-38 969  1- 7-97       Added 74-10 970  1-21-97       Added 74-141-74-145 971  1-21-97 1-6 86-51 972  2- 4-97 74-142(c) 973  2-10-97       Added 18-2 977  3- 4-97       Added 114-88 979  4-17-97 70-63 980  7- 1-97       Added 94-12 981  5- 6-97 App. A, 607.2, 
607.3, 607.10 982  5-20-97 603.3 983  6- 3-97 App. A, 803.1.I, 
803.2.B., D 985  7- 1-97 6-88, 18-30, 
18-54, 18-56, 
18-57, 18-83-18-86, 
18-110-18-112, 
22-37, 82-18 986  7- 1-97 App. A, 401.4 987  7- 1-97 App. A, 604.2 988  7- 1-97 App. A, 601.2 989  7- 1-97       Added 114-6 991  9- 2-97       Added 18-83(c) 992  9- 2-97 18-109 993  8- 5-97 66-7(c) 994  8- 5-97 110-102 995  8- 5-97       Added 110-238 996  8- 5-97 110-280(c) 998  9- 2-97 22-37 999  9- 2-97 14-67 1001  1- 6-98 1 74-60 1002  9-17-02 1 2-134 1004  1-20-98 1 110-279 1005  2- 3-98 1 74-142(a), (g)-(c) 1006  2- 3-98 1 74-143 1007  2- 3-98 1 74-144 1011  4- 7-98 1 App. B, § 6.03 1012  7-21-98 1       Added 10-1 1014  7-21-98 1 114-85 1015  7-21-98 1       Added 74-11 1016  8- 4-98 1 114-34 1017  8- 4-98 1 114-35 1018  8- 4-98 1 98-11 1019  8-18-98 1 34-44 1020  9-15-98 1 App. A, 602.4 1021  9-15-98 1 110-102 1023 11-17-98 1 App. A, 607.4, 
607.9, 607.10 1026 12-15-98 1 App. A, 607.4, 
607.5, 607.9, 
607.10 1029  2-16-99 1 App. A, 602.31.F 1030  2-16-99 1 App. A, 607.5 1031  3- 2-99 1       Added 18-3 1032  4- 6-99 1       Added 110-317 1035 10-19-99 1 34-51 1036 10-19-99 1       Added 46-32-46-36 1042 11-16-99 1 2-218, 2-219, 2-222, 2-223 1043 12- 7-99 1 18-30 1045  1-18-00 1 54-27 2 54-30 3 54-32 4 54-47(2) 5, 6 54-49(a), 54-50 7, 8, 9 54-62(4)(b), 54-62, 54-63(a) 1046  1-18-00 1 1-7 1048  1-18-00 1 18-26 3 18-30 1049  1-18-00 1 18-53, 18-54, 18-60, 18-61 1050  1-18-00 1 18-56 1051  2- 1-00 1 34-51 1052  3-21-00 1 App. A, §§ 602.31-602.33 1053  3- 7-00 1 18-82 1054  2-15-00 1-5 86-51 1058  6- 6-00 1 86-51 1059  7- 6-00 1 98-19(b) 1060  7- 6-00 1 2-227(a) 1061  7-18-00 1 18-30 2 114-146(b) 1063  8 1-00 1 86-51 1064  9-19-00 1 98-19(b) 1065 10- 3-00 1 26-56 1066 10-17-00 1 34-52 1067 10-17-00 1 34-51 1068 10-17-00 1 1-13 1070 11- 7-00 1 114-38(a) 1071  2-20-01 1 114-77 1072  3-21-01 1 114-33 1076  4- 3-01 1 86-51 1077  4-17-01 1 App. B, § 4.03 1078  5-15-01 1 App. A, § 603.2 1079  5-15-01 1       Added 98-22 1080  7-27-01 1-5 86-51 1081  6-19-01 1-12 App. C 1082  7- 2-01 1 34-52 1083  7-17-01 1 98-19(a)-(c) 1084  7-17-01 1 2-137(b) 1085  8- 7-01 1 98-19(a)-(c) 1086  8- 7-01       Added 98-23 1088  8-21-01 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 605.1-605.78       Added App. A, §§ 605.1-605.79 1091  9-18-01 1 App. A, § 603.2 1092 12- 3-01 1 2-137(b) 1093  1-15-02 1 34-51(a) 1094  1-15-02 1 1-7 1095  2- 6-02 1       Added 114-89 1097  4-16-02 1 App. A, § 603.2 1098  5-21-02 1-5 86-51 Ch. 86, Div. 2(note) 86-66 86-67 Ch. 86, Div. 2,App. 1099  6- 4-02 1 54-32 2 54-62(3) 3 54-62(4)a. 4 54-62(4)c. 5 54-62(5) 6 54-64(2)b. 7 54-64(4) 1101  7- 2-02 1 2-137(b) 1104 12-17-02 1 2-137(b) 1110 12-17-02 1 114-52(a) 2 114-53(d), (f) 3 114-54 1112  1-21-03 1 App. B, § 3.04 1113  2-18-03 1 2-182 2       Added 2-183 3       Rnbd 2-183       as 2-184 1115  5- 6-03 1       Added App. A, §§ 605.91-605.999 1116  5-20-03 1 114-34 1117  5-20-03 1 114-35 1118  5-20-03 1 98-11 1119  6- 3-03 1-6 18-106-18-111 7       Rpld 18-112 1120  6- 3-03 1 18-81-18-83 2       Rpld 18-84 3       Rpld 18-85(c) 1121  6- 3-03 1 18-26       Rpld 18-27 18-28-18-30 1122  6- 3-03 1 18-54, 18-56(d), 18-60, 18-61       Added 18-62 1123  6- 3-03 1       Added 18-136, 18-137 1124  6- 3-03 1       Added 18-4 1125  6- 3-03 1       Added 54-101-54-183 1132 12-16-03 1       Added 106-47 1133 12- 2-03 1 70-26, 70-28 70-41, 70-43 70-44 70-57, 70-63       Added 70-66 70-78, 70-80 70-81, 70-83 70-103 1134 11-18-03 1 2-137(b) 1136 12- 2-03 1 14-13 1137 12- 2-03 1 14-6 1138 12-16-03 1       Added 106-48 1142  4- 6-04 1       Added 18-33 1143  4- 6-04 1 106-47(d) 1145  5-18-04 1-5 Ch. 86, Div. 2, App. 1146  7- 6-04 1 70-26, 70-28 70-41, 70-43 70-44       Rpld 70-45, 70-46 70-57, 70-61 70-63, 70-66 70-78, 70-80 70-81, 70-83 70-98, 70-103 70-104 1151  9-21-04 1 110-102, 110-103 1153 11- 2-04 1 18-56(d) 1154 11- 2-04 1 18-137 1155 11-16-04 1 2-137(b) 1156 12- 7-04 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 607.1-607.11 1157 12- 7-04 1, 2       Added 59-1, 59-2 1158 12- 7-04 1       Added 59-3 1160  1- 3-05 1 46-66 46-67(b) 46-71 1161  1- 3-05 1 114-3 1163  1- 3-05 1 2-137(b) 1164  2- 1-05 1       Added 58-1 1165  3-16-05 1 94-1, 94-2 94-11(1)a., b.       Added 94-11(4)e. 94-11(5)a., b. 94-11(6)a. 94-11(7)b. 94-12(2) 94-61(6)       Added 94-61(15) 1170  5-17-05 1 118-42(b) 1171  6- 7-05 1 86-51 1172  6-21-05 1-5 Ch. 86, Art. III, Div. 2 App. 1173  6-21-05 1 74-11 1174  6-21-05 1 1-7 1175  8- 2-05 1 App. A, § 301       Added App. A, § 406.10(E)(40) App. A, § 603.1-603.3       Added App. A, § 603.6 App. A, § 803.2 1177  8-16-05 1       Added 34-58 1178  8-16-05 1       Added 34-59 1179  8-16-05 1 110-102, 110-103 1181  3- 1-05 1 110-153 1182 11- 1-05 1 98-12 1183 11- 1-05 1 98-23 1184 11- 1-05 1 114-32 1185 11- 1-05 1 App. A, § 604.2 1186 11-15-05 1 2-137(b) 1188  3-21-06 1 82-15, 82-19 1190  4-18-06 1 App. A, § 603.2 1192  8- 1-06 1 46-50 1194 10- 3-06 1-9 106-49 1195 11- 7-06 1 34-44 1196 11- 7-06 1       Added 18-5 1197 11-21-06 1       Added 74-64 1198 11-21-06 1 App. A, § 603.2 1201  1-16-07 1 2-137(b) 1203  2- 6-07 1       Added 106-71.2 1204  2- 6-07 1 98-14 1205  3-20-07 1 2-137(b) 1209  6-19-07       Added 74-150 1210  7-17-07 1 46-41 1211  9-18-07 1 110-102 1212 11- 6-07 1 98-11 1213 11- 6-07 1 98-23 1214 11- 6-07 1 114-35 1215 11- 6-07 1 114-32 1216 11- 6-07 1 114-34 1217  1-15-08 1 6-137(b) 1218  2-19-08 1 2-218 2-219 2-222 2-223 1223  5- 6-08 1 98-19 1224  6- 3-08 1       Added 106-112-106-140 1227  8-19-08 1 54-26 2 54-27 3 54-32 4 54-35 5 54-47(2) 6 54-50 7 54-62(1), (2), (4), (6) 8 54-64(1), (2) 9 54-65 1229  9-16-08 1 114-83 1231 10- 6-08 1 2-137(b) 1232 11- 4-08 1 22-48 22-51 1234  2-17-09 1       Added 74-65 1236  3- 3-09 1 App. A, § 5.03A. 1237  3- 3-09 1 18-4 1238  3- 3-09 1 110-102 1239  4- 7-09 1 34-59 1241 12-19-09 1 114-32 1242  7- 7-09 1 110-278 1243  7- 7-09 1 98-3 1245 10- 6-09 1       Added 98-8(c) 1246 11- 3-09 1 2-137(b) 1249  2- 2-10 1 2-137(b) 1250  2- 2-10 1 82-1-82-28 1251  2- 2-10 1 98-3 1255  3-16-10 1       Added 18-6 1260 11- 2-10 1 2-137(b) 1261 11-16-10 1 2-137(b) 1264 12- 7-10 1 34-36 1265  2-15-11 Ch. 86, Art. III, Div. 2 App. 1269  8- 2-11 1 App. A, § 605.9 1270 10-18-11 1 2-137(b) 1271 11- 1-11 1 46-26-46-36 46-41-46-54 46-66-46-75 1272  2- 7-10 1       Added 114-110       Added 114-147-114-151 1274  4- 3-12 1 38-2 1277  6-19-12 1 2-137(b) 1278 10- 2-12 1 98-11 1279 10- 2-12 1 114-35 1280 10- 2-12 1 114-34 1281 10-16-12 1 2-137(b) 1284 12- 4-12 1 18-108 1285  1- 2-13 1 102-64 1287  4- 2-13 1       Dltd 14-1-14-14, 
14-38-14-42, 
14-66-14-73       Added 14-1-14-11, 
14-38-14-49, 
14-66-14-76 1288  6- 4-13 1       Rpld 98-3(b)(3) 1289  6- 4-13 1       Added 110-435 1290  7- 2-13 1 70-77(c) 1291  6-18-13 1-6(Exh. A) Ch. 86, Art. III, 
Div. 2 App. 1292  6-18-13 1 18-4(c), 18-30(4), 
18-33, 18-54(a), 
18-56(d), 18-82(b), 
18-110, 18-111, 
18-137(c), 22-37, 
22-38, 22-105, 
66-5(c), 94-11(8), 
94-34(a), 102-62(a), 
114-31(a), 
App. A, §§ 605.77, 
701.5, 803.1 A., 
901.2, 
App. B, § 4.03 1293  7- 2-13 1       Added 110-171 1298  6-17-14 1       Added 74-171-74-177 1302 10-21-14 1 2-173(b)  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2017 CODE-LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within the 2017 Code of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
2017 Code Ord. No. 75 (no date) 7-1 30-19 Ord. No. 475 12-21-1972 pt. 2 App. A (note) pt. 3 App. B (note) Ord. No. 499 2-19-1974 1 App. A, § 602.33 Ord. No. 504 3-5-1974 1 App. A, § 403.2 Ord. No. 507 6-18-1974 1 App. A, § 401.4 2 App. A, § 403.1 3 App. A, § 403.2 4 App. A, § 403.3 5 App. A, § 403.4 6 App. A, § 403.5 Ord. No. 509 6-18-1974 1 App. A, § 606.2 Ord. No. 511 7-24-1974 1 App. A, § 803.2 Ord. No. 517 8-6-1974 1 App. A, § 201.3 Ord. No. 518 8-6-1974 1 App. A, § 901.6 Ord. No. 537 4-15-1975 1 App. A, § 601.2 2 App. A, § 601.2 Ord. No. 539 5-20-1975 1 App. A, § 803.1 Ord. No. 540 5-20-1975 1 App. A, § 803.3 - App. A, § 804.1 Ord. No. 546 7-15-1975 - App. A, § 802.6 Ord. No. 547 7-19-1975 1 App. A, § 403.2 Ord. No. 548 10-21-1975 1 App. B, § 5.02 Ord. No. 552 1-6-1976 1 App. B, § 3.03 2 App. B, § 3.04 3 App. B, § 4.03 Ord. No. 558 5-18-1976 1 App. A, § 601.2 Ord. No. 573 12-21-1976 App. A, § 201.1 Ord. No. 574 12-21-1976 - App. A, § 701.7 - App. A, § 901.6 Ord. No. 590 9-6-1977 1 App. A, § 803.1 2 App. A, § 803.2 Ord. No. 601 4-18-1978 2 App. A, § 803.1 - App. A, § 803.2 3 App. B, § 4.03 Ord. No. 611 9-5-1978 2 App. A, § 803.1 - App. A, § 803.2 3 App. B, § 4.03 Ord. No. 618 12-19-1978 App. A, § 201.1 Ord. No. 624 3-20-1979 1 App. A, § 803.1 - App. A, § 803.2 2 App. A, § 803.2 Ord. No. 625 4-17-1979 1 App. A, § 603.2 1 App. A, § 604.2 Ord. No. 644 11-18-1980 1 App. A, § 803.2 Ord. No. 653 10-20-1981 1 App. A, § 803.1 Ord. No. 657 10-20-1981 1 App. A, § 301 2 App. A, § 403.1 4 App. A, § 403.5 8 App. A, § 601.2 9 App. A, § 602.2 10 App. A, § 601.31 11 App. A, § 602.32 12 App. A, § 602.33 13 App. A, § 602.4 14 App. A, § 603.1 15 App. A, § 603.2 16 App. A, § 603.3 18 App. A, § 603.2 19 App. A, § 603.3 20 App. A, § 603.4 21 App. A, § 603.5 22 App. A, § 604.1 23, 23a App. A, § 604.2 Ord. No. 659 11-3-1981 1 App. A, § 804.1 Ord. No. 667 1-19-1982 1 App. A, § 602.31 Ord. No. 683 5-4-1982 1 App. A, § 602.31 1 App. A, § 602.32 Ord. No. 685 5-18-1982 1 App. A, § 602.4 Ord. No. 691 9-7-1982 1 App. A, § 604.2 Ord. No. 692 9-7-1982 1 App. A, § 603.3 Ord. No. 698 11-16-1982 1 App. A, § 803.1 Ord. No. 707 5-3-1983 1 App. A, § 104.2 Ord. No. 727 12-20-1984 1 App. A, § 602.31 1 App. A, § 602.32 Ord. No. 734 4-3-1984 1 App. A, § 604.2 Ord. No. 745 6-19-1984 1 App. A, § 602.2 2 App. A, § 602.2 3 App. A, § 301 Ord. No. 771 7-2-1985 1 App. B, § 5.02 3 App. B, § 6.03 Ord. No. 779 1-21-1986 1 App. B, § 2.06 Ord. No. 783 4-1-1986 4 App. A, § 901.4 5 App. A, § 803.1 Ord. No. 785 5-6-1986 3 App. A, § 701.1 Ord. No. 787 6-17-1986 1 App. B, § 5.02 Ord. No. 789 8-5-1986 1 App. A, § 503.1 Ord. No. 792 10-7-1986 - App. A, § 406.1 - App. A, § 406.2 - App. A, § 406.3 - App. A, § 406.4 - App. A, § 406.5 - App. A, § 406.6 - App. A, § 406.7 - App. A, § 406.8 - App. A, § 406.9 - App. A, § 406.10 - App. A, § 406.11 Ord. No. 804 10-20-1987 1 App. B, § 5.02 Ord. No. 857 1-21-1992 4 App. A, §§ 405.1, 405.2 Ord. No. 861 3-4-1992 1 App. A, § 702.1 Ord. No. 863 4-7-1992 1 App. A, § 602.31 1 App. A, § 602.32 Ord. No. 874 11-17-1992 12 App. A, § 701.1 Ord. No. 876 1-5-1993 24 App. B, § 1301 Ord. No. 901 8-2-1994 art. 1, § 12-21(A) 74-129 art. 1, § 12-21(B) 74-131 art. 1, § 12-21(C) 74-132 art. 1, § 12-21(D) 74-133 art. 1, § 12-21(E) 74-134 art. 1, § 12-21(F) 74-134 art. 1, § 12-21(G) 74-130 - 74-135 art. 1, § 12-21(H) 74-136 Ord. No. 902 10-4-1994 3 18-53 4 18-56 5 18-57 6 18-55 7 18-54 Ord. No. 903 11-1-1994 - 114-31 Ord. No. 905 1-17-1995 1 26-2 Ord. No. 907 4-18-1995 1 207-108-207-117 Ord. No. 908 5-2-1995 - 94-97 Ord. No. 913 8-1-1995 1 6-107 2 6-107 Ord. No. 914 8-1-1995 1 110-523 2 110-523 Ord. No. 915 8-1-1995 1 110-525 Ord. No. 916 8-1-1995 1 114-38 2 114-38 Ord. No. 917 10-3-1995 1 213-11 Ord. No. 919 11-7-1995 - 110-154 Ord. No. 920 11-7-1995 1 74-5 Ord. No. 921 11-21-1995 1 6-138 Ord. No. 922 11-21-1995 1 6-139 Ord. No. 923 11-21-1995 1 6-140 Ord. No. 924 11-21-1995 1 6-141 Ord. No. 925 11-21-1995 1 6-142 Ord. No. 926 11-21-1995 1 6-143 Ord. No. 927 11-21-1995 1 6-170 Ord. No. 928 11-21-1995 1 6-172 Ord. No. 929 11-21-1995 1 74-2 Ord. No. 930 12-5-1995 1 74-10 Ord. No. 931 12-5-1995 1 74-11 Ord. No. 932 12-5-1995 1 2-361 Ord. No. 933 1-2-1996 - 90-13 Ord. No. 937 2-6-1996 - 110-483 Ord. No. 939 3-5-1996 1 110-3 2 110-3 Ord. No. 940 3-5-1996 1 110-2 2 110-2 Ord. No. 944 4-16-1996 1 98-167 Ord. No. 946 5-7-1996 - 110-57-110-66 Ord. No. 948 6-4-1996 App. B, § 3.03 Ord. No. 949 6-4-1996 - 2-267 - 2-270-2-272 Ord. No. 952 7-2-1996 - 2-328 Ord. No. 953 7-2-1996 - 201-29 Ord. No. 956 9-3-1996 - 94-39 Ord. No. 958 9-17-1996 - App. A, § 601.2 Ord. No. 959 10-15-1996 1 App. A, § 607 2 App. A, § 607 3 App. A, § 607 4 App. A, § 607 5 App. A, § 607 6 App. A, § 607 7 App. A, § 607 8 App. A, § 607 9 App. A, § 607 10 App. A, § 607 11 App. A, § 607 Ord. No. 960 11-5-1996 1-11 App. A, § 607 Ord. No. 961 11-19-1996 I 22-66 II 22-66 Ord. No. 964 12-3-1996 App. B, § 5.02 Ord. No. 965 12-3-1996 App. A, § 401.5 Ord. No. 968 1-7-1997 - 18-32 Ord. No. 969 1-7-1997 - 74-12 Ord. No. 970 1-21-1997 - 74-158-74-162 Ord. No. 972 2-4-1997 - 74-159 Ord. No. 977 3-4-1997 - 114-107 Ord. No. 979 4-15-1997 - 34-91 Ord. No. 981 5-6-1997 2 App. A, § 607 3 App. A, § 607 10 App. A, § 607 Ord. No. 982 5-20-1997 1 App. A, § 603.3 Ord. No. 983 6-3-1997 - App. A, § 803.1 - App. A, § 803.2 Ord. No. 958 7-1-1997 - 204-96 Ord. No. 980 7-1-1997 - 213-12 Ord. No. 985 7-1-1997 - 6-172 - 18-31 - 204-30 - 204-69-204-71 - 204-93 - 204-97 - 204-110, 204-111 Ord. No. 986 7-1-1997 App. A, § 401.4 Ord. No. 987 7-1-1997 - App. A, § 604.2 Ord. No. 988 7-1-1997 - App. A, § 601.2 Ord. No. 989 7-1-1997 - 114-6 Ord. No. 993 8-5-1997 - 210-7 Ord. No. 994 8-5-1997 - 110-92 Ord. No. 995 8-5-1997 - 110-552 Ord. No. 996 8-5-1997 - 110-433 Ord. No. 991 9-2-1997 - 204-93 Ord. No. 992 9-2-1997 - 204-109 Ord. No. 998 9-2-1997 - 18-31 Ord. No. 1001 1-6-1998 1 74-71 Ord. No. 1004 1-20-1998 1 110-421 Ord. No. 1005 2-3-1998 1 74-159 Ord. No. 1006 2-3-1998 1 74-160 Ord. No. 1007 2-3-1998 1 74-161 Ord. No. 1011 4-7-1998 1 App. B, § 6.03 Ord. No. 1012 7-21-1998 1 18-3 Ord. No. 1014 7-21-1998 1 114-104 Ord. No. 1015 7-21-1998 1 74-13 Ord. No. 1016 8-4-1998 1 114-34 Ord. No. 1017 8-4-1998 1 114-35 Ord. No. 1018 8-4-1998 1 90-11 Ord. No. 1019 8-18-1998 1 50-19 Ord. No. 1020 9-15-1998 1 App. A, § 602.4 Ord. No. 1021 9-15-1998 1 110-92 Ord. No. 1023 11-17-1998 1 App. A, § 607 Ord. No. 1126 12-15-1998 1 App. A, § 607 Ord. No. 1029 2-16-1999 1 App. A, § 602.31 Ord. No. 1032 4-6-1999 1 110-575 Ord. No. 1035 10-19-1999 1 50-26 Ord. No. 1042 11-16-1999 1 2-266, 2-267 - 2-270 - 2-272 Ord. No. 1043 12-7-1999 1 204-30 Ord. No. 1045 1-18-2000 1 207-20 2 207-23 3 207-25 4 207-48 5 207-50 6 207-51 7 207-79 8 207-79 9 207-80 Ord. No. 1046 1-18-2000 1 1-7 Ord. No. 1048 1-18-2000 1 204-27 3 204-30 Ord. No. 1049 1-18-2000 1 204-68, 204-69 - 204-74, 204-75 Ord. No. 1050 1-18-2000 1 204-70 Ord. No. 1051 2-1-2000 1 50-26 Ord. No. 1052 3-21-2000 1 App. A, § 602.31 - App. A, § 602.32 - App. A, § 602.33 Ord. No. 1053 3-7-2000 1 204-92 Ord. No. 1059 7-6-2000 1 90-19 Ord. No. 1060 7-6-2000 1 2-276 Ord. No. 1061 7-18-2000 1 204-30 2 114-190 Ord. No. 1064 9-19-2000 1 90-19 Ord. No. 1065 10-3-2000 1 22-66 Ord. No. 1066 10-17-2000 1 50-27 Ord. No. 1067 10-17-2000 1 50-26 Ord. No. 1068 10-17-2000 1 2-31 Ord. No. 1070 11-7-2000 1 114-38 Ord. No. 1071 2-20-2001 1 114-96 Ord. No. 1072 3-21-2001 1 114-33 Ord. No. 1077 4-17-2001 1 App. B, § 4.03 Ord. No. 1078 5-15-2001 1 App. A, § 603.2 Ord. No. 1079 5-15-2001 1 90-22 Ord. No. 1081 6-19-2001 App. C (note) Ord. No. 1082 7-2-2001 1 50-27 Ord. No. 1083 7-17-2001 1 90-19 Ord. No. 1084 7-17-2001 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1085 8-7-2001 1 90-19 Ord. No. 1086 8-7-2001 - 90-23 Ord. No. 1088 8-21-2001 1 App. A, § 605.1 - App. A, § 605.2 - App. A, § 605.3 - App. A, § 605.4 - App. A, § 605.5 - App. A, § 605.6 - App. A, § 605.7 Ord. No. 1091 9-18-2001 1 App. A, § 603.2 Ord. No. 1092 12-3-2001 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1093 1-15-2002 1 50-26 Ord. No. 1094 1-15-2002 1 1-7 Ord. No. 1095 2-6-2002 1 114-108 Ord. No. 1097 4-16-2002 1 App. A, § 603.2 Ord. No. 1099 6-4-2002 1 207-25 2 207-79 3 207-79 4 207-79 5 207-79 6 207-81 7 207-81 Ord. No. 1101 7-2-2002 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1002 9-17-2002 1 2-203 Ord. No. 1104 12-17-2002 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1110 12-17-2002 1 114-66 2 114-67 3 114-68 Ord. No. 1112 1-21-2003 1 App. B, § 3.04 Ord. No. 1113 2-18-2003 1 2-178 2 2-179 3 2-180 Ord. No. 1115 5-6-2003 1 605.9 Ord. No. 1116 5-20-2003 1 114-34 Ord. No. 1117 5-20-2003 1 114-35 Ord. No. 1118 5-20-2003 1 90-11 Ord. No. 1119 6-3-2003 1 204-106 2 204-107 3 204-108 4 204-109 5 204-110 6 204-111 Ord. No. 1120 6-3-2003 1 204-91-204-93 3 204-96 Ord. No. 1121 6-3-2003 1 204-27-204-30 Ord. No. 1122 6-3-2003 1 204-69, 204-70 - 204-74-204-76 Ord. No. 1123 6-3-2003 1 204-136, 204-137 Ord. No. 1124 6-3-2003 1 204-3 Ord. No. 1125 6-3-2003 1 207-148-207-156 - 207-181-207-186 - 207-211-207-214 - 207-237, 207-238 - 207-270-207-272 - 207-293-207-299 - 207-317-207-319 Ord. No. 1134 11-18-2003 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1133 12-2-2003 1 34-19 - 34-23 - 34-52 - 34-54, 34-55 - 34-85 - 34-89 - 34-91 - 34-93 - 34-117 - 34-119, 34-120 - 34-122 - 34-141 Ord. No. 1132 12-16-2003 1 98-77 Ord. No. 1138 12-16-2003 1 98-78 Ord. No. 1142 4-6-2004 1 204-32 Ord. No. 1143 4-6-2004 1 98-77 Ord. No. 1146 7-6-2004 1 34-19 - 34-22, 34-23 - 34-52 - 34-54, 34-55 - 34-85 - 34-89 - 34-91 - 34-93 - 34-117 - 34-119, 34-120 - 34-122 - 34-141 - 34-142 Ord. No. 1151 9-21-2004 1 110-92, 110-93 Ord. No. 1153 11-2-2004 1 204-70 Ord. No. 1154 11-2-2004 1 204-137 Ord. No. 1155 11-16-2004 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1156 12-7-2004 1 App. A, § 607 Ord. No. 1157 12-7-2004 1 42-2 2 42-3 Ord. No. 1158 12-7-2004 1 42-4 Ord. No. 1161 1-3-2005 1 114-3 Ord. No. 1163 1-3-2005 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1164 2-1-2005 1 42-1 Ord. No. 1181 3-1-2005 1 110-474 Ord. No. 1165 3-16-2005 1 213-1, 213-2 - 213-11, 213-12 - 213-80 Ord. No. 1190 4-18-2006 1 App. A, § 603.2 Ord. No. 1170 5-17-2005 1 118-45 Ord. No. 1173 6-21-2005 1 74-13 Ord. No. 1174 6-21-2005 1 1-7 Ord. No. 1175 8-2-2005 1 App. A, § 301 - App. A, § 406.10 - App. A, § 603.1 - App. A, § 603.2 - App. A, § 603.3 - App. A, § 603.6 - App. A, § 803.2 Ord. No. 1177 8-16-2005 1 50-33 Ord. No. 1178 8-16-2005 1 50-34 Ord. No. 1179 8-16-2005 1 110-92, 110-93 Ord. No. 1182 11-1-2005 1 90-12 Ord. No. 1183 11-1-2005 1 90-23 Ord. No. 1184 11-1-2005 1 114-32 Ord. No. 1185 11-1-2005 1 App. A, § 604.2 Ord. No. 1186 11-15-2005 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1194 10-3-2006 1 98-79 2 98-79 3 98-79 4 98-79 5 98-79 6 98-79 7 98-79 8 98-79 9 98-79 Ord. No. 1195 11-7-2006 1 50-19 Ord. No. 1196 11-7-2006 1 204-4 Ord. No. 1197 11-21-2006 1 74-75 Ord. No. 1198 11-21-2006 1 App. A, § 603.2 Ord. No. 1201 1-16-2007 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1203 2-6-2007 1 98-168 Ord. No. 1204 2-6-2007 1 90-14 Ord. No. 1205 3-20-2007 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1209 6-19-2007 1 74-16 Ord. No. 1211 9-18-2007 1 110-92 Ord. No. 1212 11-6-2007 1 90-11 Ord. No. 1213 11-6-2007 1 90-23 Ord. No. 1214 11-6-2007 1 114-35 Ord. No. 1215 11-6-2007 1 114-32 Ord. No. 1216 11-6-2007 1 114-34 Ord. No. 1217 1-15-2008 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1218 2-19-2008 1 2-266, 2-267 - 2-270 - 2-272 Ord. No. 1223 5-6-2008 1 90-19 Ord. No. 1224 6-3-2008 1 98-214-98-240 Ord. No. 1227 8-19-2008 1 207-19 2 207-20 3 207-25 4 207-28 5 207-48 6 207-51 7 207-79 8 207-81 9 207-82 Ord. No. 1229 9-16-2008 1 114-102 Ord. No. 1231 10-6-2008 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1232 11-4-2008 1 30-86 - 30-89 Ord. No. 1234 2-17-2009 1 74-76 Ord. No. 1236 3-3-2009 1 App. B, § 5.02 Ord. No. 1237 3-3-2009 1 204-3 Ord. No. 1238 3-3-2009 1 110-92 Ord. No. 1239 4-7-2009 1 50-34 Ord. No. 1242 7-7-2009 1 110-2 Ord. No. 1243 7-7-2009 1 90-3 Ord. No. 1245 10-6-2009 1 90-8 Ord. No. 1246 11-3-2009 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1241 12-19-2009 1 114-32 Ord. No. 1249 2-2-2010 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1250 2-2-2010 1 82-1-82-5 - 82-29-82-34 - 82-57-82-60 Ord. No. 1251 2-2-2010 1 90-3 Ord. No. 1272 2-7-2010 1 114-132 - 114-191-114-193 - 114-225, 114-226 Ord. No. 1255 3-16-2010 1 204-5 Ord. No. 1260 11-2-2010 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1261 11-24-2010 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1264 12-7-2010 1 50-11 Ord. No. 1268 8-2-2011 1 App. A, § 605.9 Ord. No. 1270 10-18-2011 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1271 11-1-2011 1 54-1-54-11 - 54-41-54-53 - 54-82-54-91 Ord. No. 1274 4-3-2012 1 26-2 Ord. No. 1277 6-19-2012 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1279 10-2-2012 1 114-35 Ord. No. 1280 10-2-2012 1 114-34 Ord. No. 1281 10-16-2012 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1278 10-21-2012 1 90-11 Ord. No. 1284 12-4-2012 1 204-108 Ord. No. 1285 1-2-2013 1 94-75 Ord. No. 1287 4-2-2013 1 14-1-14-17 - 14-38-14-41 - 14-71-14-75 - 14-94-14-101 Ord. No. 1288 6-4-2013 1 90-3 Ord. No. 1289 6-4-2013 1 110-526 Ord. No. 1292 6-18-2013 1 18-31, 18-32 - 18-115 - 94-73 - 114-31 - 204-3 - 204-30 - 204-32 - 204-69, 204-70 - 204-92 - 204-110, 204-111 - 204-137 - 210-5 - 213-11 - 213-46 1 App. A, § 803.1 - App. A, § 701.5 - App. A, § 901.2 - App. B, § 4.03 Ord. No. 1290 7-2-2013 1 34-116 Ord. No. 1293 7-2-2013 1 110-573 Ord. No. 1298 6-17-2014 1 74-193-74-199 Ord. No. 1302 10-21-2014 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1303 11-4-2014 1 204-27 - 204-30 Ord. No. 1304 11-4-2014 1 204-51, 204-52 Ord. No. 1305 11-4-2014 1 204-67 - 204-74 - 204-76 Ord. No. 1306 11-4-2014 1 204-91, 204-92 - 204-94 - 204-96 1(18-83) 204-95 Ord. No. 1307 11-4-2014 1 204-106, 204-107 - 204-111 Ord. No. 1308 11-4-2014 1 204-136-204-138 Ord. No. 1310 2-10-2015 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1311 3-17-2015 1 1-7 Ord. No. 1312 3-17-2015 1 50-1 - 50-8 - 50-11 - 50-16-50-18 - 50-21 - 50-23 - 50-26, 50-27 - 50-30 - 50-32 - 50-34, 50-35 Ord. No. 1313 3-17-2015 1 74-2 - 74-6 - 74-12, 74-13 - 74-16 - 74-68 - 74-70 - 74-74 - 74-100 - 74-130 - 74-136 - 74-158-74-162 Ord. No. 1314 3-17-2015 1 110-2-110-5 - 110-29 - 110-92, 110-93 - 110-116 - 110-155 - 110-200 - 110-328 - 110-386, 110-387 - 110-474 - 110-552 Ord. No. 1316 3-17-2015 1 App. A, § 201.1 2 App. A, § 401.3 3 App. A, § 406.1 4 App. A, § 608 Ord. No. 1321 7-17-2015 1 2-206 Ord. No. 1322 7-21-2015 2 94-99 - 114-298-114-301 - 114-303 - App. A, § 406.3 - App. B, § 5.01 - App. B, § 5.02 3 App. A, § 602.1 4 114-109 - App. A, § 602.34 Ord. No. 1324 9-3-2015 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1327 10-20-2015 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1328 10-20-2015 1 114-35 Ord. No. 1329 10-20-2015 1(110-172) 110-390 Ord. No. 1330 11-3-2015 1(110-173) 110-389 Ord. No. 1334 3-15-2016 1 114-32 Ord. No. 1335 4-5-2016 1 114-34 Ord. No. 1336 3-26-2016 1 114-35 Ord. No. 1339 9-20-2016 1 50-27 Ord. No. 1341 10-18-2016 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1343 4-18-2017 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1344 7-18-2017 - App. A, § 608 Ord. No. 1345 7-18-2017 1 App. A, § 201.1 2 App. A, § 401.3 3 App. A, § 406.1 Ord. No. 1346 7-18-2017 1 2-199 Ord. No. 1347  8-15-2017 Adopting Ord. Ord. No. 1348  8-15-2017 1 50-27 Ord. No. 1349 10-17-2017 1 2-199(b) Ord. No. 1350 11-7-2017 1 50-27 Ord. No. 1351 11- 7-2017 1 50-27 Ord. No. 1353  2-6-2018 - 213-11 - 213-43-213-51 Ord. No. 1355  3-20-2018 1       Added 30-64-30-71 Ord. No. 1357  7-17-2018 - 74-10 Ord. No. 1358  5-15-2018 1       Added 34-143 Ord. No. 1359  7-2-2018 1 50-34 Ord. No. 1360  5-15-2018 1 2-199(b) Ord. No. 1361  8- 7-2018 1 2-199(b) Ord. No. 1363  8-21-2018 1       Added 214-1-214-4, - 214-21, - 214-41, - 214-61-214-63 Ord. No. 1364  8-21-2018       Added 24-1-24-19 Ord. No. 1365  9-18-2018 1 214-1-214-4, - 214-21, - 214-41, - 214-61       Added 214-81       Rnbd 214-62, 214-63       as 214-82, 214-83 Ord. No. 1366  9-27-2018 1       Rpld 34-24 2 34-116 3 34-118 Ord. No. 1367 10-16-2018 1 114-34 Ord. No. 1368 10-16-2018 1 90-11 Ord. No. 1369 10-16-2018 1 90-23 Ord. No. 1372 11- 6-2018 1 90-11 Ord. No. 1377 11- 6-2018 1 2-199(b) Ord. No. 1379 12- 4-2018 1 114-109 2       Added 114-110 Ord. No. 1384  2- 5-2019       Rpld 74-9       Added 74-9 Ord. No. 1385  2-19-2019 1 214-1-214-4, - 214-21, - 214-41, - 214-61, - 214-81-214-83 Ord. No. 1386  2-19-2019 - 74-9 Ord. No. 1387  2-19-2019 - 6-1 - 6-21-6-24       Rpld 6-52-6-55       Added 6-52-6-54       Rpld 6-84       Added 6-84 - 6-85 - 6-86 - 6-88 - 6-89 - 6-107 - 6-109-6-111  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Oklahoma Statutes (O.S.). 
O.S. 
Title Section Section 
in Code 4 30.1 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 41 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 499 et seq. 14-38 10A - 74-136 2-8-222 6-88 2-8-224 74-160 11 - Ch. 2 (note) 1-102 54-44 12-228 110-328 12-608 110-600 12-609 110-599 14-107 Ch. 204 (note) 14-108 1-1 14-109 50-19 14-109 et seq. 1-1 14-110 50-19 14-111 1-7 - 50-27 14-111.1 et seq. 1-7 16-112 98-41 17-110 98-79 17-201 et seq. 2-200 22-104 Ch. 114 (note) 22-106 Ch. 18, Art. II 22-107.1 Ch. 22 (note) 22-108 74-9 22-109 74-9 22-110 Ch. 38, Art. III - 74-8 22-111 Ch. 54, Art. II 22-113 Ch. 204 (note) 22-114 Ch. 114 (note) 22-115 14-1 - Ch. 14, Art. II - Ch. 14, Art. IV 22-116 1-5 22-117 110-1 22-117.1 110-1 22-118 110-431 - Ch. 118, Art. II 22-118(1) 118-48 22-118(5) Ch. 118, Art. II, Div. 2 - 118-45 - 118-47 22-118(6) 118-45 22-119 Ch. 94, Art. VI 22-121 Ch. 54 (note) 22-131 2-77 22-132 2-77 22-133 Ch. 34, Art. II 22-138 2-206 27-101 50-2 27-102 50-2 27-103 50-3 27-104 50-4 - 50-5 - 50-8 27-105 50-10 27-106 50-7 27-107 50-9 27-108 50-12 27-109 50-11 27-111 50-11 27-113 50-13 - 50-22 27-114 50-6 27-115 50-14 27-116 50-18 27-117-27-118 50-17 27-117.1 110-29 27-119 50-19 27-121 50-23 27-122.2 50-29 27-123 50-28 27-125 50-30 27-126 1-7 27-129 50-31 31-101 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 31-101 46-19 31-106 46-22 33-101 et seq. Ch. 78 (note) 33-103 Ch. 78 (note) 35-101 et seq. Ch. 114 (note) 35-101 114-5 35-107 Ch. 114, Art. II 37-101 et seq. Ch. 114, Art. III 37-109 Ch. 114, Art. II 37-201 et seq. Ch. 114, Art. IV 41-101 et seq. App. B, Art. I, § 1.03 43-101 et seq. 201-35 - App. A (note) 43-102 Ch. 204 (note) 43-103 201-32 43-109 201-35 45-101 Ch. 201, Art. II 45-102 201-24, 201-25 45-103 201-27 - 201-30 45-104 201-33, 201-34 49-100.1 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II 49-103 et seq. 86-20 50-101 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II 51-101 et seq. 2-152 17 51 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 19 1601 et seq. Ch. 82 (note) 20 1313.2 50-27 1313.3 50-27 21 1 et seq. Ch. 74 (note) - 74-1 42 74-3 441 74-38 540 74-6 540(A) 110-152 941 et seq. 74-9 1102 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 1102 10-20 1104 10-20 1220 74-14 1281 et seq. 74-4 1289.8 74-10, 74-11 1289.24 74-10, 74-11 1290.1 et seq. 74-2 1321.1-1321.10 Ch. 74, Art. IV 1321.2 74-96 1321.3 74-97 1321.4 74-98 1321.6 74-99 1321.9 Ch. 74, Art. IV 1353 74-72-74-74 1533 74-36 1680 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) - 14-6 - 14-75 1753.3 90-4 1760 et seq. 74-68 1761.1 90-4 1787 74-67 22 1115 et seq. 50-17 - 110-29 1115.1 110-29 25 1 et seq. 1-2 27 2-201 et seq. 207-148 27A 1-1-101 et seq. 207-150 2-10-101 et seq. Ch. 90 (note) - 110-417 2-10-901 et seq. Ch. 90 (note) 2-10-901(B) 90-12 28 153.3 50-27 29 7-502 14-8 36 1106 110-5 37 8 74-15 8a 74-15 163.1 et seq. Ch. 6 - Ch. 6, Art. III 163.1 74-14 - 6-136 - 6-138 - 74-14 163.10 6-172 213 6-137 241 6-139 502 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) - Ch. 6, Art. II 518 Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 4 523(B) 6-24 534(C) 6-52 537(A)(1) 6-86 537(A)(2) 6-89 537(A)(3) 6-54 537(B)(2) 6-85 - 74-193 537(C)(3) 6-53, 6-54 537(C)(7) 6-84 538(E) 6-84 - 6-87 554.1 Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 4 - 6-110 600.1 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. VI 600.2 74-158 600.3 74-159 600.8 74-161 600.9 74-162 37A 1-101 et seq. 6-24 1-103 6-21 6-88 43 10-103 110-481 47 Ch. 110 (note) - 110-1 1-105 74-14 - 110-325 1-160 74-14 1-174 74-14 6-303 110-4 7-204 110-5 7-330 110-5 7-503 110-5 7-600 et seq. 110-5 7-600 110-5 7-602.1 110-5 7-605-7-607 110-5 7-607(B) Ch. 210 (note) 8-104 110-5 10-102 110-115 10-103 110-415 10-104 110-116 11-101 110-146 11-103 110-147 11-104 110-150 11-105 110-151 11-106 110-152 11-107 110-153 11-201 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 2 11-201 110-155 11-202 110-159 11-203 110-160 11-204 110-161 11-204.1 110-162 11-206 110-166 11-207 110-168 11-208 110-167 11-301 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 3 11-301 110-190 11-302 110-191 11-303 110-192 11-304 110-193 11-305 110-194 11-306 110-195 11-307(B) 110-196 11-308 110-197, 110-198 11-309 110-199 11-309-11-314 110-199-110-204 11-310 110-200 11-311 110-201 11-312 110-202 11-313 110-203 11-314 110-204 11-315 110-206 11-401 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 4 11-401 110-236 11-402 110-237 11-403 110-238 11-404 110-239 11-405 110-240 11-406 110-241 11-501 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 5 11-501 110-261 11-501.1 110-262 11-502 110-263 11-503 110-266 11-504 110-267 11-505 110-268 11-506 110-269 11-507 110-270 11-601 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 6 11-601 110-289 11-602 110-290 11-603 110-291 11-604 110-292 11-605 110-293 11-606 110-294 11-701 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 7 11-701 110-324 11-702 110-325 11-703 110-326 11-704 110-327 11-705 110-328 11-705.1 110-329 11-801 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 8 11-801 110-347 11-804 110-348 11-805 110-349 11-805.1 110-350 11-805.2 110-351 11-805.3 110-352 11-805.4 110-353 11-806 110-354 11-806.1 110-355 11-808 110-356 11-808.1 110-356 11-809 110-356 11-901 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 9 11-901 110-386 11-901(B) 110-388 11-901(C) 110-389 11-901(D) 110-390 11-902 110-391 11-903 110-392 11-1001 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 10 11-1001 110-415 11-1002 110-2 - 110-416 11-1003 110-417 11-1004(A) 110-418 11-1004(B) 110-418 11-1004(C) 110-419 11-1005 110-413 11-1006 110-420 11-1007 110-421 11-1101 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 11 11-1101 110-465 11-1102 110-466 11-1103 110-467 11-1104 110-468 11-1105 110-469 11-1107 110-470 11-1108 110-471 11-1109 110-472 11-1110 110-473 11-1112 110-474 11-1114 110-476 11-1115 110-478 11-1116 110-479 11-1117 110-480 11-1119 110-481 11-1201 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 12 11-1201 110-513 11-1202 110-514 11-1203 110-515 11-1204 110-517 11-1205 110-518 11-1206 110-519 11-1208 110-521 11-1301 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 13 11-1301 110-553 11-1302 110-554 12-101 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. V 12-201(A) 110-601 12-201(B) 110-527 12-201(C) 110-601 12-201(D) 110-601 12-202(B) 110-601 12-203 110-601 12-203(C) 110-601 12-218 110-152 12-224 110-601 12-225 110-601 12-227 110-601 12-228 110-329 - 110-601 12-401 110-599 12-402 110-599 12-601-12-606 110-601 12-702-12-704 110-527 12-706 110-527 12-707 110-527 12-708 110-528 14-101 110-241 14-101 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. V 14-103(D) Ch. 210 (note) 15-101 et seq. Ch. 110 15-102(A)(1) Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 10 15-102(A)(2) Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 2 - 110-32 15-102(A)(3) 94-131 15-102(A)(4) 110-198 15-102(A)(6) 110-238 15-102(A)(9) Ch. 110, Art. IV, Div. 6 - 110-295 15-102(C) 110-155 15-106 110-156 15-112 110-421 15-112(D)(4), (5) 110-421 108.1 110-31 112 110-5 230.3(5) 110-415 756 110-391 955(A) 110-5 1101 et seq. 110-2 - 110-352 - 110-421 1102 110-5 - 110-479 1102.11 Ch. 210 (note) 1135.1 110-421 1135.2 110-421 1137.1 110-5 1137.3 110-5 1151(E) 110-479 50 1 et seq. Ch. 54 (note) 12 54-9 14 54-10 15 54-10 16 54-3 17 54-3 - 54-11 51 24A.1 et seq. 2-77 59 1000.23 204-27 - 204-51 - 204-74 - 204-92 - 204-106 - 204-136 1000.25 204-5 1001 et seq. 204-91 1015 204-91 1020 204-93 1108 50-17 1200.1 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. IV 1301 50-17 1301-1340 50-17 1332 50-17 1750.1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III - 18-53 1750.5 18-56 1800.1 et seq. 30-87 62 517.1 et seq. 2-204 63 - 42-1 - 42-3 1-209 Ch. 42 (note) 1-508 14-101 1-701 et seq. 42-2 1-1011 54-5 1-1511 et seq. 74-8 1-1522 74-193 - 74-198 1-1523 74-196, 74-197 1-1900 et seq. 74-198 1-2501 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. III - 30-59 1-2515 Ch. 30, Art. III 2-204 110-391 680 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) - Ch. 30, Art. II 683.3 30-19 683.11 Ch. 30, Art. II 683.14 Ch. 30, Art. II 683.17(B) 30-27 1051 et seq. Ch. 204, Art. VII 1084 Ch. 210 (note) 1521 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. VII 2657 et seq. 42-3 65 1-101 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 151 et seq. Ch. 46 (note) 66 1 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. VI 12 94-154 67 201 et seq. 2-77 301 et seq. 98-59 68 205 98-59 - 98-77, 98-78 - 98-147 - 98-234 217 98-55 - 98-77, 98-78 - 98-143 218 et seq. 98-55 220 98-56 - 98-77, 98-78 - 98-144 221 98-54 227 98-57 - 98-77, 98-78 - 98-145 240.1 98-58 241 98-58 242 98-58 1350 et seq. 98-46-98-50 - 98-52 - 98-54 - 98-77-98-79 1352 98-42 - 98-77, 98-78 1354 98-48 1355-1360 98-49 1357(6) 98-48 1361 98-51 - 98-77, 98-78 1361(D)-(F) 98-55 1362 98-52 1363 98-46 1364 98-47 1365 98-50 - 98-54 1367.1 98-54 1401 et seq. 98-132 - 98-134, 98-135 - 98-137 - 98-139 - 98-148, 98-149 1408 98-148 1621 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. III 1629 38-43 1631 Ch. 38, Art. III 2601 Ch. 98, Art. IV - 98-191 2602 Ch. 98, Art. IV 2603 98-192 2604 98-194 2605 98-195 2701 et seq. Ch. 98 (note) - 98-238 2701 98-48 2702 Ch. 98, Art. II 2705 98-43 70 10-105 et seq. 74-13 72 5 82-32 74 314 et seq. Ch. 38 (note) 324.8 Ch. 204 (note) 82 1601 et seq. Ch. 207 (note) 1601-1618 207-19 - 207-48 85 1 et seq. 114-226 - 204-3 - 213-49  
