



ORDINANCE NO. 670
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING REGULATIONS FOR THE
CITY OF AUMSVILLE, OREGON, ADOPTING AN OFFICIAL ZONING MAP FOR THE CITY
OF AUMSVILLE, PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND
AMENDMENTS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH ORS CHAPTER 227. REPEALING ORDINANCE
323 AND AMENDMENTS IN THEIR ENTIRETY AND STATING PENALTIES. IT IS FURTHER
THE PURPOSE OF THIS ORDINANCE TO COORDINATE THE CITY REGULATIONS
CONTROLLING THE DIVISION, DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF LAND AND TO IMPLEMENT
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
WHEREAS, the City Council for the City of Aumsville directed the City Planning
Commission and staff to consider revising and updating the Aumsville Development Ordinance
(Ordinance 323, as amended); and
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission for the City of Aumsville conducted a hearing on
May 21, 2020 regarding Planning File “Aumsville Development Ordinance Proposed Revisions”
and made findings recommending certain amendments to the Ordinance 323 of the City of
Aumsville; and
WHEREAS, the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of the Aumsville Development
Ordinance, after appropriate notice given, has conducted a hearing to take testimony, hear
arguments and to consider all the evidence concerning such proposed Development
Ordinance amendments, such hearing being conducted on June 8, 2020; and
WHEREAS, The City Recorder is directed to incorporate the amendments into the
Municipal Code, making corrections to any scrivener’s errors that may be found.
WHEREAS, the City Council has considered all relevant evidence and deliberated.
NOW, THEREFORE, the City of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. In addition to the findings referred to above, the City Council does hereby
adopt and find those matters contained in Exhibit “B” which is incorporated herein by this
reference as if fully set forth at this point.
Section 2. Based upon the findings adopted herein, and recognizing the degree and
number of amendments, the Ordinance 323 and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed
and replaced in their entirety by Ordinance No. 670 as specified in Exhibit “A”, which is
incorporated herein by this reference as if fully set forth at this point.
Section 3. Ordinance No. 670 may be referred to as the "Aumsville Development
Ordinance” and is also referenced as the Development Ordinance.
Section 4. Emergency Clause. It is hereby adjudged and declared that existing
conditions are such that this ordinance is necessary for the immediate preservation of the
public peace, health, and safety of the City of Aumsville. Emergency is hereby declared to
exist, and this ordinance shall take effect and be in full force and effect when passed by the
council and signed by the mayor.
2
THEREFORE: PRESENTED AND PASSED the first reading on the 8th day of June, 2020.
PASSED its second reading on the 8 day of June, 2020. ADOPTED by unanimous vote of the
Aumsville City Council on the 8 day of June, 2020.
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Nos.
SECTION 1.00 Definitions 4 – 19
SECTION 2.00 Establishment of Zones: Provisions for Official
Zoning Map 20 – 22
SECTION 3.00 Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries 23 – 24
SECTION 4.00 Application of Zone Regulations 25 – 27
SECTION 5.00 RS-Residential Single Family 28 – 31
SECTION 6.00 RM-Residential Multi-Family 32 – 38
SECTION 7.00 CL-Commercial 39 – 42
SECTION 8.00 I-Industrial 43 – 46
SECTION 9.00 P-Public 47 – 48
SECTION 10.00 ID-Interchange Development Zone 49 – 54
SECTION 11.00 Administration and Enforcement 55 – 57
SECTION 12.00 Administrative Procedures 58 – 71
SECTION 13.00 Variances 72 – 74
SECTION 14.00 Conditional Uses 75 – 77
SECTION 15.00 Amendments 78 – 80
SECTION 16.00 Zone Change 81 – 84
SECTION 17.00 Annexations 85 – 87
SECTION 18. 00 Off-Street Parking and Loading 88 – 95
SECTION 19.00 Signs 96 – 104
SECTION 20.00 Land Divisions 105 – 125
SECTION 21.00 Site Development Review 126 – 132
SECTION 22.00 Supplementary Zone Regulations 133 – 148
SECTION 23.00 Landscaping Design 149 – 154
SECTION 24.00 Severability 155
SECTION 25.00 Flood Hazard Regulations 156 - 173
SECTION 26.00 Temporary Uses 174 - 176
SECTION 27.00 Mobile Food Service 177 - 179
Illustrations of Calculations: 180 – 184
Calculation of Clear Vision Area/Building Stories/Building Lot Lines/Lot
Types
4
SECTION 1.00
Definitions
1.00 Definitions
5
SECTION 1.00
Definitions
1.00 General. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms or words used in this
ordinance shall be interpreted as follows:
The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or
corporation as well as an individual.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular.
The word “shall’ is mandatory, the word “may” is permissive.
The word “used” or “occupied” include the words “intended, designed or arranged to be
occupied".
The word "lot” includes the words “plot” and “parcel".
Some definitions apply to specific Sections and are noted with a ( ) after the definition. For
example, Recreational Vehicle applies to recreational vehicles in general, while Recreational
Vehicle (Flood) is applicable to those recreational vehicles located in a Flood Hazard area.
Abut: Contiguous to, for example, two lots with a common property line. However, "abut” does
not apply to buildings, uses or properties separated by public rights-of-way.
Abutting property owners and occupants (Mobile Food Service): An owner or occupant of
property which abuts the subject site, excluding public right-of-way.
Access: The place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have ingress and/or
egress to a property or parking space.
Accessible Route (Mobile Food Service): A continuous unobstructed path of travel connecting
all publicly accessible elements and spaces of a building or facility.
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU): An interior, attached or detached residential structure with
kitchen, bathroom and living areas that is subordinate to and used in connection with or is
accessory to a single-family dwelling on the same lot or parcel
Accessory Structure: A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to the
main building or use of the land. An accessory structure does not include habitable living
space.
Accessory Use: A use or activity that is a subordinate part of a primary use and that
is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site.
6
Administrative Official: The city administrator is designated by the Council as the
Administrative Official to administer and enforce this ordinance. The city administrator may
designate others to provide assistance.
Alteration, Structural: Any change or repair which would affect or materially change a
supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beam, or girder.
Appeal: A request for a review of a decision that interprets and applies any provision of this
ordinance.
Area of shallow flooding: A designated Zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH on a community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to
an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR. “Special flood hazard area” is
synonymous in meaning and definition with the phrase “area of special flood hazard”.
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
Base flood elevation (BFE): The elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the
base flood.
Basement (Flood): Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on
all sides.
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
Base flood elevation (BFE): The elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the
base flood.
Basement/Cellar: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is partly below and
partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is
equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. If such portion of a building
is not a basement, then it shall be considered a story. (See Section 1, Story, see also
Illustrations.)
Basement (Flood): Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on
all sides.
Block: An area of land containing one or more lots or parcels surrounded by streets, railroad
rights-of -way, unsubdivided acreage or combination thereof.
Buildable Area: The portion of a lot remaining after the required yards have been provided.
7
Child Day Care Home: The home of a childcare provider of 12 or fewer children. For state of
Oregon requirements contact the Children’s Services Division.
Child Day Care Center: A facility which provides childcare, pre-school, or kindergarten for 13 or
more children.
Clearances (Mobile Food Service): Clearances as referenced in this section are measured
horizontally from the outside edge of the subject property line to any obstruction on the ground
greater than one-half inch in height, or to an adjacent projection.
Club: An organization, group, or association supported by the members, the purpose of which
is to render a service primarily for members and their guests, but shall not include any
organization, group or association the chief activity of which is to render a service customarily
carried on as a business.
Commission: The city of Aumsville Planning Commission.
Council: The city of Aumsville City Council.
Covenant: A written agreement or promise under seal between two or more parties especially
for the performance of some action.
Criteria: A general rule or specific standard test on which a judgment or decision can be based.
Cul-de-sac: A short street which has one end open to traffic and being terminated by a vehicle
turn-around.
Density: The number of living units per acre of land.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to construction, installation or change of a building or other structures, land division,
establishment or termination of a right to access, storage on the land, drilling and site alteration
such as that due to land surface mining, dredging, paving, excavation or clearing.
Development (Flood): Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Development Permit: A permit issued by the city for a particular development in compliance
with this ordinance and the Comprehensive PIan.
Development Plan: A plan adopted by the commission for the guidance of growth and
improvement of the city. The Commission may make adjustments in any such plan from time to
time to meet unanticipated problems and conditions affecting the public and landowners.
Development Site: A tract of land either unsubdivided or consisting of two or more contiguous
lots of record which on the effective date of this ordinance or subsequently, came under single
or common ownership and continued to be so owned at the time a development permit was
applied for.
8
Dwelling: A building or part thereof designed for, used for residential occupancy, and
containing one or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, Accessory: See Accessory Dwelling Unit.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A residential building or group of buildings on a single lot designed
for or occupied by three or more families, with the number of families in residence not
exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A detached residential dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one
family only.
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached: A residential dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one
family only which is attached by a common wall at the lot line to a similar unit on a separate lot.
Dwelling, Duplex, or Two Family: A detached residential building containing two dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms constituting a separate, independent housekeeping
establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease; and physically separated from any other
room or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent
cooking and sleeping facilities.
Easement: A record interest in land owned by another that entitles its holder to a specified
limited use.
Family: An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage or a group of not
more than five persons (excluding servants) not related by blood or marriage, living together in
a dwelling unit. Family shall include two or more handicapped persons as defined in the Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988 living as a single housekeeping unit. (According to the Act
"handicapped" means: with respect to a person; (1) a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; (2) a record of having such
an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not
include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, as defined in Section 102
of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
Flood or Flooding:
(A) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(3) Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in
paragraph (A)(2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on
the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of
water and deposited along the path of the current.
(B) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a
result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of
9
(C) nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this
definition.
Flood elevation study: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): See “Flood elevation study.”
Flood Plain: The area adjoining a stream that is subject to inundation by a regional flood.
Flood proofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway."
Floodway Fringe: The area of the flood plain lying outside of the floodway.
Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Garage, Private: A detached accessory building or portion of a dwelling for the parking or
temporary storage of resident vehicles or supplies and in which no business, occupation, or
service is provided for or is in any way conducted except as permitted by an approved home
occupation.
Garage, Public: A building, other than a private garage, used for the care, repair, or equipping
of motor vehicles, or where such vehicles are parked or stored for compensation, hire, or sale.
Group Care Facility: A private institution maintained and operated for the care, boarding and
training of sixteen or more persons who require special care, but does not include correctional
homes, detention facilities, or residential homes.
Height of Building: The vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished grade to the
highest point of the building’s wall. (See Illustrations).
10
Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure (Flood): Any structure that is:
(A) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(B) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(C) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
(D) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Home Occupations: An occupation, profession, craft or hobby, which is customarily incidental
to or carried on in a dwelling place or premises and not one in which the use of the premises as
a dwelling place is largely incidental to the occupation carried on, and which occupation is
carried on by an immediate member of the family residing within the dwelling place. Home
occupation activities include but are not limited to: dressmaking, lawyer, notary public, public
accountant, artist, writer, teacher, musician, home office of a physician, dentist or other
practitioner of any of the healing arts, or practices of any art or craft of a nature to be
conveniently, unobtrusively, and inoffensively pursued in a family dwelling.
House of Worship: A church, mosque, synagogue, temple, meeting house, or other
nonresidential building used primarily for religious worship. A house of worship may include
accessory buildings for related religious activities, but not kindergarten through grade 12 school
facilities.
Kennel: Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs and/or cats over the age of four
months are kept for sale, lease, boarding or racing.
Land Division: The creation of a lot or parcel of land through the process of subdividing or
partitioning land .
Landscaping or Landscaped Area: The lawn, ground cover plants, shrubs, annuals, perennials
and trees, or desirable native vegetation. It includes landscape elements including any
combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf
grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, plazas,
works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like. It also includes irrigation systems, mulches,
decorative rock ground cover, topsoil, and re-vegetation or the preservation, protection and
replacement of trees.
Loading/Unloading Space: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or
contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate
means of access.
11
Lot: A unit of land created by subdivision.
Lot Frontage: The front of a lot is the portion nearest the street. For the purposes of
determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to
streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under Yards in
this section.
Lot Lines: (See Illustrations)
(A) Front: The line separating the lot from the street and/or city right of way. Where no street
separations exists, it is the lot line which the architecturally designed front of the building
faces; and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the lot from the street on which the
improvements or contemplated improvements will face. In the case of a flag lot, the line
running parallel to the access road shall be considered the front yard line and shall be used
to calculate front yard setback requirements.
(B) Rear: A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an
irregular or triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line, for building purposes, shall be assumed
to be a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.
(C) Side: Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line. Interior side lot lines separate lots.
Exterior side lot lines separate a lot from the right of way.
Lot Measurement: (See Illustrations)
(A) Lot Area: The total area measured on a horizontal plane within the lines of a lot.
(B) Lot Depth: The horizontal distance between the front line and the rear lot line measured at
a point halfway between the side lot lines.
(C) Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to
the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot Types: (See Illustrations)
(A) Corner Lot: Any lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
(B) Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred
to as double frontage lots.
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
12
Magazine Parking: a physical situation where two or more parking spots abut at the ends of the
parking spots such that a vehicle parked in one spot cannot move unless a vehicle parked in the
other spot moves out of the way.
Manufactured Dwelling:
(A) A residential trailer, a structure constructed for movement on the public highways,
that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human
occupancy, is being used for residential purposes and, was not constructed in
accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards
(HUD code), in effect after June 15, 1976.
(B) Manufactured Home:
(1) For any purpose other than that set forth in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph,
“manufactured home” means a structure constructed for movement on the public
highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for
human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was
constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and
safety standards (HUD code) in effect after June 15, 1976; or
(2) For purposes of implementing any contract pertaining to manufactured homes
between the city and the federal government, “manufactured home” has the
meaning given the term in this contract.
"Manufactured dwelling” does not mean any building or structure subject to the structural
specialty code adopted pursuant to ORS 455.100 and 455.450 or any unit identified as a
recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.
Manufactured dwelling (Flood): A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation
when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured dwelling" does not include a
"recreational vehicle" and is synonymous with “manufactured home.”
Manufactured dwelling park or subdivision (Flood): A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale.
Manufactured Home Park: Any place where four or more manufactured homes or occupied
recreational vehicles are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land
under the same ownership; the primary purpose of which is to rent manufactured homes,
occupied recreational vehicles, or manufactured home space or keep the same for rent to any
person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or use of facilities or to offer space
free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person. Manufactured home
park does not include a lot or lots located within a subdivision being rented or leased for
occupancy by no more than one manufactured home per lot if the subdivision was approved
pursuant to Section 20.
Mature landscaping: Does not include seedlings, seeds, plugs or small plant starts. Shrubs and
plants must be mature size 3-5-gallon containers, grass must be established sod.
Mean sea level: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
13
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Medical Clinic: A building where one or more healthcare providers licensed by the State of
Oregon provide medical care. Further, there will be a licensed healthcare professional on duty
(on premise) during all hours open to patients/clients. All medical care shall be in compliance
with all local, state and federal laws/regulations. A properly licensed professional includes: MD,
DD, DC, DO, NP, ND, Acupuncturist, LMT, or other licensed health care professional.
Mobile food cart (Mobile Food Service): A vehicle that is propelled, or can be pulled or pushed
down a sidewalk, street, or highway, on which food is prepared, processed, or converted, or is
used in selling and dispensing food to the customer.
Modification, Major: A major modification to an approved permit or other land use decision
includes one or more of the changes listed below:
(A) A change in land use;
(B) An increase in the number of dwelling units;
(C) An increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than 25% where
previously specified;
(D) A reduction of more than 30% of the area reserved as open space;
(E) A reduction to specified setback requirements by more than 25%, or to a degree that
the minimum setback standards of the land use zone cannot be met; or
(F) Changes similar to those listed, which are likely to have an adverse impact on
adjoining properties.
Modification, Minor: A modification to a permit or other land use decision that is not a major
modification.
Modular Home: Factory-built housing certified as meeting the State Building Code as
applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state, modular homes shall be subject to
the same standards as site-built homes.
New construction: For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures
for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the City of Aumsville and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
Non-Conforming Structure: A structure that was lawfully placed prior to the effective date of
current standards for the structure but does not comply strictly with the current standards.
Lot: A unit parcel land legally created as a lot prior to the effective date of current land division
standards but does not conform to current standards for the lot size, area, or dimensions for the
zone in which it is located.
Use: A use that was lawfully established prior to the adoption of current list of allowed uses in a
zone and that does not comply with uses.
Operator of mobile food cart (Mobile Food Service): Any person, partnership, corporation,
14
association, or other business entity operating a mobile food unit.
Owner: The owner of record of real property as shown on the latest tax rolls or deed records of
the county, or a person who is purchasing a parcel of property under written contract.
Parking Area, Public: An open area , building or structure, other than a street or alley used for
the parking of automobiles, and other motor vehicles, but not to include trucks, and available for
use by the public or by persons patronizing a particular building or establishment.
Partition: Dividing of a lot or parcel into 2 or 3 parcels in a calendar year .
Plat: The map, drawing or chart on which the plan of subdivision or partition is presented and
which is submitted for approval and which in final form would be recorded.
Property owner (Mobile Food Service): Owner or agent of a private property where mobile food
units are proposed to be located.
Public Need: A conclusion based on the presentation of factual evidence which demonstrates
that a particular request for a change is in the best interest of the public, for social, economic,
and environmental reasons.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle with or without motive power; that is designed for human
occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal, or emergency purposes; and
specifically includes camping trailers, camping vehicles, motor homes, recreational park trailers,
bus conversions, van conversions, tent trailers, travel trailers, truck campers, combination
vehicles which include a recreational vehicle use, and any vehicle converted for use or partial
use as a recreational vehicle. Recreational Vehicles contain eating and sleeping facilities.
Recreational vehicle (Flood): A vehicle which is:
(A) Built on a single chassis;
(B) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(C) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(D) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regional Flood: Inundation during periods of higher than normal stream flows, high tides, or
combination thereof, that has a one percent chance of occurrence in any single year (100 Year
Flood).
Reserve Strip: A strip of land, usually one foot in width, reserved across the end of a street and
terminating at the boundary of a subdivision or a strip of land between a dedicated street of less
than full width and adjacent acreage, in either case reserved or held for future street extension
and widening.
Residential Facility: A private institution providing care, treatment, training for six to fifteen
individuals who need not be related, but does not include correctional homes, detention
facilities, or residential homes.
15
Residential Home: Means a residence for 5 or fewer unrelated persons who are physically or
mentally handicapped and for staff persons in addition to residents.
Right-of-Way: The area between boundary lines of a street or other easement.
Setback: The distance between a structure foundation and a lot line. Setback distance shall be
measured perpendicular to all portions of a lot line.
Signs: Any writing, including letter, word, or numeral; pictorial presentation, including mural,
illustration or decoration; emblem, including device, symbol or trademark; flag, including banner or
pennant; or any other device, figure or similar thing which is a structure or any part thereof, or is
attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building or structure or device;
and is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise; and is visible from any public right-ofway.
Sign does not include house numbers. For purposes of Section 19.00 et seq., the following
definitions apply:
Building Frontage: For the purpose of determining allowable sign area in a commercial district,
the building frontage is the full width of the building wall where the primary customer entrance is
located. This is generally facing the public street, but may face
an internal parking lot. If there is more than one major customer
entrance with entrances on differing frontages, only the single
longest frontage is used to determine allowable sign area.
Canopy Sign: A sign hanging from a canopy or eave, at any
angle relative to the adjacent wall, the lowest portion of which is
at least 8 feet above the underlying grade.
Flashing Sign: A sign any part of which pulsates or blinks on
and off.
Free-Standing Sign: A sign supported by one or more uprights,
poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground, or a sign
supported by any structure primarily for the display and support
of the sign and may include a free-standing monument sign.
Graffiti: Markings, such as initials, slogans, or drawings, written, spray-painted, or
sketched on a sidewalk, wall of a building, or public restroom, or the like.
Incidental Signs: A sign, not temporary, which is normally
incidental to the allowed use of the property, but can contain
any message or content. Such signs can be used for, but are
not limited to, A-frame or sandwich board signs, nameplate
signs, warning or prohibition signs, and directional signs not
otherwise allowed.
Indirect Illumination: A source of illumination directed toward
such sign so that the beam of light falls upon the exterior
surface of the sign.
Figure 1 - Free Standing Sign
Figure 2 - Indirect Illumination
16
Integrated Shopping Center: a unified complex with three or more commercial establishments
occupying three or more distinct spaces in a single building or three or more freestanding
buildings on a single property or on separate properties but with the business frontages all
facing a common parking area.
Message Sign: A sign which can change its message electronically and is designed to display
various messages, including but not limited to signs displaying time and temperature.
Monument Sign: A square or rectangular sign that sits directly on the ground without pole or
uprights located at the entrance to a shopping center, business park, or residential development.
Off-Site Sign: A sign which advertises goods, products,
businesses, services, or facilities which are not sold,
manufactured, or distributed on or from the property or
facilities on which the sign is located, and which is
supported by a substantial permanent sign structure with
a display surface or display surfaces designated
primarily for the purpose of painting or posting a
message thereon at periodic intervals.
Portable Sign: Any sign that is not originally designed to
be permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. A sign
originally designed, regardless of its current modification, to be moved from place
to place. These signs primarily include, but are not limited to, signs attached to
wood or metal frames and designed to be self-supporting and movable, and also
including trailer reader boards. Portable signs are not to be considered temporary
signs as defined and used in this ordinance.
Projecting Sign: A sign the face of which is not parallel to the wall on which it is
mounted, projecting more than 12 inches from a structure.
Roof Sign: A sign or any portion of which is displayed above
the highest point of the roof, whether or not such a sign also
is a wall sign.
Sign Alteration or Altered: Any change in the size, shape,
method or illumination, position, location, construction, or
supporting structure of a sign. A change in sign copy or sign
face alone shall not be considered an alteration.
Figure 3 - Portable Signs
Figure 4 –
Projecting Sign
Figure 5 - Roof signs
17
Sign Area: The area of a sign shall be the entire area within
any type of perimeter or border which encloses the outer
limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or
character. If the sign is enclosed in a frame or cabinet, the
area is based on the inner dimensions of the frame or
cabinet surrounding the sign face. When a sign is on a base
material and attached without a frame, such as a wood
board or Plexiglas panel, the dimensions of the base
material are to be used. The area of a sign having no such
perimeter, border, or base material shall be computed by
enclosing the entire area within a parallelogram or a triangle
of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire message of the sign and computing the area of
the parallelogram or the triangle. For the purpose of computing the number of signs, all writing
included within such a border shall be considered one sign, except for multi-faced signs on a
single sign structure, which shall be counted as one sign per structure. The area of multi-faced
signs shall be calculated by including only 1/2 the total area of all sign faces.
Temporary Sign: A new business is allowed a temporary sign
for a period of 90 days. This sign must be constructed in a
professional manner such as a printed banner, a frame or
sandwich board sign. Temporary signs cannot exceed the
facilities allowable sign square footage. Within that time a sign
permit must be obtained to replace with permitted signage.
Wall Sign: A sign attached to, erected against or
painted on a wall of a building or structure, with the
exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately
parallel to the face of said wall and not projecting
more than 12 inches. A sign painted on an awning in
which the face of the sign is approximately parallel to
and within 3.5 feet of the wall shall also be
considered a wall sign.
Special flood hazard area: See “Area of special flood hazard” for this definition.
Start of construction (Flood): Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of
the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured dwelling on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
Figure 6 - Sign Area
Figure 8 – Wall Sign
Figure 7 - Temporary Sign
18
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Story: That portion of building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and ceiling or roof above. If the
finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused under-floor space is more than
6 feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused
under-floor space shall be considered a story. (See Definitions, Basement/Cellar. See also
Illustrations).
Street: A public road; or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned, other than an alley;
which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way,
drive, land, boulevard, highway, road, and other thoroughfare. The word “street” shall include
all arterial highways, freeways, traffic collector streets, road systems, and local streets.
Structure: Anything constructed or built, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work
artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Structure (Flood): For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including
a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
dwelling.
Subdivision: Dividing a parcel of land into 4 or more lots.
Substantial Conformance: When a final plat meets all the conditions of preliminary plat approval
and no characteristic that met City standards in the approved preliminary plan is varied to the
extent that a City standard is no longer met. The final plat also has no more lots than approved in
the preliminary plan; streets are generally in the same number, location, and alignment as
approved in the preliminary plan; and open spaces are generally in the same location and of the
same size as was in the approved preliminary plan.
Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement (Flood): Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(A) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
(B) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a "historic structure.”
19
Trailers, Travel or Vacation: A vehicle equipped with wheels for highway use that is intended
for occupancy which is not being used for residential purposes and is being used for vacation
and recreation purposes. For the purposes of this ordinance, a travel trailer shall not be
considered as a mobile home.
Vehicle: A unit designed and built to transport people or objects from one place to another.
Wrecking or Junk Yard: A lot used for the storage or sale of used automobile parts or for the
storage, dismantling, or abandonment of junk, obsolete automobiles, trailers, trucks, machinery,
or parts.
Variance (Flood): A grant of relief by the City of Aumsville from the terms of a flood plain
management regulation.
Violation (Flood): The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this
ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Yard: Any open space, which is required, created or is maintained on a lot.
Yard, Front: The yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the
minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel to the foundation of
the main building.
Yard, Side: The yard between the primary building and the side lot line extending from the front
yard to the rear property line.
Yard, Rear: The yard extending across the full width of the lot, between the rear property line
and the nearest point of the primary building on the same lot.
20
SECTION 2.00
Establishment of Zones: Provisions for Official Zoning Map
2.01 Official Zoning Map
2.02 Official Zoning Map Changes
2.03 Official Zoning Map Copies
2.04 Replacement of Official Zoning Map
21
SECTION 2.00
Establishment of Zones: Provisions for Official Zoning Map
2.01 Official Zoning Map: The city of Aumsville is hereby divided into zones as shown on the
Official Zoning Map which together with all explanatory matter, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
The Official Zoning Map of the city of Aumsville shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor, attested by the Administrative Official, and bearing the seal of the city under the
following words: “THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THIS IS THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
REFERRED TO IN SECTION 2.00 OF ORDINANCE NUMBER 670 OF THE CITY OF
AUMSVILLE, OREGON” together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance.
2.02 Official Zoning Map Changes: If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance,
changes are made in zone boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning
Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the
amendment has been approved by the Council, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map,
as follows: “ON (date), BY OFFICIAL ACTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL, THE
FOLLOWING CHANGES WERE MADE IN THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP: (cite nature of
change),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the city
administrator.
2.03 Official Zoning Map Copies: The Official Zoning Map, which shall be located in city hall,
shall be in the final authority as to the current zoning of land and water areas, buildings,
and other structures in the city.
2.04 Replacement of Official Zoning Map: In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of
changes and additions, the Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map
which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may
correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such
correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any
subsequent amendments.
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior
map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all
available records pertaining to its adoption or amendments.
22
23
SECTION 3.00
Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries
3.01 Rules
24
SECTION 3.00
Rules for Interpretation of Zone Boundaries
3.01 Rules: Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(A) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways,
or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines.
(B) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
(C) Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as
following such city limits.
(D) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway
between the train tracks.
(E) Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore
lines, and in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with
the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines
of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow
such center lines.
(F) Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the map.
(G) The Commission shall interpret the zoning boundaries.
(H) Where a zone boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of
passage of this ordinance, the Commission may adjust the line without resorting to a
rezone procedure.
(I) Specific Description. Where a Plan map designation or zoning action referenced a
specific property description, that description shall establish the boundary. Where two
or more property descriptions establish conflicting boundaries, the most recent
description shall govern.
25
SECTION 4.00
Application of Zoning Regulations
4.01 Purpose and Intent
4.02 Minimum Requirements
4.03 Maintenance of Ordinance Requirements
4.04 Effects on Other Requirements
4.05 Establishment of Major Zoning Districts
4.06 Overlay Districts
4.07 Access
4.08 Conformance and Permits Required
4.09 Authorization or Similar Uses
4.10 Non-Conforming Uses
4.11 Non-Conforming Building
4.12 Non-Conforming Lot or Parcel Lot
26
SECTION 4.00
Application of Zoning Regulations
4.01 Purpose and Intent: The purpose of this ordinance is to implement the City of Aumsville
Comprehensive Plan, as acknowledged by the Land Conservation and Development
Commission on May 3, 1979, through the coordination of the regulations governing the
use and development of land; and, it is further the intent that all use and development of
land within the city of Aumsville be consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan and
with all other applicable county, state and federal regulations.
4.02 Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance
within each zone, the provisions shall be minimum requirements and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.
4.03 Maintenance of Ordinance Requirements: No lot area, yard, or other open space,
required off-street parking or loading area or other site condition existing on or after the
effective date of this ordinance shall be reduced in area, dimension or size below the
minimum required by this ordinance, nor shall any site condition which is required by this
ordinance for one development be used to meet a requirement for any other
development, except as authorized.
4.04 Effects on Other Requirements: This ordinance shall not repeal, impair or modify private
covenants or other public laws, except that it shall apply whenever it imposes stricter
regulations.
4.05 Establishment of Major Zoning Districts: All lands within the city of Aumsville is within
one of the zoning districts as set forth in this ordinance and shown on the Official Zoning
Map. Abbreviated notations of the district has the same meaning as the entire
classification title.
4.06 Overlay Districts:
(A) Overlay districts may be combined with any major zoning district.
(B) The requirements of an overlay district apply in addition to the major zoning district.
(C) Conflicts of regulations and standards are resolved to the more restrictive
requirements.
4.07 Access: Every dwelling and every main building other than a dwelling on a lot with less
than 30 feet of public street frontage shall have direct vehicular access to a public street
or approved private street. Provisions related to access spacing standards between
streets and/or driveways is provided in Section 22 Supplementary Zone Regulations,
Access Spacing Standards.
4.08 Conformance and Permits Required: No new building structure or manufactured home
shall be used or occupied; and no building or part shall be erected, constructed, moved,
altered, or enlarged unless in conformity with all the regulations specified for the zone in
27
which it is located, and then only after applying for, securing and complying with all
permits, agreements, licenses and paying the fees required by all laws and this
ordinance. The granting of a permit by the city shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee or warranty of the suitability of lands, practicability or safety of any structure,
use, or other plan proposed.
4.09 Authorization or Similar Uses: The Planning Commission, Administrator, or other person
designated by the Administrator may permit in a zone, a use not listed in this ordinance,
provided the use is of the same general type as the uses permitted there by this
ordinance. However, this section does not authorize a use specifically listed in another
zone or which is of the same general type and is similar to a use specifically listed in
another district.
4.10 Non-Conforming Uses: A non-conforming use may be continued, but not replaced by
another non-conforming use. A non-conforming use, if discontinued for a period of six
months, may not be resumed.
4.11 Non-Conforming Building: A non-conforming building may be continued and maintained
but shall not be altered or expanded. All maintenance and repairs shall conform to
applicable building code requirements. A non-conforming building damaged or
destroyed by fire, flood, wind, or other acts of God may be restored if such restoration
conforms to all applicable building code requirements and provided a building permit for
the restoration shall be obtained within one year from the date of the destruction of the
building.
4.12 Non-Conforming Lot or Parcel Lot: If, at the time of adoption of the applicable
standards, a lot or parcel, or the aggregate of contiguous lots or parcels held in a single
ownership, has an area or dimension that does not meet minimum size requirements,
the lot, parcel or aggregate holdings may be developed subject to all other requirements,
and providing, if there is an area deficiency, residential use shall be limited to a singlefamily
residence.
28
SECTION 5.00
RS – Residential Single-Family
Purpose: The single-family residential zone is intended to preserve and protect the
development of residential uses that are exclusively owner occupied; single lot
development that enhances the livability of the city. It is further intended and
recognized that certain accessory uses and activities will be permitted and that
there are compatible and necessary uses to be permitted only through a public
hearing process that will insure their acceptability by the public.
5.01 Uses Permitted Outright
5.02 Accessory Uses and Structures
5.03 Conditional Uses
5.04 Minimum Lot Area
5.05 Minimum Lot Width
5.06 Maximum Lot Coverage
5.07 Minimum Setbacks
5.08 Maximum Height of Structure
5.09 Parking
5.10 General Requirements
29
SECTION 5.00
RS – Residential Single-Family
5.01 Uses Permitted Outright:
(A) Single-family dwellings;
(B) Accessory Dwelling Unit (one per detached single-family dwelling), subject to the
provisions in Section 22;
(C) Public right-of-way;
(D) Home occupations;
(E) Child day care home;
(F) Residential home;
(G) Manufactured home.
5.02 Accessory Uses and Structures, subject to Section 22, including:
(A) Garages and carports;
(B) Garden;
(C) Fences and Walls (subject to Section 22);
(D) Home occupations;
(E) Greenhouses, hot houses;
(F) Utility buildings.
5.03 Conditional Uses:
(A) Parks and playgrounds;
(B) Schools;
(C) Private swimming pool;
(D) Public and semi-public uses and structures;
(E) Child day care center;
(F) House of worship and the reasonable use of the real property for activities
customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity, including but not
limited to the uses set forth in Section 22;
(G) Residential facility;
(H) Other similar developments that the city may find to be similar to those listed as
permitted in this zone and which are not inconsistent with its purpose.
5.04 Minimum Lot Area: 7,000 square feet.
5.05 Minimum Lot Width: 70 feet.
5.06 Maximum Lot Coverage: 45 percent, all principal and accessory structures.
5.07 Minimum Setbacks:
(A) Front: 20 feet
(B) Side, Interior: 5 feet – one story; 8 feet – two stories
(C) Side, Adjacent to Street: 20 feet
(D) Rear: 5 feet – one story; 8 feet – two stories
30
5.08 Maximum Height of Structure: 35 feet or 2 ½ stories for approved public and semi-public
uses.
5.09 Parking:
(A) A minimum of 2 off-street parking spaces are required for each single-family
residence;
(B) One off-street parking space is required for an Accessory Dwelling Unit with an
area under 400 square feet. Two off-street parking spaces are required for an
Accessory Dwelling Unit with an area equal to or in excess of 400 square feet.
Required parking for Accessory Dwelling Units is in addition to the parking
requirement for the primary single-family dwelling.
(C) Public and semi-public uses requiring off-street parking shall be determined by the
Commission based upon the requirements of Section 18.00, Off-Street Parking,
and Loading, of this ordinance.
5.10 General Requirements: Single-family dwellings, Accessory Dwelling Units, and
manufactured homes shall meet the following requirements:
(A) It is required that the owner of the property and of the dwelling be the same
person(s).
(B) Dwellings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of not less than 3/12 (i.e., a vertical
rise of 3 inches for every 12 inches of horizontal run/span).
(C) Dwellings shall utilize at least five of the following design features to provide visual
relief along the front of the home:
(1) Dormers
(2) Roof gables (excluding dormer gables) with a minimum 18" projection
(3) Recessed entries
(4) Covered porches entry with same roofing as home
(5) Pillar or posts at front entry
(6) Bay or Bow windows
(7) Eaves (minimum 18" projection)
(8) Off sets on building face or roof (minimum 16")
(9) Shutters, as a matched pair for windows, either decorative, fixed or movable
(10) Balconies or decks of at least 2-foot depth and 5 feet in width, accessed by a door
and enclosed by railing or parapet
(11) Exterior wall (or portion) and/or chimney of brick, stone, composite, masonry, or
other similar materials
(D) External systems for heating and cooling shall be installed only at ground level, and
not within the required front yard.
(E) All hitches, travel light/clearance lights, wheels, axles are to be removed from the
exterior of dwellings.
(F) A manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than
1,000 square feet.
(G) A manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated, prepared level site and
supported on a continuous concrete footing. After setting and blocking, the home
shall be enclosed at the entire perimeter with a standard finish concrete block set
on the continuous concrete footing. After backfilling as required, the bottom of the
home shall be no more than 12” above the surrounding finished grade. All
foundation, blocking, pier, and footing requirements in addition to those outlined in
this paragraph shall conform to Marion County Building Code requirements.
31
(H) A manufactured home shall incorporate not fewer than four architectural features
per dwelling unit from 1-11 below. Applicants are encouraged to use those
elements that best suit the proposed building style and design.
(1) Covered front porch: not less than six feet in depth and not less than 30 percent
of the width of dwelling, excluding the landing for dwelling entrance;
(2) Dormers: minimum of two required for each single-family dwelling and one each
for other dwellings; must be a functional part of the structure, for example,
providing light into a living space;
(3) Recessed entrance: not less than three feet deep;
(4) Windows: not less than 30 percent of surface area of all street-facing
elevation(s);
(5) Window trim: minimum four-inch width (all elevations);
(6) Eaves: overhang of not less than 12 inches;
(7) Offset: offset in façade or roof;
(8) Bay window: projects from front elevation by 12 inches;
(9) Balcony: one per dwelling unit facing street;
(10)Decorative top: e.g., cornice or pediment with flat roof or brackets with pitched
roof;
(11) Other: feature not listed but providing visual relief or contextually appropriate
design similar to options 1-11, as approved by the Aumsville Planning Commission
through a Type II procedure.
A manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior
thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce levels equivalent to
the performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under
the state building code as defined in ORS 455.010.
32
SECTION 6.00
RM – Residential Multi-Family
Purpose: It is the intent of the RM – Residential Multi-Family zone to provide for more
concentrated and diverse living arrangements.
6.01 Uses Permitted Outright
6.02 Accessory Uses and Structures
6.03 Conditional Uses
6.04 Minimum Lot Area
6.05 Minimum Lot Width
6.06 Maximum Lot Coverage
6.07 Minimum Yard Requirements
6.08 Maximum Height of Structure
6.09 Parking
6.10 General Requirements
6.11 Manufactured Home Parks General Requirements
6.12 Manufactured Home Park Minimum Site Requirements
6.13 Standards of Mobile Homes in Manufactured Home Parks
33
SECTION 6.00
RM – Residential Multi-Family
6. 01 Uses Permitted Outright:
(A) Single-family dwelling;
(B) Accessory Dwelling Unit (one per detached single-family dwelling), subject to the
provisions in Section 22;
(C) Duplexes; triplexes;
(D) Apartments;
(E) Rooming and boarding houses;
(F) Public right-of-way;
(G) Home occupations;
(H) Child day care home;
(I) Residential home;
(J) Manufactured home, subject to the general requirements of Section 6.11;
(K) Manufactured home parks;
Proposed manufactured home parks must satisfy the requirements set forth in
Sections 6.12; 6.13; and 6.14 of this ordinance, and these criteria must be addressed
at the public hearings by the applicant when processing an application for site
development review; and within manufactured home parks only the following uses
are permitted outright:
(1) Manufactured homes and occupied recreational vehicles, if lawfully connected to
City water supply systems and sewage disposal systems and placed on a
designated manufactured home space;
(2) A caretaker dwelling, recreation building, a manager office, or other general use
buildings needed for operations typical of a manufactured home park.
(L) Residential facilities.
6.02 Accessory Uses and Structures: (Subject to Section 22)
(A) Garages and carports;
(B) Off-street parking lots;
(C) Storage buildings or areas for boats, campers, and trailers;
(D) Fences and Walls (Subject to Section 22);
(E) Gardens, greenhouses, and hot houses.
6.03 Conditional Uses:
(A) Group care facilities;
(B) Public and semi-public uses and structures;
(C) Hospitals;
(D) All uses listed under Section 5, (Residential Single-Family);
(E) House of worship and the reasonable use of the real property for activities
customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity, including, but not
limited to, the uses set forth in Section 22;
(F) Single-family attached dwelling: In addition to the criteria of Section 14, conditionally
permitted single-family attached dwellings shall not be approved unless the proposal
satisfies the following specific criteria:
34
(1) The minimum lot size shall be 4000 square feet.
(2) Attached single-family dwellings shall meet the requirements of enclosing a space
of not less than 1,000 square feet.
(3) Each dwelling shall have a garage.
(G) Other similar developments that the city may find to be similar to those listed as
permitted in this zone and which are not inconsistent with its purpose.
6.04 Minimum Lot Area:
(A) 8,000 square feet;
(B) 1,000 square feet for each dwelling unit over 2;
(C) Group care facilities; 8,000 square feet plus 500 square feet for each patient over 4.
(D) Single-family attached dwellings: 4,200 square feet, subject to approved conditional
use (See Section 6.03).
6.05 Minimum Lot Width:
(A) 80 feet.
(B) Single-family attached dwellings: 40 feet.
6.06 Maximum Lot Coverage:
(A) 50 percent.
6.07 Minimum Yard Requirements:
(A) Front: 20 feet;
(B) Side, Interior: One story, 5 feet;
Two story, 7 feet;
Three story, 8 feet;
Four stories and above, 8 feet plus 1 foot for each story over 3.
(C) Rear Yard: 10 feet plus 1 foot for each story over 3.
(D) Single-Family Attached Dwelling: No setback is required along the interior lot line
where the unit is attached to an adjacent single-family- attached unit on a separate
lot.
6.08 Maximum Height of Structure:
(A) Residential: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories;
(B) Approved Public and Semi-Public Uses: 70 feet or 6 stories.
6.09 Parking:
(A) A minimum of 2 off-street parking spaces are required for each dwelling unit;
(B) One off-street parking space is required for an accessory dwelling unit with an area
under 400 square feet. Two off-street parking spaces are required for an accessory
dwelling unit with an area equal to, or in excess of 400 square feet. Required parking
for accessory dwelling units is in addition to the parking requirement for the primary
single-family dwelling.
(C) Public and semi-public and conditional uses requiring off-street parking shall be
determined by the Commission based upon the requirements of the Off-Street
Parking and Loading section of this ordinance (See Section 18.00).
35
6.10 General Requirements: Single-family dwellings, attached single family dwellings,
accessory dwelling units, duplexes and manufactured homes shall meet the following
requirements:
(A) Dwellings shall have a pitched roof with a slope of not less than 3/12 (i.e., a vertical
rise of 3 inches for every 12 inches of horizontal run/span).
(B) Dwellings shall utilize at least five of the following design features to provide visual
relief along the front of the home:
(1) Dormers
(2) Roof gables (excluding dormer gables) with a minimum 18" projection
(3) Recessed entries
(4) Covered porches entry with same roofing as home
(5) Pillar or posts at front entry
(6) Bay or Bow windows
(7) Eaves (minimum 18" projection)
(8) Off sets on building face or roof (minimum 16")
(9) Shutters, as a matched pair for windows, either decorative, fixed or movable
(10) Balconies or decks of at least 2-foot depth and 5 feet in width, accessed by a door
and enclosed by railing or parapet
(11) Exterior wall (or portion) and/or chimney of brick, stone, composite, masonry, or
other similar materials
(C) External systems for heating and cooling shall be installed only at ground level and
not within the required front yard.
(D) All hitches, travel light/clearance lights, wheels, axles are to be removed from the
exterior of dwellings.
(E) A manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a space of not less than
1,000 square feet.
(F) A manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated, prepared level site and
supported on a continuous concrete footing. After setting and blocking, the home
shall be enclosed at the entire perimeter with a standard finish concrete block set on
the continuous concrete footing. After backfilling as required, the bottom of the home
shall be no more than 12” above the surrounding finished grade. All foundation,
blocking, pier, and footing requirements in addition to those outlined in this paragraph
shall conform to Marion County Building Code requirements.
(G) A manufactured home shall incorporate not fewer than four architectural features per
dwelling unit from 1-11 below. Applicants are encouraged to use those elements that
best suit the proposed building style and design.
(1) Covered front porch: not less than six feet in depth and not less than 30 percent
of the width of dwelling, excluding the landing for dwelling entrance;
(2) Dormers: minimum of two required for each single-family dwelling and one each
for other dwellings; must be a functional part of the structure, for example,
providing light into a living space;
(3) Recessed entrance: not less than 3 feet deep;
(4) Windows: not less than 30 percent of surface area of all street-facing elevation(s);
(5) Window trim: minimum 4-inch width (all elevations);
(6) Eaves: overhang of not less than 12 inches;
(7) Offset: offset in façade or roof;
(8) Bay window: projects from front elevation by 12 inches;
(9) Balcony: one per dwelling unit facing street;
36
(10) Decorative top: e.g., cornice or pediment with flat roof or brackets with pitched
roof;
(11) Other: feature not listed but providing visual relief or contextually appropriate
design similar to options 1-11, as approved by the Aumsville Planning
Commission through a Type II procedure.
(H) A manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior
thermal envelope meeting performance standards which reduce levels equivalent to
the performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under
the state building code as defined in ORS 455.010.
6.11 Manufactured Home Parks General Requirements:
(A) All manufactured home parks shall consist of a minimum of 5 acres.
(B) Each manufactured home space shall contain not less than 2,500 square feet.
Streets, play areas, service areas or other areas required by this ordinance shall not
be considered as providing any part of the required manufactured home space.
(C) The maximum density of a manufactured home park shall not exceed 12
manufactured home spaces per gross acre.
(D) A manufactured home park shall be built to state and federal standards in effect at
the time of construction, including American Disabilities Act standards.
(E) No manufactured home or occupied recreational vehicle in the park shall be located
closer than 10 feet from another manufactured home, occupied recreational vehicle,
or from a general use building in the park. No accessory building or other building or
structure on a manufactured home space shall be closer than 6 feet from an
accessory building or other building or structure on another manufactured home
space. No manufactured home shall be located closer than 16 +/- feet to the
boundary of a private street located within the park. Accessory buildings adjacent to
property lines see Setback Measurement in Section 22.
(F) There shall be no outdoor storage of furniture, tools, equipment, building materials, or
supplies belonging to the occupants or management of the park.
(G) The land, which is used for park purposes, shall be surrounded except at entry and
exit places, by a sight-obscuring fence or hedge not less than 6 feet in height. The
fence or hedge shall be maintained in a neat appearance.
(H) If the park provides for 25 or more manufactured home spaces, each vehicular way in
the park shall be named and marked with signs which are similar in appearance to
those used to identify public streets in the city. A map of the named vehicular ways
shall be provided to the city for notification to appropriate agencies.
(I) If a manufactured home space or permanent structure in the park is more than
300 feet from a public fire hydrant, the park shall have water supply mains designed
to serve fire hydrants and fire hydrants shall be provided within 300 feet of such
space or structure. Each hydrant within a park shall be located on a vehicular way
and shall conform in design and capacity to the public hydrants in the city.
6.12 Manufactured Home Park Minimum Site Requirements:
(A) The road system of the park shall be paved, improved with curb and gutter, and
connected to an existing public street according to plans approved.
(B) The improvements of driveways, walkways, streets, drainage, and other utilities shall
conform to adopted state standards or to adopted city standards, whichever is more
restrictive.
37
(C) The minimum surfaced width of the roads within the park shall be:
(1) 24 feet where no parking is allowed;
(2) 30 feet if parking is allowed on one side only; and
(3) 36 feet if parking is allowed on both sides.
(D) A minimum of 200 square feet per manufactured home space of outdoor recreation
area shall be provided which may be in one or more locations in the park.
(E) A minimum of 100 square feet per manufactured home space for unoccupied
recreational vehicles or other equipment storage used by park residents shall be
provided. Such areas are to be surfaced and drained, fenced, and lighted and
maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
(F) Each designated space, recreation building, managers office, or other public or
private structure shall be serviced by underground services of water, sewer, and
power.
(G) A minimum of 4-foot-wide walkways shall connect each manufactured home space
with public streets, adjacent public sidewalk systems, common areas, and recreation
areas.
(H) All streets and walkways within the park shall be lighted at night to provide a
minimum of 0.35-foot candles of illumination.
(I) Manufactured home pads and placement shall be in accordance with state building
codes requirements.
(J) At each entrance to a manufactured home park, a permanent, non-illuminated sign
not to exceed 32 square feet shall be allowed. Such sign shall display the name of
the park and shall show by map the layout of the sites and addresses or space
number of each manufactured home.
(K) Manufactured home spaces shall be indicated on the development plan and each
space clearly identified by number of the site. Such spaces shall not exceed the
density and coverage limitations of this ordinance. In the design of a manufactured
home park, it shall be demonstrated that planned spaces can reasonably
accommodate a variety of manufactured home types with accessory structures and
required setbacks.
(L) All common areas within a manufactured home park, exclusive of required buffer
areas, buildings and roadways, shall be landscaped and maintained. All
manufactured home spaces shall be landscaped within 6 months of manufactured
home placement.
(M)Manufactured home parks shall be designed to include 2 off-street parking spaces for
each manufactured home space, which may include a garage or carport space and
the driveway. In addition, one guest space shall be provided for every
5 manufactured home spaces in a park, which shall be provided in bays of at least
4 spaces. Office and common buildings shall be provided with 1 space for each
300 square feet of floor area which may be combined with required guest parking if
located within 300 feet of such building.
6.13 Standards of Manufactured Homes in Manufactured Home Parks: A manufactured
home and occupied recreational vehicle in a manufactured home park, in addition to
conforming to state installation standards, shall conform in the following:
(A) The manufactured home shall bear the Department of Housing and Urban
Development insignia indicating compliance with manufactured home construction
standards in effect at the time of manufacture and with a date not previous to
June 15, 1976.
38
(B) Notwithstanding deterioration which may have occurred due to misuse, neglect,
accident or other cause, the manufactured home shall meet the Department of
Housing and Urban Development Standards for manufactured home construction
evidenced by the insignia.
(C) Each manufactured home shall contain not less than 500 square feet of space as
determined by measurement of the exterior of the unit exclusive of any trailer hitch
device.
(D) Each manufactured home or occupied recreational vehicle shall be provided with a
continuous skirting and shall be tied down with devices that meet state standards and
tie-down devices.
(E) Occupied recreational vehicles require a placement permit from the City before a
vehicle can be connected to City sewer and water. Recreational vehicle may not
dump waste and waste chemicals into the Aumsville sewer system. Documentation
of proper dumping must be documented by the manufactured home park before a
placement permit is granted by the City.
39
SECTION 7.00
CL – Commercial
Purpose: The CL – Commercial zone is intended to maintain the business and limited
commercial activities to one area of the city, and to encourage the placement of a
variety of new businesses that offer a greater service to the residents of the city.
7.01 Uses Permitted Outright
7.02 Accessory Uses and Structures
7.03 Conditional Uses
7.04 Minimum Lot Area
7.05 Minimum Lot Width
7.06 Maximum Lot Coverage
7.07 Yard Requirements
7.08 Maximum Height of Structure
7.09 Parking and Loading
7.10 Business District
40
SECTION 7.00
CL – Commercial
7.01 Uses Permitted Outright:
The following uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of Site Development
Review (Section 21).
(A) Beauty or barber shop;
(B) Medical and dental offices;
(C) Banks;
(D) Furniture and appliance stores;
(E) Drugstores;
(F) Food stores;
(G) Sporting goods stores;
(H) Hardware;
(I) Television, video, stereo, computer and radio sales and service;
(J) Self-service laundromat or cleaners or pick-up and delivery station;
(K) Professional or business office or any use that is demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the city to be of a similar character and impact;
(L) Restaurant;
(M)Public right-of-way;
(N) Small animal clinic
(O) Child day care center;
(P) Retail establishment of similar character and impact as the above;
(Q) Apartments above a permitted ground floor commercial use.
(R) Residential facilities;
(S) A classroom and small instruction facility; other than a public or private elementary,
middle, or high school or college or university, or house of worship (see
Section 7.03).
(T) Mobile Food Services. See also Section 27.
7.02 Accessory Uses and Structures: (See Setbacks in Section 22)
No accessory uses or structures, containing more than 600 square feet of floor area, are
permitted outside of the main building or use without site development review approval
by the city.
7.03 Conditional Uses:
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in accordance with Section 14.
They are also subject to the provisions of Site Development Review (Section 21):
(A) Automobile service station, garage or car wash;
(B) Any establishment selling alcohol to be consumed on the premises;
(C) Amusement and recreation related businesses, such as bowling alley, pool halls, video
arcades, skating rinks, miniature golf, motion picture theaters;
(D) Equipment sale or rental yard;
(E) Hotel and motel;
(F) Public and semi-public uses;
(G) Gymnasium, athletic and health facilities;
41
(H) House of worship;
(I) Retail or wholesale trade (warehouse, distribution, and/or sales factory); or research
and development laboratory facility which meets the following additional
requirements:
(1) Total square footage of all areas for such use not to exceed 2000;
(2) Must comply with Section 8, but to a higher degree so as to be compatible with
surrounding commercial and residential uses.
(J) Other similar developments that the city may find to be similar to those listed, as
permitted in this zone, and which are not inconsistent with its purpose.
7.04 Minimum Lot Area: None required.
7.05 Minimum Lot Width: 20 feet.
7.06 Maximum Lot Coverage: Unrestricted.
7.07 Yard Requirements:
(A) Front: 3 feet (See Section 22);
(B) Where the commercial zone abuts a residential zone, interior yards shall be
provided equal to the minimum of the abutting residential yard(s).
7.08 Maximum Height of Structure: 6 stories or 70 feet.
7.09 Parking and Loading: See the Parking and Loading section of this ordinance (Section
18.00).
7.10 Business District:
(A) The Business District is defined as all commercial zoned properties contained within
the following boundaries:
(1) West of the railroad tracks, east of 5th Street, south of Church Street, and north of
the Mill Race.
(2) West of 5th Street, East of 11th Street, South of Church Street, and north of
Washington Street.
(B) Business District Design Standards. Buildings in the Business District must adhere to
the following additional requirements:
1. Orientation. Primary structures shall be oriented toward, and provide a public
entrance onto, the adjacent street.
2. Landscaping/pedestrian amenities. If a building is setback from an adjacent street,
at least 50% of the setback area shall be improved with pedestrian and landscaping
amenities. Permitted landscaping and pedestrian amenities include plants,
planters, shrubbery, benches, tables, etc.
3. Siding materials. At least 20% of the ground floor façade facing the street shall be
of a masonry construction, with the remaining solid finish in wood or masonry, or
such other material indistinguishable in appearance from wood or masonry. Such
wood type siding as horizontal lap, shingle, and board and batten are acceptable.
Acceptable wood substitutes such as vinyl, aluminum, and pressed wood product
shall only be permitted as a horizontal lap siding; vertical aluminum siding shall be
prohibited. Such masonry type siding as brick and stone are acceptable; stucco
material or concrete blocks are prohibited. Acceptable
42
masonry substitutes include masonry veneer and split concrete or other similar
material formed to simulate rock or brick.
4. Windows. At least 20% of the ground floor façade facing the street shall contain
window coverage.
5. Fencing shall be either black chain link, wrought iron or similar. Wooden fences
shall be permitted only through site development review.
6. All storage of materials and merchandise shall be located within a building; outdoor
storage shall be prohibited unless otherwise permitted through a site development
review.
43
SECTION 8.00
I – Industrial
Purpose: It is the intent of the I – Industrial zone, commensurate with the availability of
water and sewer facilities, to help attract industrial and commercial users that are
diversified, non-polluting and of the greatest opportunities for residents of the city
for employment while strengthening the city’s tax base.
8.01 Uses Permitted Outright, but not Limited to
8.02 Conditional Uses
8.03 Industrial Performance Standards
8.04 Minimum Lot Area
8.05 Minimum Lot Width
8.06 Maximum Lot Coverage
8.07 Maximum Height of Structure
8.08 Yard Requirements
8.09 Parking and Loading
44
SECTION 8.00
I – Industrial
8. 01 Uses Permitted Outright, but not Limited to:
(A) Agriculture and Forestry:
1. Agriculture production crops;
2. Forest nurseries and tree seed gathering and extracting.
(B) Construction:
1. Construction including building construction general contractors.
(C) Manufacturing:
1. Grain mill products;
2. Food preparation and kindred products;
3. Textile mill products;
4. Cabinet or carpentry shop;
5. Paperboard containers and boxes;
6. Printing, publishing and allied industries;
7. Glass, pottery, and related products;
8. Cut stone and stone products;
9. Cutlery, hand tools and general hardware;
10. Heating equipment and plumbing fixtures;
11. Manufactured housing;
12. Miscellaneous fabricated metal products;
13. Metalworking machinery and equipment;
14. Office, computing and accounting machines;
15. Refrigeration and service industry machinery;
16. Measuring, analyzing, and controlling instrument, photographic, medical and
optical goods, watches and clocks.
(D) Transportation and Electric Services:
1. Railroad transportation;
2. Local and suburban transit and interurban highway passenger transportation;
3. Motor freight transportation and warehousing;
4. Transportation services;
5. Electric services.
(E) Other Uses
Retail and Wholesale Trade:
1. Agriculture equipment sales and service, wholesale or retail;
2. Automobile, motorcycle, boat, trailer or truck rental, sales and service;
3. Lumber or building supplies equipment storage or sales, retail;
4. Storage or sales of frozen or refrigerated food;
5. Warehouse or wholesale distribution and sales factory;
6. Eating and drinking places;
7. Mobile Food Services. See also Section 27.
8. Mini-storage warehouses available to the public, including indoor or outdoor
recreational vehicle storage.
45
(F) Services:
1. Veterinary services;
2. Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography and stenographic
services;
3. Cleaning and maintenance services to dwellings and other buildings, not
elsewhere specified;
4. Welding repair;
5. Industrial machinery service;
(G) Public Administration:
1. Public and semi-public uses and structures.
(H) Other Uses:
1. Utilities - truck and equipment storage and parking and material storage yard;
2. Accessory buildings, structures and uses normal and incidental to the uses
permitted in this district;
3. Dwelling unit or guest room for a caretaker or watchman on the premises being
cared for or guarded;
4. Public right-of-way;
5. Other similar developments which the city may find to be similar to those listed as
permitted in this zone and which are not inconsistent with its purpose.
8.02 Conditional Uses:
(A) Agriculture:
1. Soil preparation services;
2. Crop services;
(B) Manufacturing:
1. Dairy products;
2. Canned and preserved fruits and vegetables;
3. Leather and leather products;
4. Transportation equipment;
5. Millwork, veneer, plywood, and structural wood members;
6. Rubber, concrete, gypsum, and plastic products;
7. Rolling, drawing, and extruding of nonferrous metals;
8. Metal forgings and stampings;
9. Engines and turbines;
10. Farm and garden machinery and equipment;
11. Energy plant.
(C) Services:
1. Laundry, cleaning, and garment services;
2. Research and development laboratories;
3. Vocational schools.
4. Automotive repair, services, and garages;
5. Child day care home and center;
6. Tire retreading and vulcanizing shop;
(D) Other Uses:
1. Recycling depots;
2. Planned industrial unit development;
46
8.03 Industrial Performance Standards: The discharge of solids, liquids, or gases which are
detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare causing injury to human, plant, or
animal life or to property is prohibited in this industrial zone. In an I zone no land or
structure shall be used or occupied unless therein continuing compliance with the
following standards:
(A) Heat, glare, and light:
1. All operations and facilities producing heat, glare, or light, including exterior
lighting, shall be so directed or shielded by walls, fences, evergreen plantings,
that such heat, glare, or light is not reflected onto adjacent properties or streets.
(B) Noise:
1. No noise or sound in an I zone shall be of a nature which will constitute a
nuisance as documented by the chief of police.
(C) Sewage:
1. No categorical wastewater discharges are allowed. Adequate provisions shall
be in place for the disposal of sewage and waste materials and such provisions
shall meet the requirements of the city of Aumsville sewage disposal system.
(D) Vibration:
1. No vibration other than that caused by highway vehicles and trains shall be
permitted which is discernible without instruments at or beyond the property line
for the use concerned.
8.04 Minimum Lot Area: None.
8.05 Minimum Lot Width: None.
8.06 Maximum Lot Coverage: None.
8.07 Maximum Height of Structure: 70 feet.
8.08 Yard Requirements: None.
8.09 Parking and Loading: See the Parking and Loading section of this ordinance (Section
18.00).
47
SECTION 9.00
P- Public
9.01 Purpose
9.02 Permitted Uses
9.03 Conditional Uses
9.04 Minimum Lot Area
9.05 Minimum Lot Width
9.06 Maximum Lot Coverage
9.07 Building Setbacks
9.08 Maximum Height of Structure
9.09 Signs
9.10 Parking and Loading
48
SECTION 9.00
P- Public
9.01 Purpose: To recognize existing public land uses and to provide for the development of
public services.
9.02 Permitted Uses: All uses listed below are subject to site development review procedures
pursuant to Section 21 of this ordinance.
(A) Public and private utility buildings and structures, including electric substations,
telephone exchanges, and communications antennas or towers.
(B) Publicly owned and operated facilities or structures, including government offices
and stations, and public use buildings.
(C) Governmental, educational, administrative, or public facility uses, including:
1. Public parks and recreation areas.
2. Public schools, including elementary, middle, and high schools.
3. Public storage yards for machinery, equipment, and other materials.
4. Sewer system and lagoon areas.
5. Water system facilities.
6. Uses clearly accessory and subordinate to the above.
9.03 Conditional Uses: All uses listed below are subject to conditional use approval
procedures pursuant to Section 14.00 of this ordinance, and require site development
review pursuant to Section 21.00.
(A) Public or private airport or heliport.
(B) Other similar development that the city finds are similar to those listed as permitted
in this zone and that are not inconsistent with its purpose.
9.04 Minimum Lot Area: Sufficient area to provide for the use and minimum required
setbacks.
9.05 Minimum Lot Width: None required.
9.06 Maximum Lot Coverage: Unrestricted.
9.07 Building Setbacks: The following setbacks shall apply to development within the public
zone:
(A) Any yard abutting a residential zone: 10 feet
9.08 Maximum Height of Structure: 50 feet.
9.09 Signs: Signs shall be subject to the requirements in Section 19.00.
9.10 Parking and Loading: Parking and loading shall be subject to the requirements in
Section 18.00.
49
SECTION 10.00
ID – Interchange Development Zone
10.01 Purpose
10.02 Permitted Use
10.03 Conditional Uses
10.04 Prohibited Activities
10.05 Performance Standards
10.06 Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions
10.07 Maximum Height of Structure
10.08 Setbacks
10.09 Design Requirements
10.10 Landscaping
10.11 Signs
10.12 Parking and Loading
10.13 Transportation Impact Analysis
10.14 Site Development Review Required
10.15 IAMP Compliance Required
50
SECTION 10.00
ID – Interchange Development Zone
10.01 Purpose: To provide for industrial, commercial, and office uses on property located at
the State Highway 22 interchange. The transportation amenities offered by Highway 22
will be a factor in attracting industrial and commercial users. However, the community
views the interchange area as the key entry point into the City. For this reason, the
quality of the site design will be emphasized. In providing for the development of the
interchange area, it is essential that the principal function of the intersection be
preserved.
10.02 Permitted Use: The following uses are permitted, subject to a Site Development Review
and conformance with the provisions in this Section. In interpreting this Section, following
uses are permitted, subject to a Site Development Review and conformance with the
provisions of the Aumsville Development Ordinance.:
(A) Industrial-Related Activities
1. Manufacturing: Light manufacturing, assembly, processing, packaging,
treatment, fabrication of goods or merchandise, and similar uses.
2. Research centers and laboratories.
3. Telecommunication centers, including call centers.
(B) Retail and Services
1. Offices.
2. Restaurants, delicatessens, snack shops, and other types of eating and
drinking establishments, including entertainment facilities accessory to the
establishment..
3. Banks and other financial institutions.
4. Business services, such as photocopy and mailing centers.
5. Traveler accommodations, including hotels and motels; but excluding
camping and recreational vehicle parks.
6. Professional offices including, but not limited to, medical, dental, veterinary,
engineering, and legal services. Veterinary clinics shall not provide on-site
services for farm animals.
7. Services, such as cleaning and maintenance services provided to dwellings
and other buildings.
8. Mobile Food Services (See also Section 27).
(C) Other Uses: Other uses, which the city may find to be similar to those listed as
permitted in this zone that are consistent with its purpose.
10.03 Conditional Uses: The following activities are conditionally allowed in the ID zone:
(A) Convenience stores.
(B) Service stations; but excluding repair facilities.
(C) Towing services; but excluding storage of vehicles.
(D) Retail activities that are designed to serve the community or region.
(E) Establishments serving liquor.
(F) House of worship
(G) Gymnasium
(H) Other uses determined by the Planning Commission to be of similar character or
51
to have similar impacts as those specified above.
Conditionally permitted uses shall not be approved unless the proposal satisfies the
following criteria:
(1) The proposal will be consistent with the provisions of the Development Ordinance,
the underlying land use zone, and other applicable policies of the city.
(2) Taking into account location, size, design and operation characteristics, the proposal
will have minimal adverse impact on the livability, value, and appropriate
development of abutting properties and the surrounding area compared to the impact
of development that is permitted outright.
(3) The location and design of the site and structures for the proposal will be as
attractive as the nature of the use and its setting warrants.
(4) The proposal will preserve assets of particular interest to the community.
10.04 Prohibited Activities: The following uses are prohibited in the ID Zone.
(A) Agriculture and Forestry:
(1) Agriculture production crops;
(2) Forest nurseries and tree seed gathering and extracting.
(B) Tanneries.
(C) Energy plant.
(D) Rendering plants.
(E) Wrecking, demolition, junk yards, including recycling firms.
(F) Waste transfer stations.
(G) Chemical manufacturing plants
(H) Cement, concrete, lime or gypsum manufacturing.
(I) Asphalt plants; aggregate plants.
(J) Fertilizer manufacturing or distribution.
(K) Manufacturing activities involving primary metal industries such as foundries/forge
shops, smelters, blast furnaces, boiler-works, and rolling mills; manufacture of
flammable, hazardous, or explosive materials; creosote and related products; coal tar
and related products
(L) Storage warehouses.
(M)Manufacture or storage of oil, gasoline, or petroleum products for distribution, not
including service stations.
(N) Commercial outdoor recreational uses, amusement parks, or sports arenas, not
including golf courses or country clubs.
(O) Truck, trailer, heavy machinery, or farm equipment storage.
(P) Any other use which is or can be operated in such a manner as to create a
dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, or other
hazard; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, or other forms of air pollution; electrical
or other disturbance; glare; or other substance, condition or element in such amount
as to adversely affect the surrounding area or premises, as may be determined by
the Planning Commission.
10.05 Performance Standards: The discharge of solids, liquids, or gases which are detrimental
to the public health, safety, and welfare causing injury to human, plant, or animal life or
to property is prohibited in the ID Zone. Further, no land or structure shall be used or
occupied unless therein continuing compliance with the following standards:
52
(A) Heat, glare, and light: All operations and facilities producing heat, glare, or light,
including exterior lighting, shall be so directed or shielded by walls, fences, evergreen
plantings, that such heat, glare, or light is not reflected onto adjacent properties or
streets.
(B) Noise: No noise or sound shall be of a nature, which will constitute a nuisance as
documented by the chief of police.
(C) Sewage: No categorical wastewater discharges are allowed. Adequate provisions
shall be in place for the disposal of sewage and waste materials and such provisions
shall meet the requirements of the city of Aumsville sewage disposal system.
(D)Vibration: No vibration other than that caused by highway vehicles and trains shall be
permitted which is discernible without instruments at or beyond the property line for
the use concerned.
10.06 Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions: None.
10.07 Maximum Height of Structure: 50 feet.
10.08 Setbacks:
(A) Highway 22: 30 feet
(B) Designated arterial or collector: 20 feet
(C) Local Street: 15 feet
(D) Side yard: 15 feet
(E) Rear yard: 15 feet
(F) Setback Exceptions: Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in this subsection,
the following exceptions apply:
(1) Setbacks from any street may be reduced by 5 feet when landscaping, screening
material, or other mitigation techniques are provided, to a degree greater than that
called for in this section, which effectively screen the parking areas and building
service areas from the street.
(2) Setbacks of up to zero feet along all local designated streets and property lines
may be provided in commonly planned projects which exhibit characteristics of an
urban village which includes extensive amenity areas, strong pedestrian, transit,
and bicycle orientation, varied and high quality building materials, complex and
interesting building massing, and extensive landscaping.
10.09 Design Requirements: Building design shall be subject to the following:
(A) Building material should be of high quality and attractive appearance using matte
texture earth tones. Masonry, brick, and stone in their natural state are preferred as
principal cladding materials. Textured concrete, architectural block, stucco,
modulated in jointed patterns, and pre-cast concrete with appropriate detailing are
also acceptable materials. Materials, detailing, and colors should be repeated on all
building facades.
(B) Unpainted or un-textured concrete or masonry, metal buildings, and unpainted metal
are prohibited.
(C) The use of roof or facade offsets or breaks is encouraged. Roof planes should be
varied. Facade lines should be broken at least every 40 feet on all building sides.
53
(D) All mechanical equipment to be screened from view in a manner consistent with the
design of the structure and site.
(E) The color palette should be simple and consistent within projects. Colors should be
compatible with neighboring development. Bright or primary colors shall be limited to
accent elements.
10.10 Landscaping: All rights-of-way and setbacks are to be landscaped and maintained by
property owners as follows: (See also Section 23, Landscaping Design)
(A) Sites shall include landscaped areas, hard surface landscapes, public plazas, walks,
and sidewalks.
(B) All setback areas shall be landscaped; parking or other physical improvements shall
be prohibited within required setback areas.
(C) Street trees: At least one tree per 40 lineal feet shall be provided between the
sidewalk and back of curb. An additional tree and 10 shrubs per 40 lineal feet must
be provided within 10 feet of the sidewalk.
10.11 Signs: Signs shall be subject to the provisions in Section 19. The following additional
provisions shall apply to development within the ID zone. Where conflicts occur, the
more restrictive regulations shall apply.
(A) A sign plan is required for all development. All signs shall be architecturally
integrated with the overall project design.
(B) Permitted freestanding signs are limited to monument signs. Monument signs shall
not exceed 32 square feet per face nor shall the sign area exceed four feet in height
or 6 feet total for the sign structure, and the horizontal length shall not exceed 8 feet.
A sign not complying with these provisions may be established through a Conditional
Use Permit pursuant to provisions in Section 14.
(C) Wall signs may not extend above roof line and shall be consistent throughout the
project.
10.12 Parking and Loading: See the Parking and Loading section of this ordinance (Section
18.00). In addition to compliance with the provisions in Section 18, all lots exceeding
50 spaces shall include the following landscaping provisions:
(A) At least 5% of the parking area shall be landscaped. The landscaping improvements
may count toward the minimum landscaping requirements.
(B) The ends of parking rows must have 6-foot-wide planting islands with a minimum of
2 shade trees and 8 shrubs.
(C) Landscaped medians shall be required between every fourth parking row with at least
1 shade tree and 8 shrubs for every 30 lineal feet of median.
10.13 Transportation Impact Analysis. In addition to the site development review provisions in
Section 21, the City may request a transportation impact analysis for development within
the ID zone. This study shall be based on the requirements of the Oregon Department
of Transportation.
54
10.14 Site Development Review Required: All new structures and uses and any expansion of
existing structures or uses shall be subject to a Site Development Review.
10.15 IAMP Compliance Required: A new or expanded uses or structure is subject to the
applicable provisions, if any, of an Interchange Area Management Plan. Notice of any
proposed development in an area subject to an Interchange Area Management Plan.
55
SECTION 11.00
Administration and Enforcement
11.01 Administrative Official
11.02 Building Permits
11.03 Application for Building Permits
11.04 Building Permit Applications and Renewal
11.05 Expiration of Building Permits and Renewal
11.06 Refund of Permits
11.07 Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, and
Permits
56
SECTION 11.00
Administration and Enforcement
11.01 Administrative Official:
(A) The city administrator is designated by the Council as the Administrative Official to
administer and enforce this ordinance. The city administrator may designate others to
provide assistance.
(B) If any provisions of this ordinance or the Comprehensive Plan are being violated, the
Administrative Official shall give written notice to the person(s) responsible for such
violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to
correct.
(C) Abatement and Penalty: A person violating a provision of this ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 dollars per day, as determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction. A violation shall be considered a separate violation on each
day it continues. The Administrative Official (see Section 11.01 (A)) or the chief of
police shall each have jurisdiction to enforce this ordinance by letter and/or citation. It
is the responsibility of the city attorney to cause a person cited under this ordinance
to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction for determination of appropriate
action and/or fine.
(D) See Section 12.
11.02 Building Permits:
(A) A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction or repairs, other than
ordinary repairs, using application forms furnished by the Administrative Official.
Ordinary repairs are nonstructural repairs and do not include addition to, alteration of,
or replacement or relocation of water supply, sewer, drainage or similar piping,
electrical wiring, or mechanical or other work for which a permit is required by the
Administrative Official.
(B) No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of the city
of Aumsville's Comprehensive Plan and Development Ordinance, unless written
communications are received from the Commission in the form of review, variance,
conditional use, or building permits not meeting parcel requirements exception in
Section 20, as provided by this ordinance.
11.03 Application for Building Permits:
(A) All applications for building permits shall be on forms provided by the city and shall
be accompanied by such fees as are required and plans, drawn to scale, in duplicate
or triplicate and containing:
1. The actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon;
2. The locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any, and the distances
from all property lines; and
3. The location and dimensions of the proposed building or alterations; and
4. Other information as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and
provide for the enforcement of this ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
(B) A building permit application shall include all applicable fees established by City
Council resolution. Plans shall be distributed per the requirements of the building
official. Plans shall be distributed per the requirements of the building official.
57
11.04 Building Permit Applications and Renewal:
(A) Building permit applications are kept in the review process for a period of 180 days
following the date of the application. If not issued within this time they shall expire by
limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned
to the applicant or destroyed by the Administrative Official.
(B) Expired applications may be extended for a period not exceeding 180 days upon the
written request of the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the
applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended
more than once.
(C) Once an application has expired, it becomes invalid and all fees are forfeited.
(D) Any fee erroneously paid or collected may be refunded. Refunds will be subject to the
City’s adopted fee schedule. No fee shall be refunded except upon written request
by the original applicant, not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment
and before a permit has been processed. The Zoning Review Fee shall not be
refunded and refund of other fees will be based on the review work completed.
11.05 Expiration of Building Permits and Renewal:
(A) Permits are not transferable and expire by limitation and become null and void if:
1. Work is not commenced within 180 days from the date the permit is issued, or
2. Work is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a
period of 180 days. The burden of proof to show that substantial work has been
done rests with the property owner. Written notice of expiration shall be given to
the permittee by the Administrative Official.
(B) Any permitee holding an unexpired permit may submit a written request for an
extension showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have
prevented action from being taken. The permit may be extended for not more than
180 days. No permit shall be extended more than once.
(C) An expired permit must be renewed before any work can be recommenced. A new
permit shall be first obtained with the fee determined by the Administrative Official.
11.06 Refund of Permits:
(A) Any fee erroneously paid or collected may be refunded.
(B) Refunds will be subject to the City’s adopted fee schedule.
(C) No fee shall be refunded except upon written request by the original permittee when
no construction work has been done, not later than 180 days after the date of the fee
payment. Once payment has been made by the city to Marion County, refund
request must be made directly to Marion County Building Inspection.
(D) No zoning review, state surcharge, or plans review fees shall be refunded.
11.07 Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans, and Permits: Building
permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Administrative
Official authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved
plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violations
of this ordinance.
58
SECTION 12.00
Administrative Procedures
12.01 Summary of Application Types and Review Procedures
12.02 General Procedures
12.03 Public Notice Requirements
12.04 Public Hearing Before the Planning Commission
12.05 Review and Public Hearings by Council
12.06 Appeal Provisions
12.07 Fees
12.08 Type IV Actions
12.09 Revocation of Decision
59
SECTION 12.00
Administrative Procedures
12.01 Summary of Application Types and Review Procedures: All development permits and
land use actions are processed under the city’s administrative procedures provided for in
this section. There are four types of actions, each with its own procedures.
(A) Type I-A Action. An administrative action reviewed by staff based on clear and
objective standards. The notice of the decision is sent only to the applicant. Appeal
is to the Commission. The following actions are processed under the Type I
procedure:
1. Property Line Adjustment (Section 20)
2. Home Occupation (Section 22)
3. Sign Permit (Section 19)
4. Non-Conforming Use (Section 4)
(B) Type I-B Action. An administrative action reviewed by staff based on clear and
objective standards with a minimum level of discretion. Notice of the decision is
sent to the applicant and those who submitted comments. Appeal is to the
Commission. The following actions are processed under the Type I-B procedure:
1. Site development reviews for uses listed as “Uses Permitted Outright” within
their respective zones. A site development review shall not be required in the
event a use in an existing building is replaced by a use listed as “Uses
Permitted Outright” within their respective zones.
2. Minor Modifications per definition contained in Section 1.
3. Accessory Structures (Section 21)
4. Landscaping Plan that is not part of a Type II application.
5. Partition (Section 20)
(C) Type II Actions. A Type II action is a quasi-judicial review in which the Commission
applies a mix of objective and subjective standards that allow considerable
discretion. Public notice and a public hearing are provided, see Section 12.02.
Appeal of a Type II decision is to the Council. The following actions are processed
under a Type II procedure:
1. Conditional Use Permit (Section 14)
2. Manufactured Home Park (Section 6)
3. Similar Use (Section 4)
4. Variance (Section 13)
5. Site Development Review (Section 21)
6. Major modifications to approved site plan (Section 21)
(D) Type III Actions. A Type III action is a quasi-judicial process in which the Council
applies a mix of objective and subjective standards. The Commission has an
advisory role. Public notice is provided and public hearings are held at the
Commission and Council, see Section 12.03. Appeal of the decision is to the Land
Use Board of Appeals (LUBA). The following actions are processed under a Type
III procedure:
1. Annexation (Section 17)
2. Zone Change (Section 16)
3. Comprehensive Plan Map Amendment (Section 16)
60
4. Subdivision (Section 20)
5. Development Agreements, as set forth in ORS 94.504 to 94.528
(E) Type IV Actions. A Type IV action is a legislative review in which the city considers
and enacts or amends laws and policies. Except as otherwise provided in Section
15. or Oregon laws regarding initiatives (e.g. ORS chapter 250), a private party
cannot request a Type IV action. A Type IV application must be initiated by city
staff, Commission, or Council. Public notices and hearing are provided in a Type IV
process. The following actions are processed under a Type IV procedure:
1. Comprensive Plan amendments and revisions.
2. Development Ordinance amendments.
(F) Applications requesting vacation of public rights-of-way shall be processed
according to the applicable Oregon Revised Statutes.
(G) Whenever an applicant requests more than one approval, including different
approval types, the proceedings may be consolidated at the discretion of the City,
so that one approval authority shall decide all applications. In such cases, the
review procedure and approval authority will be that of the highest numbered
approval type involved in the applications. Type IV legislative actions cannot be
combined with Types I-III quasi-judicial actions.
12.02 General Procedures:
(A) Procedure for Type I Review: Applications subject to administrative review shall be
reviewed and decided by the Administrative Official.
1. Upon receipt of an application for a Type I land use action, the city staff shall
review the application for completeness.
(a) Incomplete applications shall not be reviewed until all required information
has been submitted by the applicant.
(b) If incomplete, city staff shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly what
information is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application, and allow
the applicant to submit the missing information.
2. The application shall be deemed complete either:
(a) Upon receipt of the missing information; or
(b) Upon receipt of some of the missing information and written notice from the
applicant that no other information will be provided; or
(c) Upon receipt of written notice from the applicant that none of the missing
information will be provided.
3. On the 181st day after the application was first submitted the application is void
if: as required under subsection (2) of this section, the applicant has been
notified of the missing information and applicant has not responded
appropriately.
4. Referrals may be sent to interested agencies such as city departments, police
and fire departments, school district, utility companies, and applicable state or
federal agencies.
5. If the staff finds that the facts of the particular case require interpretation of
existing standards, then a public hearing before the Commission shall be
scheduled. The procedures for conducting the public hearing shall comply with
the requirements in Section 12.03(A).
6. Staff shall review the application and shall make a decision based on an
evaluation of the proposal and on applicable criteria as set forth in this
ordinance.
61
7. The city may place conditions related to ensuring the applicant complies with
standards and requirements.
8. A Type I land use decision may be appealed by the applicant to the
Commission. The appeal shall be filed within 12 days from the date of the
decision, following the provisions of Section 12.06.
9. The timing requirements established by this section are intended to allow a final
action, including resolution of any appeals, within 120 days of receipt of a
complete application. The 120-day time period may be extended for a specified
period of time at the written request of the applicant. The total of all extensions
may not exceed 245 days.
10. If for any reason it appears that such final action may not be completed within
the 120-day period, unless the time period is voluntarily extended by the
applicant, the following procedures shall be followed regardless of other
processes set forth elsewhere in this ordinance.
(a) The city staff shall notify the Council of the timing conflict by the 95th day.
The Council may, in accordance with its own procedures, set a time for an
emergency meeting within the 120-day period.
(b) Public notice may be mailed to affected parties as specified in Section
12.03(B).
(c) The Council shall hold a public hearing on the specified date, if applicable, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 12.05 and render a decision
approving or denying the request within the 120-day period. Such action
shall be the final action by the city on the application.
(B) Procedure for Type I-B Review: Applications subject to administrative review shall
be reviewed and decided by the Administrative Official.
1. Upon receipt of an application for a Type I-B land use action, the city staff shall
review the application for completeness.
(a) Incomplete applications shall not be reviewed until all required information
has been submitted by the applicant.
(b) If incomplete, city staff shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly what
information is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application,and allow
the applicant to submit the missing information.
2. The application shall be deemed complete either:
(a) Upon receipt of the missing information; or
(b) Upon receipt of some of the missing information and written notice from the
applicant that no other information will be provided; or
(c) Upon receipt of written notice from the applicant that none of the missing
information will be provided.
3. On the 181st day after the application was first submitted the application is void
if: as required under subsection (2) of this section, the applicant has been
notified of the missing information and applicant has not responded
appropriately.
4. Hearing Option: If the staff finds that the facts of the particular case require
interpretation of existing standards, then a public hearing before the
Commission shall be scheduled. The procedures for conducting the public
hearing shall comply with the requirements in this section. Further, the City
Administrator or designee may request a public hearing before the Planning
Commission. A public hearing may also be requested by the applicant.
62
5. Before making an Administrative Decision, the City shall mail notice to:
(a) All owners of record of real property within 100 feet of the subject site.
(b) Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice; and
(c) Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an
intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City, or required by
State statute.
(d) The road authority, and rail authority and owner, when there is a proposed
development abutting or affecting their transportation facility and allow the
agency to review, comment on, and suggest conditions of decision for the
application.
(e) The City may notify other affected agencies, as appropriate, for review of
the application.
6. Notice of a pending Administrative Decision shall:
(a) Provide a 14-day period for submitting written comments before a decision
is made on the land use application.
(b) Identify the specific land use decisions or decisions requested.
(c) Describe the street address or other easily understandable reference to the
location of the site.
(d) List the relevant decision criteria by name and number of Code sections.
(e) State the place, date, and time the comments are due, and the person to
whom the comments should be addressed.
(f) Include the name and telephone number of a contact person regarding the
Administrative Decision.
(g) State that if any person fails to address the relevant decision criteria with
enough detail, they may not be able to appeal to the Land Use Board of
Appeals or Circuit Court on that issue. Only comments on the relevant
decision criteria are considered relevant evidence.
(h) State that all evidence relied upon by the City to make this decision is in the
public record, available for public review. Copies of this evidence can be
obtained at a reasonable cost from the City.
(i) State that after the comment period closes, the City shall issue an
Administrative Decision. The decision shall be mailed to the applicant and
to anyone else who submitted written comments or who is otherwise legally
entitled to notice.
7. Decision: The City Administrator or designee shall review the application and
shall make a decision based on an evaluation of the proposal and on applicable
criteria as set forth in this Code. The city may place conditions related to
ensuring the applicant complies with standards and requirements.
8. Notice of Decision: Within five working days after a decision is made, a Notice of
Decision shall be sent by mail to:
(a) The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the site
that is the subject of the application.
(b) Any person who submits a written request to receive notice, or provides
comments during the application review period.
(c) Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an
intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City, and other agencies
that were notified or provided comments during the application review
period.
63
9. Appeals and Reconsideration: All administrative land use decisions of the City
Recorder may be appealed to the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be
filed within 12 days from the date of the decision, following the provisions of this
section.
10. The timing requirements established by this section are intended to allow a final
action, including resolution of any appeals, within 120 days of receipt of a
complete application. The 120-day time period may be extended for a specified
period of time at the written request of the applicant. The total of all extensions
may not exceed 245 days.
11. If for any reason it appears that such final action may not be completed within
the 120-day period, unless the time period is voluntarily extended by the
applicant, the following procedures shall be followed regardless of other
processes set forth elsewhere in this ordinance.
(a) The city staff shall notify the Council of the timing conflict by the 95th day.
The Council may, in accordance with its own procedures, set a time for an
emergency meeting within the 120 period.
(b) Public notice may be mailed to affected parties as specified in Section 12.03.
(c) The Council shall hold a public hearing on the specified date, if applicable, in
accordance with the provisions of this section and render a decision
approving or denying the request within the 120-day period. Such action
shall be the final action by the city on the application.
(C) Procedures for Type II and Type III Actions:
1. Upon receipt of an application for Type II or Type III land use action, the city
staff shall review the application for completeness.
(a) Incomplete applications shall not be scheduled for Type II or Type III review
until all required information has been submitted by the applicant.
(b) If incomplete, city staff shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly what
information is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application, and allow
the applicant to submit the missing information.
2. The application shall be deemed complete for the purposes of scheduling the
hearing and all related timing provisions either:
(a) Upon receipt of the missing information; or
(b) Upon receipt of some of the missing information and written notice from the
applicant that no other information will be provided; or
(c) Upon receipt of written notice from the applicant that none of the missing
information will be provided.
3. On the 181st day after the application was first submitted the application is void
if: as required under subsection (2) of this section, the applicant has been
notified of the missing information and applicant has not responded
appropriately.
4. Applications for more than one Type II or Type III land use action for the same
property may, at the applicant’s discretion, be combined and heard or reviewed
concurrently.
5. Referrals may be sent to interested agencies such as city departments, police
and fire departments, school district, utility companies, post office, and
applicable state or federal agencies.
6. The public hearing shall be scheduled and notice shall be mailed or delivered to
the applicant and adjacent property owners. Notice requirements shall comply
with Section 12.03(B)
64
7. Any staff report or written recommendations shall be available at least 7 days
prior to the hearing. This report shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant and
be available at city hall for all interested parties.
8. The public hearing before the Commission shall comply with the provisions in
Section 12.04.
9. Approvals of any Type II or Type III action may be granted subject to conditions.
The following limitations shall be applicable to conditional approvals:
(a) Conditions shall be designed to ensure compliance with applicable approval
criteria may be related to the following:
1. Protection of the public from the potentially deleterious effects of the
proposed use; or
2. Fulfillment of the need for public service demands created by the
proposed use.
(b) Changes or alterations to a condition of approval shall be processed as a
major or minor modification, as applicable.
(c) Whenever practical, all conditions of approval required by the city shall
be completed before the issuance of an occupancy permit. When an
applicant provides information which demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the Commission that it is not practical to fulfill all conditions prior to
issuance of such permit, the Commission may require a performance
bond or other guarantee to ensure compliance with zoning regulations or
fulfillment of required conditions.
1. Types of Guarantees. Performance guarantees may be in the form
of performance bond payable to the city of Aumsville, cash, certified
check, time certificate of deposit, or other form acceptable to the city.
The form must be approved by the city attorney and appropriate
documents filed with the Administrative Official.
2. Amount of Guarantee. The amount of the guarantee must be equal
to at least 110% of the estimated cost of the performance. The
applicant must provide a written estimate acceptable to the city,
which must include an itemized estimate of all materials, labor,
equipment, and other costs of the required performance.
3. Time Periods. The Administrative Official may grant a waiver of
performance for a period not to exceed 6 months. A request for
extension of any waiver granted must be submitted to and approved
by the Council.
10. The Commission or Council shall render a decision that either approves or
denies the application. City staff shall prepare the decision in writing and
include:
(a) A brief statement that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant
to the decision;
(b) A brief statement of the facts relied upon in rendering the decision and an
explanation or the justification for the decision based on the criteria;
(c) If applicable, any conditions placed on an approval; and
(d) Signature of the decision-maker’s chair.
11. A Type II land use decision may be appealed to the Council by a person who
participated in the decision. The appeal shall be filed within 12 days from the
date of the final written decision, following the provisions of Section 12.06.
Type III land use applications are automatically reviewed by the Council.
65
12. The timing requirements established by this section are intended to allow final
action, including resolution of appeals, for all Type II or Type III land use
actions (except Annexations and Comprehensive Plan Map amendments) within
120 days of receipt of a complete application. The 120-day time period may be
extended for a specified period of time at the written request of the applicant.
The total of all extensions may not exceed 245 days.
13. If for any reason it appears that such final action may not be completed within
the 120-day period, unless the time period is voluntarily extended by the
applicant, the following procedures shall be followed regardless of other
processes set forth elsewhere in this ordinance.
(a) The city may shall notify the Council of the timing conflict by the 95th day.
The Council shall, in accordance with its own procedures, set a time for an
emergency meeting within the 120-day period.
(b) Public notice may be mailed to affected parties as specified in
Section 12.03(B).
(c) The Council shall hold a public hearing on the specified date, if applicable, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 12.05 and render a decision
approving or denying the request within the 120-day period. Such action
shall be the final action by the city on the application.
12.03 Public Notice Requirements:
(A) Type I Actions. Written notice of any Type I hearing shall be mailed or delivered to
the applicant. An electronic copy shall be acceptable.
(B) Type II and Type III Actions.
1. Notice of any public hearings before the Commission or Council for a Type II or
Type III land use action required by this ordinance shall be posted on the
subject property at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
2. Written notice of the initial public hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least
20 days prior to the hearing date to the owners of property within 100 feet of the
boundaries of the subject property. Where a multiple hearing application is
scheduled, only a 10-day written notice shall be required.
3. Notice of the hearing shall be printed in the Aumsville Newsletter, except for
Annexations. Annexation notice of hearing shall be published in accordance
with Oregon Revised Statutes. An affidavit of publication of the notice shall be
made a part of the administrative record.
4. Applicants for a Type II or III action shall be responsible for providing a certified
list of property owners within the notice area, prepared by Marion County or a
title company, within 100 feet of the subject property.
(C) Type IV Actions. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the first public hearing
shall be mailed at least 20 days but not more than 40 days prior to the hearing date
to all owners of property within the city whose property would be rezoned by a
Type IV action. Notice of all hearings shall be published in the Aumsville Newsletter
or other publication of general circulation within the city at least 10 days before the
first public hearing.
66
(D) Notice of Appeals. Notice of hearings on appeal to either the Commission or
Council shall be pursuant to Subsection (B)(2) above, and shall include written
notice at least 10 days prior to hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and any other
individual who received notice of the original decision, and any others requesting
notice.
(E) Notice Requirements.
1. Public notice shall:
(a) Explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which
could be authorized;
(b) Cite the applicable criteria from the ordinance and the plan which apply to
the application at issue;
(c) Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical
reference to the subject property;
(d) State the date, time, and location of the hearing;
(e) State that failure of an issue to be raised in a hearing, in person or by letter,
or failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford the decision maker an
opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board
of Appeals based on that issue;
(f) Include the name of the city representative to contact and the telephone
number where additional information may be obtained;
(g) State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted
by or on behalf of the applicant and applicable criteria are available for
inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost at least 20 days
prior to the public hearing. Where a multiple hearing application is
scheduled, only at least 10 days shall be required for availability of the above
material;
(h) State that a copy of any staff report will be available for inspection at no cost
at least 7 days prior to the hearing and a copy will be available at reasonable
cost;
(i) Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of
testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearing.
(F) Failure to Receive Notice. Failure to receive notice prescribed in this section does
not invalidate a decision if the city can demonstrate by affidavit that such notice was
given. The notice provisions of this section shall not restrict the giving of notice by
other means, including posting, newspaper publication, radio, and television.
12.04 Public Hearing Before the Planning Commission:
(A) General Provisions.
1. A land use actions that requires a public hearing by the Commission under the
provisions of this ordinance shall be initially heard by the Commission within
60 days of the receipt of a complete application or appeal.
2. The Commission or Council may continue a public hearing for additional,
information, testimony, decision, or to serve further notice. Upon recessing the
hearing, the Commission or Council shall announce the time and place when
the hearing will be resumed. When the hearing body reopens the record to
admit new evidence or testimony, any person may raise new issues that relate
to the new evidence, testimony, or criteria for decision-making which apply to
the matter at issue.
67
3. Unless there is a continuance, if a participant so requests before the conclusion
of the initial evidentiary hearing, the record shall remain open for at least 7 days
after the hearing.
4. The decisions of the Commission on applications for Type II actions shall be
final unless appealed to the Council pursuant to Section 12.06.
5. The recommendations of the Commission on applications for Type III actions
shall be referred to the Council for final determination, pursuant to Section 12.05
6. An issue which may be the basis for an appeal to the Land Use Board of
Appeals (LUBA) may be raised not later than the close of the record at the final
evidentiary hearing on the proposal before the city. Such issues shall be raised
with sufficient specificity so as to afford the Council or Commission, and the
parties, an adequate opportunity to respond to each issue.
7. Appeal of a Type I action shall be heard by the Commission in accordance with
provisions of Section 12.04. The Commission’s decision is final unless further
appealed to the Council.
(B) Public Hearing Procedures.
1. Open Public Hearing: The presiding officer shall open the record, announce the
nature and purpose of the hearing, and summarize the rules of conduct of the
hearing and appeal rights.
2. Declaration of Interests: The presiding officer shall inquire whether any member
of the Council or Commission has any conflicts of interest concerning the issue
before the city. All Councilors and Commissioners are required to declare
conflicts of interest, bias, and ex parte contacts, and to state on the record
whether they intend to participate in the decision.
All declarations shall be made publicly at the commencement of the first public
hearing following the date when the Councilor or Commissioner first learned of
or had an interest which must be declared. A member shall declare whether the
member can make an impartial decision on the matter before them.
3. Preliminary Matters: Immediately following the declaration of interest section of
the hearing, the presiding officer shall determine if there are other preliminary
matters that need to be addressed prior to taking testimony and evidence on the
case. Preliminary matters may include issues such as the notice of the public
hearing, jurisdictional questions, or procedural issues.
4. Opening Statement: Following the determination of all preliminary matters, the
presiding officer shall read into the record an opening statement that includes
the following:
(a) A description of the applicable substantive approval criteria.
(b) That testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing must be directed
toward the approval criteria listed in the notice of public hearing and as read
in item (4)(a) hereof, or to other criteria which the person believes to apply to
the decision.
(c) A disclaimer that failure to raise an issue with sufficient specificity to afford
the decision-maker and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue
precludes appeal to LUBA on that issue.
68
(d) Note that any person may request either a continuance of the hearing if
additional evidence in support of the application is presented, or that the
record be left open for submission of additional evidence, then the record
shall remain open for at least 7 days.
(e) Notify those who will be testifying to provide their name and full mailing
address if they wish to receive the notice of decision, be notified of a
continuance, appeal, or other action on the application.
5. Staff Report: A representative of the city shall present a staff report,
summarizing the nature of the application, citing applicable standards and
criteria, and making a recommendation with or without conditions as to whether
the application should be granted or denied.
6. Applicant or Appellant: The applicant or appellant, or a person representing the
applicant or appellant shall present evidence in support of the application or
appeal. In cases where the appellant is other than the applicant, the burden of
proof remains with the applicant to show that the land use application is entitled
to approval. In such cases where the appellant is not the applicant, the
appellant shall testify first, followed by the applicant.
7. Proponents: Any person in favor of the application, followed by
Commission/Council questions.
8. Opponents: Any person opposed to the application, followed by
Commission/Council questions.
9. Governmental Agencies: A representative of any governmental agency or
department may present testimony or other evidence concerning the application
at issue.
10. General Testimony: Any person who has not previously testified on the issue
shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
11. Applicant Rebuttal Summary: The applicant is be allowed to summarize briefly
the proposal and shall be given the opportunity to present rebuttal testimony or
evidence.
12. Questions from the Council or Commission: After recognition by the presiding
officer, any member of the Council or Commission may direct questions to the
applicant, staff, or any other party.
13. Staff Summary: The city staff representative shall respond to any relevant
questions from the testimony and summarize the actions required by the city.
14. Closing the Hearing: Generally, the record will be closed at the conclusion of
the hearing unless the presiding officer has declared that the record will be held
open to receive additional evidence, or to continue the hearing to a date and
time certain.
15. Discussion by members and determination of the findings of fact.
16. Decision, including any conditions of approval and a restatement of appeal
procedures.
(C) Evidence.
1. All evidence offered is included in the record unless the evidence is expressly
rejected by the Commission or Council.
2. The Commission or Council may take notice of judicially recognizable facts, and
members may take notice of general, technical, or scientific facts within their
specialized knowledge. Parties shall be notified at any time during the
proceeding, but in any event prior to the final decision, of the material so
noticed, and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the facts so
69
noticed. The Commission members may utilize their experience, technical
competence, and specialized knowledge in evaluation of the evidence
presented.
3. All interested persons are entitled to an opportunity to be heard and to present
evidence. The applicant is also entitled to present rebuttal.
(D) Burden of Proof. The proponent(s) of a matter at public hearing before the
Commission or Council has the burden of proving that the proposal complies with
all applicable criteria. The proposal must be supported by substantial evidence in
the whole record it conforms with the applicable provisions of this ordinance.
(E) Record of Hearing. A record of the proceeding shall be made by written,
mechanical or electronic means. The record need not be transcribed except upon
request by the City Council or as provided in this section.
(F) Limits on Oral Testimony. The presiding officer may set consistent, reasonable
time limits for oral presentations to the end that parties are encouraged to submit as
much evidence as possible in writing prior to the hearing.
(G) Exhibits. All exhibits received shall be marked so as to provide identification upon
review. Such exhibits shall be retained by the city.
(H) General Conduct of the Hearing. Each person appearing before the Commission
and Council shall give their name and address. No person shall speak without
obtaining the permission from the chair. No person shall be disorderly, abusive, or
disruptive of the orderly conduct of the hearing.
12.05 Review and Public Hearings by Council:
(A) Hearings by Council.
1. Council shall hold public hearings on all Type III and Type IV actions.
2. The hearings shall follow ORS 197.763 procedures.
3. A final decision shall be made within the timeframe mandated by state law, unless
the applicant agrees to extend the 120-day review period.
4. The decision of the Council of a Type III or Type IV action is final and in
accordance with Section 12.02(B)(9).
12.06 Appeal Provisions: The appeal period starts on the date of the Notice of Decision.
(A) Appeals.
1. The Commission shall hear appeals of all Administrative Official decisions on a
Type I Action.
2. The Council shall hear all appeals of Commission decisions.
3. The appeal must be perfected as required by Section 12.06. The action of the
Administrative Official or Commission is final and the appeal shall not be heard if
the appeal period has lapsed.
4. Submission of New Testimony and De Novo Hearings: The Council may admit
additional testimony and other evidence by holding a de novo hearing. Upon
the decision to admit additional testimony or other evidence and to hear the
entire matter de novo, the presentation of such testimony and evidence shall be
governed by the procedures applicable to the presentation of such matters at
the initial hearing.
5. The Council may affirm, rescind, or amend the action of the Commission and
may grant approval subject to conditions necessary to ensure compliance with
70
the applicable approval criteria and the Comprehensive Plan. The Council may
also remand the matter back to the Commission for additional information,
subject to the agreement of the applicant to extend the 120-day review period.
(B) Appeal Period.
1. The decision of the Administrative Official is final for a Type I land use decision
unless a notice of appeal is received by the city within 12 days of the date of the
final written decision, or unless the Council, on its own motion, orders review
within 12 days of the written decision. An appeal stays the proceedings in the
matter appealed until the determination of the appeal. The 120-day deadline for
final action by the city remains in effect unless the time period is voluntarily
extended by the applicant.
2. The decision of the Commission for a Type II land use decision, or the appeal of
a Type I decision, is final unless a notice of appeal is received by the city within
12 days of the date of the final written decision, or unless the Council, on its
motion, order review within 12 days of the written decision. An appeal stays the
proceedings in the matter appealed until the determination of the appeal. The
120-day deadline for final action by the city remains in effect unless the time
period is voluntarily extended by the applicant.
3. All appeals from the Council’s decision on a Type III or Type IV action shall be to
the state Land Use Board of Appeals. The appeal must be perfected following
applicable state law.
(C) Form of Appeal. An appeal shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall
state the alleged errors in the decision.
(D) Transcript Fees. In addition to any cost or fees set forth in Section 12.07 below, the
city may charge a fee for the preparation of any transcript that may be required for the
appeal. The fee shall be determined based on the current city hall per page rate for
the copying and personnel costs as an hourly rate equivalent to the salary plus
benefits (computed at an hourly rate) of each employee involved in the preparation of
the transcript.
(E) Appeal Fee.
1. The appeal fee is determined based on the current city hall per page rate for the
copying and personnel costs at an hourly rate equivalent to the salary plus
benefits (computed at an hourly rate) of each employee involved in the appeal
work; and
2. The city shall estimate the cost of the appeal and receive a deposit from the
appellant in that amount. The appellant shall be billed for actual costs more than
the deposit or receive a refund for surplus deposit funds, whatever the case may
be.
12.07 Fees.
(A) Purpose. Fees are for the purpose of defraying administrative costs.
(B) General Provisions.
1. Fees shall be payable at the time of application and shall be as set forth by
ordinance or resolution of the Council. There shall be no fee required for an
application initiated by the Commission or the Council.
71
2. The failure to submit the required fee with an application or notice of appeal,
including return of checks unpaid or other failure of consideration, will constitute an
incomplete application.
3. Fees are not refundable unless the application or appeal is withdrawn before the
notification of the hearing. Refund of any fees will be based on the review work
completed.
4. The Council may reduce or waive the fees upon showing of just cause to do so.
12.08 Type IV Actions.
(A) Initiation. Type IV may be initiated by:
1. Majority vote of the Council.
2. Majority vote of the Commission.
3. Initiative petition, in accordance with ORS 250.305 and Section 15 of the
development ordinance.
(B) Procedure for Type IV Actions.
1. Public Hearings by Commission.
(a) A public hearing shall be held by a majority of the Commission on all proposed
amendments to this ordinance and on all legislative amendments to the zoning
maps. The Commission may continue any hearing in order to make a
reasonable decision. Notice shall be as specified in Section 12.03.
(b) Amendments shall be considered and acted upon by the Commission. If the
Commission fails to act on the action, and no extension is granted by the
Council, the Council may act upon the amendment.
2. Public Hearing by Council. Following Commission action, the Council shall hold a
public hearing to consider the applicable criteria and the Commission’s
recommendation on proposed amendments. Notice shall be as specified in
Section 12.03.
3. Time Requirement. The 120-day deadline for final action by the city does not
apply to any Type IV action.
12.09 Revocation of Decision.
(A) Compliance with Conditions. Compliance with the conditions of approval imposed by
the Administrative Official, Commission or Council in approving a permit or other land
use decision is required. Any departure from the conditions of approval and approved
plans constitutes a violation of this ordinance.
(B) General Provisions.
1. The Administrative Official may initiate a revocation of any permit or other land use
decision for failure to comply with a condition of approval. A hearing on the
revocation shall be conducted by the Commission as a Type II hearing and in
accordance with the procedures for a Type II hearing.
2. Final decisions regarding Comprehensive Plan text or map amendments,
development ordinance text amendments, or zone changes are not subject to
revocation.
72
SECTION 13.00
Variances
Purpose: It is the purpose of this section, subject to the restrictions and provisions of this
ordinance, to vary or modify the strict application of any of the regulations or
provisions, except for use of property.
13.01 Purpose Statement
13.02 Commission
13.03 Application
13.04 Public Hearing
13.05 Criteria for Granting a Variance
13.06 Findings
13.07 Limiting Variances
13.08 Notice
13.09 Limit on a Variance Permit
13.10 Appeals
13.11 Resubmission of Variance Application
73
SECTION 13.00
Variances
13.01 Purpose Statement. The development standards in this Development Code protect the
public health, safety, and welfare by establishing standard setbacks, maximum building
heights, and other development standards that apply to various uses. For lands or uses
with unique characteristics, the intent and purpose of the development standards may be
maintained while allowing for a variance to quantifiable requirements only. Economic
hardship shall not be the basis for a variance request, neither shall a variance be approved
as a means to establish a use not otherwise permitted in the zone.
13.02 Commission: The Commission is authorized to conduct public hearings on applications
for variances within the limits, spirit and intent of this ordinance, and as will not be
contrary to the public interest, and are applied reasonably to maintain and not abolish
the distinctive classifications created by this ordinance. The Commission may approve,
deny, or conditionally approve any application for a variance permit.
13.03 Application: A property owner may initiate a request for a variance by filing with the
Administrative Official on a form provided and paying the appropriate posted fee.
13.04 Public Hearing: Public hearings before the Commission shall be in accordance with the
procedures in Section 12, Administrative Procedures.
13.05 Criteria for Granting a Variance: A variance from the numerical standards of this
ordinance shall not be granted unless ALL of the following circumstances exist:
(A) Compliance with the applicable requirement or standard of this ordinance would:
1. Create a hardship due to one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The physical characteristics of the land, improvements, or uses that are
not typical of conditions in the zoning district; or
(b) Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant possessed by the owners of
other properties in the same vicinity or district; or
(c) That the special conditions and circumstances on which the application
is based do not result from the negligent or knowing violation of this
ordinance by the applicant.
2. Not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in
the vicinity or district in which property is located.
(B) Strict adherence to the requirement or standard is unnecessary because the
proposed variance will reasonably satisfy both of the following objectives:
1. Granting the variance will not create significant adverse effects to the
appearance, function, or safety of the use or uses on the subject property;
and
2. Granting the variance will not impose limitations on other properties in the
area, including uses which would be allowed on vacant or underdeveloped
properties.
(C) Approval of this application will allow the property to be used only for the
purposes authorized by the zoning district.
74
13.06 Findings: Before the Commission shall grant or deny a request for a variance, the
Commission shall develop specific findings of fact that support or do not support the
criteria set forth in Section 13.05. If it is determined by the Commission that the criteria
set forth in Section 13.05 are not met, the Commission shall deny the request for
variance.
13.07 Limiting Variances: In granting any variance, the Commission may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violations of such
conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. Under no circumstances shall
the Commission grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this
ordinance in the zone involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the
terms of this ordinance.
13.08 Notice: Within 10 days after a decision the Administrative Official shall provide the
applicant with written notice of the decision of the Commission.
13.09 Limit on a Variance Permit: Unless otherwise provided in the final decision granting a
variance, a variance granted pursuant to this Section shall run with the land and associated
approvals granted in conjunction with the variance. Further, the variance shall
automatically transfer to any new owner or occupant subject to all conditions of approval.
13.10 Appeals: Appeals from the decision of the Commission shall be in accordance with the
procedures in Section 12, Administrative Procedures.
13.11 Resubmission of Variance Application: An application for a variance that was denied
wholly or in part by the Commission may not be resubmitted for a period of 1 year from
such denial, unless approved by the Administrative Official upon showing of good cause.
75
SECTION 14.00
Conditional Uses
Purpose: In addition to development intended for a zone there are uses that are specified
as conditional uses because of their public convenience, necessity, unique
nature, or their effect on the Comprehensive Plan. A conditional use listed in a
zone may be permitted, enlarged, or altered provided that the conditional use
would be reasonably compatible with and have minimal impact on the livability
and appropriate development of an abutting property surrounding neighborhood,
and to the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
14.01 Commission
14.02 Administrative Official
14.03 Application
14.04 Public Hearing
14.05 Criteria for Granting a Conditional Use
14.06 Permit Conditions
14.07 Existing Conditional Uses
14.08 Conditional Use and Concurrent Variances
14.09 Notice
14.10 Appeals
14.11 Time Limit of a Conditional Use Permit
14.12 Resubmission of a Conditional Use Application
76
SECTION 14.00
Conditional Uses
14.01 Commission: The Commission is authorized to conduct public hearings on an application
for a conditional use. In addition to conditions imposed to ensure compliance with the
standards, criteria and requirements expressly required by this ordinance, the
Commission may impose additional conditions the Commission considers necessary to
protect the best interest of the affected zone and the city as a whole.
14.02 Administrative Official: The Administrative Official is authorized to set for public hearing
before the Commission those written applications for a conditional use permit.
14.03 Application: A property owner may initiate a request for a conditional use permit by filing
with the Administrative Official on forms provided and paying the appropriate posted fee.
14.04 Public Hearing: Public hearings before the Commission shall be in accordance with the
procedures in Section 12, Administrative Procedures.
14.05 Criteria for Granting a Conditional Use:
(A) The proposal will be consistent with the provisions of the Development Ordinance,
the underlying land use zone, and other applicable policies of the city.
(B) Taking into account location, size, design and operation characteristics, the
proposal will have minimal adverse impact on the livability, value, and appropriate
development of abutting properties and the surrounding area compared to the
impact of development that is permitted outright.
(C) The location and design of the site and structures for the proposal will be as
attractive as the nature of the use and its setting warrants.
(D) The proposal will preserve assets of particular interest to the community.
14.06 Permit Conditions: The Commission when permitting a new conditional use or the
alteration of an existing conditional use, may impose those conditions it finds necessary
to avoid detrimental impact and to otherwise protect the best interest of the surrounding
area and the city as a whole (See Section 12). These conditions may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
(A) Limiting the manner in which the use is conducted including restricting the time an
activity may take place and restraints to minimize such environmental effects as
noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, and odor.
(B) Establishing a special yard or other open space, lot area, or dimension.
(C) Limiting the height, size, or location of a building or other structure.
(D) Designating the size, number, location, and nature of vehicle access points.
(E) Increasing the amount of street dedication, roadway width or improvements within
the street right-of-way.
(F) Designating the size, location, screening, drainage, surfacing, or other
improvements of a parking area or truck loading area.
77
(G) Limiting or otherwise designating the number, size, location, height, and lighting of
signs.
(H) Limiting the location and intensity of outdoor lighting and requiring its shielding.
(I) Requiring diking, screening, landscaping, or another facility to protect adjacent or
nearby property and designating standards for its installation and maintenance.
(J) Designating the size, height, location, and materials for a fence.
(K) Protecting and preserving existing trees, vegetation, water resources, wildlife
habitat or other significant natural resources.
(L) Other conditions to permit the development of the city in conformity with the intent
and purpose of the conditional classification of uses.
14.07 Existing Conditional Uses: In the case of a use existing prior to the effective date of this
ordinance and classified in this ordinance as a conditional use, a change in the use or in
lot area or an alteration of structure shall conform with the requirements for a conditional
use development permit.
14.08 Conditional Use and Concurrent Variances: Variances may be processed concurrently
and in conjunction with a conditional use application and when so processed will not
require an additional public hearing or additional filing fee.
14.09 Notice: Within 10 days after a decision has been rendered with reference to a
conditional use permit, the Administrative Official shall provide the applicant with written
notice of the decision of the Commission.
14.10 Appeals: Appeals from the decision of the Commission shall be in accordance with the
procedures in Section 12, Administrative Procedures.
14.11 Time Limit of a Conditional Use Permit: The term of an approved conditional use
development permit is 2 years. The Commission may extend such term for a period not
to exceed 1 additional year, if upon written application, justification can be found and
approved by the Commission.
14.12 Resubmission of Conditional Use Application: An application that was denied wholly or in
part by the Commission may not be resubmitted for a period of 1 year from such denial,
unless approved by the Administrative Official upon showing of good cause.
78
SECTION 15.00
Amendments
Purpose: Changes and amendments to the comprehensive plan and development
regulations will be necessary from time to time. It is the purpose and intent of this
section that amendments include changes and revisions to the adopted
Development Ordinance and other legally adopted land use control documents,
and corrections and changes in the Official Zoning Map, zone designations, and
adjustments to zoning district boundaries.
15.01 Commission
15.02 Administrative Official
15.03 Application
15.04 Public Hearing
15.05 Criteria of Recommending an Amendment
15.06 Final Action by the Council
15.07 Record of Amendments
15.08 Effective Date of Amendments
15.09 Appeals
15.10 Limitations of Reapplication
15.11 Protest Petitions
79
SECTION 15.00
Amendments
15.01 Commission: The Commission is authorized to conduct public hearings on all
amendments to development regulations. The Commission shall consider amendments
if initiated by the Commission, either on its own or at the request of the Council, or upon
the petition of a majority of the property owners in the area proposed for change. A
recommendation by the commission shall be forwarded to the Council.
15.02 Administrative Official: The Administrative Official is authorized to set for public hearing
before the Commission, written petitions of property owners for amendments, and those
initiated by either the Commission or Council.
15.03 Application: The request by a property owner (other than the city) for an amendment to
this ordinance or zoning map shall be accomplished by filing an application with the
Administrative Official using forms prescribed and paying the posted fee.
15.04 Public Hearing: Public hearings before the Commission shall be in accordance with the
procedures in Section 12.00, Administrative Procedures.
15.05 Criteria of Recommending an Amendment:
(A) The requested change is in conformance with the city’s adopted Comprehensive
Plan.
(B) That there was a mistake or an update needed in the original ordinance or map.
(C) That the conditions in the area have changed since adoption of the ordinance
and/or zoning map.
(D) The amendments will not interfere with the development or value of other land in
the vicinity.
(E) The amendment will not be detrimental to the general interest of the city and that
there is a public need for the amendment.
(F) That there is no other appropriately zoned property that could be used.
(G) That the amendment will not over-burden existing and future capacity of public
facilities.
(H) That the amendment complies with applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
(I) That the amendment complies with the Urban Growth Boundary and Policy
Agreement existing between the city and Marion County.
15.06 Final Action by the Council: The Commission, having conducted a public hearing on the
proposed amendment shall within 15 days after the hearing, recommend to the Council
approval, disapproval, or modified approval of the proposed amendment. After receiving
the recommendation of the Commission, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment.
80
15.07 Record of Amendments: The Administrative Official shall maintain records of
amendments to the text and zoning map of this ordinance.
15.08 Effective Date of Amendments: Amendments are final following the action and order
resulting from the public hearing by the Council
15.09 Appeals: Appeals from any action by the Council may be taken as provided by Oregon
law.
15.10 Limitation of Reapplication: Denials of a proposed amendment shall not be
reconsidered within 1 year following a previous denial.
15.11 Protest Petitions: When a proposed amendment affects the zoning classification of
property, and in case a protest against such change is signed by the owners of
20 percent or more, either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of
those immediately adjacent, or in the rear thereof extending 300 feet therefrom, or of
those directly opposite thereto extending 150 feet from the street frontage of such
opposite lots, then such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable
vote of 3/4 of the entire governing body.
81
SECTION 16.00
Zone Change
16.01 Zone Change
16.02 Initiation of a Zone Change
16.03 Notice of Public Hearing for Zone Change
16.04 General Conduct of Hearing
16.05 Action by the Commission
16.06 Final Action by the Council
16.07 Continuances
16.08 Effective Date of Zone Change
16.09 Appeals
82
SECTION 16.00
Zone Change
16.01 Zone Change: A zone change is a reclassification of any area from one zone or district
to another. A proposed zone change must be reviewed and a recommendation made by
the Commission. A zone change must be made by an ordinance enacted by the
Council. All zone changes will have at least two public hearings; one before the
Commission and one before the Council. A zone change also requires a
Comprehensive Plan amendment if the zone change does not comply with the
Comprehensive Plan Map.
16.02 Initiation of a Zone Change: A zone change and proceedings of such a change may be
initiated as one of the following:
(A) A zone change may be initiated by resolution by the Council. The Council shall not
initiate any proceedings unless the zone change is in the public interest. In such a
case, the Administrative Official shall refer the resolution to the Commission, and
set a date, time and place for the hearing as provided in Section 16.03.
(B) A zone change may be initiated by a property owner or by persons purchasing
property under contract. Procedure for a zone change by petition is as follows:
1. The application shall set forth the names of the owners of all property within
250 feet of the boundary of the property proposed for a zone change, the
mailing addresses, and the description of their properties as it appears on the
most recent assessment and tax roll of Marion County, or as it appears in the
deed records of the county, if such records be later. Property owned by the city
of Aumsville shall not be deemed as part of the affected area.
2. The application shall contain a description of the property sought for a zone
change and shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location of all property
in the affected area.
3. Attached to the application shall be the affidavit of the person(s) preparing the
application and list of names and addresses of owners therein and that no name
of any property owner in the affected area is omitted from the list. The
certificate of an abstract or title company duly incorporated under the laws of
Oregon shall be deemed a compliance with this provision.
A petition must be filed within 60 days after the making of such affidavit or
certificate. All property owners signing the petition shall acknowledge the same
before a Notary Public or some other official authorized to make
acknowledgments, and the certificate of the Notary Public or other official shall
be attached to the petition; or in lieu of having the signers of the petition
acknowledge before a Notary Public or other officer, the person(s) circulating
the petition may execute and file with the petition an affidavit to the effect that
such person(s), or as he certified, that each name was signed freely, voluntarily,
without undue influence of any nature, and under no misrepresentation as to
facts.
4. An application for a zone change shall be filed with the Administrative Official,
who shall within 5 days, check the application and determine whether the same
83
is signed by the property owners requesting a zone change and contains the
required plat and list of names. The Administrative Official shall then fix the
public hearing date before the Commission as provided in Section 16.03.
16.03 Notice of Public Hearing for Zone Change: Whenever a resolution proposing a zone
change is adopted by the Council, or whenever the Commission initiates any such
change, or an application is submitted by a property owner is deemed sufficient, the
Administrative Official shall set the proposed change for a public hearing before the
Commission, giving notice to all persons particularly interested and to the general public.
The hearing shall be set within 30 days of the filing of the request. The notice shall set
forth the time and place of the hearing and the nature of the zone change proposed.
Such notice shall be given in the following manner:
(A) When the zone change or reclassification of property is proposed by the Council or
the Commission, notice of the public hearing shall be given by posting the notice in
three conspicuous places within the affected area within not less than 10 days prior
to the date of the hearing.
(B) For a zone change or reclassification proposed by a petition, a post card or letter
containing the notice shall be mailed not less than 20 days prior to the date of the
hearing to each property owner within the affected area; provided, that failure of
any such owner to receive any notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings.
(C) For a zone change that would limit or prohibit uses previously allowed in the zone,
written notice shall be provided to the owner of every property in the zone as shown
in the county tax roll. The notice shall:
1. Contain the following language in boldfaced type extending from the lefthand
margin to the right-hand margin across the top of the face page of the
notice: This is to notify you that Aumsville has proposed a land use
regulation that will affect the permissible uses of your land.
2. Contain substantially the following language in the body of the notice: On
(date of public hearing), (city) will hold a public hearing regarding the
adoption of Ordinance Number ___. The city has determined that adoption
of this ordinance will affect the permissible uses of your property and may
reduce the value of your property .
16.04 General Conduct of Hearing: Refer to Sections 12 of this ordinance.
16.05 Action by the Commission: After its final public hearing on a proposed zone change, the
Commission shall forward to the Council its decision and include in its decision, findings
of fact to support the public health, safety, and welfare by relating to, but not limited to
the following:
(A) That the change is in conformance with the Aumsville Comprehensive Plan, or that
there was a mistake in the amended plan, or conditions in the area have changed
since adoption of the amended plan. This includes both the plan map, and the
goals, objectives, and policies of the plan.
(B) That there is a public need for the proposed use or zone.
(C) That this need will best be met by a zone change of the property in question as
compared with other property.
84
(D) That there is no other appropriately zoned property in the surrounding area that
could be used.
(E) That the range of uses allowed by the proposed zone will not over-burden existing
and future capacity of public facilities.
When the report of the Commission is filed with the Council on any proposed zone
change, the Administrative Official shall set the date, time and place for the hearing,
a brief description of the property for which a zone change is sought and the nature
of the zone change sought. The Administrative Official shall also give notice of the
public hearing by posting a notice in three conspicuous places within the affected
area and by publishing such notice in a local newspaper of general circulation in
Marion County not less than 3 times in any daily newspaper or not less than 1 time
in any other newspaper at least 7 days prior to the public hearing. At the hearing
before the Council, all persons who are affected by the proposed change, or are of
the general public, shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, either by counsel,
in person, or by written testimonial.
16.06 Final Action by the Council: Any zone change or reclassification of property shall be by
ordinance, which shall be passed by the Council. Any denial of a proposed zone change
shall be by resolution. Whenever any premises are reclassified as to zone, or a new
zone established, or boundary lines of a zone changed, the Official Zoning Map shall be
changed.
16.07 Continuances: Any hearing before the Commission or Council may be continued from
time to time.
16.08 Effective Date of Zone Change: After a public hearing is held by the Council, the zone
change shall be effective 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance.
16.09 Appeals: An appeal from a decision of the Council is to the Land Use Board of Appeals
as provided by state law.
85
SECTION 17.00
Annexations
Purpose: Land within the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) of the city of Aumsville, as
indicated on the city’s Comprehensive Plan Map, is considered available for
annexation. This section provides for a timely and orderly process to determine
and adjust city limits boundaries to best meet the needs of the city.
17.01 Commission
17.02 Administrative Official
17.03 Application
17.04 Public Hearings
17.05 Criteria to be Applied
17.06 Final Action by the Council
17.07 Record of Annexation
17.08 Effective Date of Annexation
17.09 Limitation of Reapplication
86
SECTION 17.00
Annexations
17.01 Commission: The Commission is authorized to conduct public hearings on all proposed
annexations and shall forward its findings, conclusions, and recommendations to the
Council within 15 days following the closing of the public hearing.
17.02 Administrative Official: The Administrative Official shall set the public hearing before the
Commission a petition for annexation.
17.03 Application: Other than a city-initiated annexation, an annexation petition shall be
accomplished by filing the petition with the Administrative Official, using forms prescribed
and paying the posted fee.
17.04 Public Hearings: Public hearings before the Commission and the Council shall be in
accordance with the procedures in Section 12, Administrative Procedures. Marion
County shall be notified of all annexation applications and be provided the opportunity to
review and comment.
17.05 Criteria to be Applied:
(A) The annexation proposal complies with the city Comprehensive Plan, or
amendments to that effect can be achieved.
(B) The annexation will provide development that is at present unable to be met by
existing available land in the city.
(C) There is a present and future capacity of public services to accommodate future
development of the annexed area.
(D) The annexation is in the best interest of the city.
(E) If an election is required, the majority of eligible voters called upon to vote have
consented to the annexation.
(F) The property is located adjacent to the Aumsville City limits.
17.06 Final Action by the Council: After receiving the findings, conclusions, and
recommendation of the Commission, the Council shall set and hold a public hearing on
the proposed annexation. The Council may approve the annexation if it concludes that
is complies with the criteria the criteria described in Section 17.05 and any requirements
of state law. If an election on the annexation is required, the Council shall submit the
proposed annexation to the voters of the area proposed for annexation or the voters of
the city, or both, at a general election or at a special election to be held for that purpose.
17.07 Record of Annexation: The Administrative Official shall maintain records of annexations
to the city’s Comprehensive Plan text and map and the city’s zoning map.
17.08 Effective Date of Annexation: An annexation is final on the date it is filed with the
Oregon Secretary of State. The city will file an annexation ordinance with the Secretary
87
of State within 30 days of the expiration of the appeal period following the City Council
decision. If an appeal of the Council’s decision is filed, the city shall withhold filing of this
document until the appeal is legally resolved
17.09 Limitation of Reapplication: Reapplications for annexation shall not be reconsidered
within 1 year following a final order by the Council.
88
SECTION 18.00
Off-Street Parking and Loading
18.01 New and Existing Facilities to Provide Parking and Loading
18.02 Reduction of Required Parking Area
18.03 Parking Location, Shared Parking, and Driveways
18.04 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Requirements
18.05 Off-Street Automobile and Bicycle Parking Requirements
18.06 Off-Street Loading Requirements
18.07 Exceptions to Loading Requirements
18.08 Parking and Loading Development Standards
18.09 Parking and Loading Plan Required
18.10 Construction
18.11 Bicycle Parking
18.12 Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles
89
SECTION 18.00
Off-Street Parking and Loading
18.01 New and Existing Facilities to Provide Parking and Loading: Off-street vehicular parking
areas, off-street loading areas, and bicycle parking facilities shall be provided and
maintained:
(A) For any new building or structure erected.
(B) For additional seating capacity, floor area, guestrooms, or dwelling units added to
any existing building or structure.
(C) When the use of the building or structure is changed and would require additional
parking areas under the provisions of this ordinance. This change in parking shall
only apply if the required increase exceeds 25% of the existing number of spaces.
(D) For handicapped: One parking space at each area of public access.
18.02 Reduction of Required Parking Area: Off-street parking and loading areas which existed
on the effective date of this ordinance shall not be reduced below the required minimum
as set forth in this ordinance.
18.03 Parking Location, Shared Parking, and Driveways: Off-street parking and loading areas
shall be provided on the same lot with the main building or structure or use, except that
in any non-residential zone, parking areas may be located off the site of the main
building, structure or use if it is within 500 feet of such site on an adjacent parcel,
provided the adjacent parcel is not a residential use in the commercial zone.
(A) Off-Site Parking. Except for single-family dwellings, the vehicle parking spaces
required by this section may be located on another parcel of land, provided the
parcel is within a reasonable walking distance of the use it serves. The distance
from the parking area to the use shall be measured from the nearest parking space
to a building entrance, following a sidewalk or other pedestrian route. The right to
use the off-site parking must be evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, easement, or
similar written instrument.
(B) Mixed Uses. If more than one type of land use occupies a single structure or parcel
of land, the total requirements for off-street automobile parking shall be the sum of
the requirements for all uses, unless it can be shown that the peak parking
demands are actually less (e.g., the uses operate on different days or at different
times of the day). In that case, the total requirements shall be reduced accordingly.
(C) Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or
parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the
extent that the owners or operator show that the need for parking facilities does not
materially overlay (e.g., uses primarily of daytime versus nighttime nature), and
provided that the right of joint use is evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, contract,
or similar written instrument establishing joint use.
(D) Credit for On-Street Parking. The amount of off-street parking required shall be
reduced by one off-street parking space for every on-street parking space adjacent
to the development. On-street parking shall follow the established configuration of
90
existing on-street parking, except that angled parking may be allowed for some
streets, where permitted by city and/or county standards. The following constitutes an
on-street parking space:
1. Parallel parking, each 24 feet of uninterrupted curb;
2. 45 degree diagonal, each with 10 feet of curb;
3. 90 degree (perpendicular) parking, each with 10 feet of curb;
4. Curb space must be connected to the lot which contains the use;
5. Parking spaces that would not obstruct a required clear vision area, nor any
other parking that violates any law or street standard; and
6. On-street parking spaces credited for a specific use may not be used
exclusively by that use, but shall be available for general public use at all times.
No signs or actions limiting general public use of on-street spaces is permitted.
(E) Shared Driveway Access: Where parking is provided for two or more uses,
structures or parcels of land, access needs may be satisfied by use of a common or
shared driveway to the extent that the right of joint use us evidenced by a recorded
deed, contract, or similar written instrument establishing joint use and maintenance.
(F) Magazine Parking: Magazine Parking shall only count as one parking space for the
purpose of determining conformance to the required number of parking spaces.
18.04 Off-Street Vehicular Parking Requirements:
(A) If several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for
off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the several uses
computed separately.
(B) Required parking shall be available for parking of operable passenger vehicles of
residents, customers, and employees only, and shall not be used for the storage or
display of vehicles or materials.
18.05 Off-Street Automobile and Bicycle Parking Requirements:
(A) Criteria Used in Determining Parking Requirements. The criteria used include the
following:
1. Number of equivalent dwelling units.
2. Square Footage of a Facility or Building. Unless otherwise noted, when
square feet are specified, the area measured shall be the net floor area of
the building's primary use, but shall exclude any space within a building
used for off-street parking, loading, or service functions not primary to the
use. For example, net floor area for a restaurant is limited to the dining
area.
3. Capacity or Number of Persons. When the requirements are based on the
number of: (a) Employees — it shall be determined on the basis of the
number of persons working on the premises during the largest shift at peak
season; (b) Sleeping facilities or beds provided — it shall be determined on
the basis of the maximum number of persons to be accommodated or beds
available.
4. Persons at Maximum Occupancy. The number used shall be determined
on the basis of the maximum occupancy for the shift.
91
(B) Parking Requirements
Off-street parking for vehicles and bicycles shall be provided based on the
following table. Vehicle parking space improvements shall comply with provisions
in Section 18.03 and bicycle parking improvements shall comply with provisions in
Section 18.11.
VEHICLE AND BICYCLE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
Land Use Activity
Vehicle Spaces
Bicycl
e
Space
s
Measurement
A. 1, 2, and 3 family
dwellings
2 spaces per dwelling unit 0 None
B Accessory dwelling
units
2 spaces per ADU if equal
to or over 400 square feet.
1 space per ADU if under
400 square feet.
C. Multi-family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit 1 Per two dwelling
units
D. Hotel, motel, boarding
house
1 space per guest room
plus 1 space for the owner
or manager
1 Per 20 guest
rooms
E. Club, lodge Spaces sufficient to meet
the combined minimum
requirements of the
heaviest uses being
conducted, such as hotel,
restaurant, auditorium, etc.
1 Per 20 vehicle
spaces
F. Hospital, nursing
home
1 space per two beds and 1
space per 2 employees
1 Per 20 vehicle
spaces
G. Churches, auditorium,
stadium, theater
1 space per 4 seats or
every 8 feet of bench length
2 Per 20 vehicle
spaces
H. Elementary, junior
high school
2 spaces per classroom,
plus off-street loading
facility
3 Per classroom
I. High school 1 space per classroom and
one space per employee,
plus off-street loading
1 Per classroom
J. Bowling alley, skating
rink, community center
1 space per 100 sq. ft. plus
1 space per employee
1 Per 20 vehicle
spaces
92
K. Retail store, except as
provided in “L”
1 space per 400 sq. ft. plus
1 space per 2 employees
1 Per 20 vehicle
spaces
L. Service or repair shop,
retail store handling
exclusively bulky
merchandise, such as
automobiles or
furniture
1 space per 800 sq. ft. of
gross floor area, plus 1
space per 2 employees
1 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
M. Bank; office buildings;
medical and dental
clinic
1 space per 300 sq. ft. of
gross floor area, plus 1
space per 2 employees
1 Per 20 vehicle
spaces
N. Eating and drinking
establishment except
a Mobile Food Vendor.
See 18.05(R)
1 space per 4 seats or
every 8 feet of bench
length, plus 1 space per 2
employees
1 Per 20 vehicle
spaces
O. Wholesale
establishment
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of
gross floor area, plus 1
space per 700 sq. ft. of
retail area
1 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
P. Municipal and
governmental
1 space per 600 sq. ft., plus
1 space per 2 employees
3 Per 10 vehicle
spaces
Q. Manufacturing and
processing:
One space per employee
during the largest shift,
plus,
1. 0-24,900 sq. ft. 1 space per 700 sq. ft. 3 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
2. 25,000-49,999 sq.
ft.
1 space per 800 sq. ft. 3 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
3. 50,000-79,999 sq.
ft.
1 space per 1000 sq. ft. 3 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
4. 80,000-199,999 sq.
ft.
1 space per 2000 sq. ft. 5 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
5. 200,000 sq. ft. and
over
1 space per 3000 sq. ft. 8 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
R. Warehousing and
storage distribution,
terminals
One space per employee
during the largest shift,
plus,
1. 0-49,999 sq. ft. 1 space per 3,000 sq. ft. 6 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
93
2. 50,000 sq. ft and
over
1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. 5 Per 30 vehicle
spaces
S. Mobile Food Vendor
Short Term - Open in
one location for less
than a 72-hour period,
or open not more than
three hours a day in
any one location
No parking required
Medium Term – Open
in one location for
more than a 72-hour
period but less than
45 days in a 6-month
period
1 space required
Long Term – Any
period of time not
meeting the definition
of Short or Medium
term
Parking required as
required for a restaurant
See Section 18.05.N
Required parking may
not displace parking
required for another
use.
18.06 Off-Street Loading Requirements: Off-street loading spaces for commercial and
industrial buildings shall require a minimum loading space size of 10 feet wide, 25 feet
long, and 14 feet high, in the following manner:
1. Up to 20,000 square feet of gross floor area 250 square feet
2. 20,000 to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area 500 square feet
3. Over 50,000 square feet of gross floor area 750 square feet
18.07 Exceptions to Loading Requirements: The Commission may waive the off-street loading
requirements for any commercial or industrial building or use when it has been
determined that the building or use is of a kind not requiring the loading or unloading or
delivery of merchandise or other property by commercial trucks or delivery vehicles.
18.08 Parking and Loading Development Standards: All parking areas shall be developed and
maintained as follows:
(A) Location. The required yard areas adjacent to a street shall not be used for
parking or loading areas, except a residential driveway. The interior yards, other
than those adjacent to a street, may be used for parking and loading areas when
such yard areas have been developed for that purpose and are not at variance
with this ordinance.
94
(B) Surfacing. All driveways, parking, and loading areas shall be paved with asphalt
or concrete surfacing and shall be adequately designed, graded, and drained.
(C) Surfacing for Single-Family Uses. All driveways, parking spaces and vehicle and
recreational vehicle storage areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete
surfacing matching existing surfaces and shall be adequately designed, graded,
and drained. Unless prohibited by the building design (e.g., a garage running
parallel to a street) all parking and storage spaces shall run perpendicular to the
adjacent street and shall not reduce minimum landscaping area requirements.
(D) Size of parking spaces and driveways:
1. A driveway for residential use shall be a minimum width of 10 feet.
2. One-way drives shall have a minimum improved width of at least 12 feet,
exclusive of parking spaces.
3. Two-way drives shall have a minimum improved width of at least 20 feet,
exclusive of parking spaces.
4. The minimum width of any parking space shall be 10 feet, exclusive of
driveways.
5. The minimum length of any parking space shall be 20 feet, exclusive of
driveways.
(E) Screening. When any parking or loading area is within or adjacent to any
residential zone, such parking or loading area shall be screened from all
residential properties within an ornamental fence, wall, hedge, or other form of
landscaping of at least 4 feet in height, but not more than 6 feet in height.
Screening shall not encroach into vision clearance areas as required and
screening shall be continuously maintained and protected from damage from
vehicles using the parking areas. (See Section 7 and 22)
(F) Lighting. Any illumination of a parking or loading area shall be so arranged as to
be directed entirely onto the loading or parking area and shall be deflected away
from residential use, and shall not cast a glare or reflection onto moving vehicles
or a public right-of-way.
(G) Single-Family Driveways. On a lot developed with a single-family dwelling, only
one driveway is allowed per street frontage unless the frontage is over 100 feet in
length.
(H) Maximum Parking Allowed. With the exception of properties with single-family
homes and duplexes, no site shall be permitted to provide more than thirty
percent in excess of the minimum off-street vehicle parking required by
Section 18.05.
18.09 Parking and Loading Plan Required: Applications for hearing before the Commission for
development permits shall submit a parking and/or loading plan, drawn to scale, and
showing:
(A) Access to street(s), both ingress and egress.
(B) Location of individual parking spaces.
(C) Location of existing and proposed buildings.
(D) Proposed screening.
(E) Proposed lighting.
(F) Surface markings and/or signs for traffic flow and space designations.
95
(G) Vehicles leaving the property from a parking area shall enter the street in a forward
motion.
(H) Proposed bicycle-parking plan.
18.10 Construction: It shall be required that all approved parking, loading, and bicycle parking
areas shall be completed and available for use at the time of final inspection or issuance
of an occupancy permit.
18.11 Bicycle Parking: At a minimum, bicycle parking facilities shall be consistent with the
following design guidelines:
(A) Bicycle parking shall be convenient and easy to find. Where necessary, a sign
shall be used to direct users to the parking facility.
(B) Each bicycle parking space shall be at least 2 feet by 6 feet with a vertical
clearance of 7 feet.
(C) An access aisle of at least 5 feet between bicycle spaces shall be provided in each
bicycle parking facility.
(D) Bicycle parking facilities shall offer security in the form of either a lockable
enclosure in which the bicycle can be stored or a stationary object, i.e., a "rack",
upon which the bicycle can be locked. Structures that require a user-supplied lock
shall accommodate both cables and U-shaped locks and shall permit the frame and
both wheels to be secured (removing the front wheel may be necessary). Note:
businesses may provide long-term, employee parking by allowing access to a
secure room within a building, although additional short-term customer parking may
also be required.
(E) The rack shall support the bicycle in a stable position without damage.
(F) Rows of bicycle racks shall not exceed 20 feet in length. Rows shall be separated
at least 5 feet.
18.12 Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles:
(A) Automobile vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates
shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in
completely enclosed buildings or in developed parking areas.
(B) Recreational vehicles, except in a manufactured home park and where specifically
permitted by this ordinance, may not connect to City water or sewer.
(C) Recreational vehicles stored on private property and not connected to City sewer
and water may be occupied no more than 10 days per 30-day period. The City
Administrator may permit occupancy longer than 10 days in a 30-day period in
cases of unique hardship, in cases of temporary housing related to construction, or
in cases where other special circumstances exist. Permission must be in writing,
must describe the special circumstance, must state the specific time period
occupancy may occur, and cannot grant an exception for more than a 6-month
period unless authorized by City Council.
96
SECTION 19.00
Signs
19.01 Purpose
19.02 Definitions
19.03 General Provisions
19.04 Signs Generally Permitted
19.05 Prohibited Signs
19.06 Signs in Residential Zones
19.07 Signs in Commercial, Industrial, and Interchange Development Zones
19.08 Review Procedures
19.09 Non-conforming Signs
19.10 Variances - Signs
97
SECTION 19.00
Signs
Signs: Any writing, including letter, word, or numeral; pictorial presentation, including mural,
illustration or decoration; emblem, including device, symbol or trademark; flag, including banner or
pennant; or any other device, figure or similar thing which is a structure or any part thereof, or is
attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building or structure or device;
and is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise; and is visible from any public right-ofway.
Sign does not include house numbers. For purposes of Section 19.00 et seq., the following
definitions apply:
Building Frontage: For the purpose of determining allowable sign area in a commercial district,
the building frontage is the full width of the building wall where the primary customer entrance is
located. This is generally facing the public street, but may face
an internal parking lot. If there is more than one major customer
entrance with entrances on differing frontages, only the single
longest frontage is used to determine allowable sign area.
Canopy Sign: A sign hanging from a canopy or eave, at any
angle relative to the adjacent wall, the lowest portion of which is
at least 8 feet above the underlying grade.
Flashing Sign: A sign any part of which pulsates or blinks on
and off.
Free-Standing Sign: A sign supported by one or more uprights,
poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground, or a sign
supported by any structure primarily for the display and support
of the sign and may include a free-standing monument sign.
Graffiti: Markings, such as initials, slogans, or drawings, written, spray-painted, or
sketched on a sidewalk, wall of a building, or public restroom, or the like.
Incidental Signs: A sign, not temporary, which is normally
incidental to the allowed use of the property, but can contain
any message or content. Such signs can be used for, but are
not limited to, A-frame or sandwich board signs, nameplate
signs, warning or prohibition signs, and directional signs not
otherwise allowed.
Indirect Illumination: A source of illumination directed toward
such sign so that the beam of light falls upon the exterior
surface of the sign.
Figure 1 - Free Standing Sign
Figure 2 - Indirect Illumination
98
Integrated Shopping Center: a unified complex with three or more commercial establishments
occupying three or more distinct spaces in a single building or three or more freestanding
buildings on a single property or on separate properties but with the business frontages all
facing a common parking area.
Message Sign: A sign which can change its message electronically and is designed to display
various messages, including but not limited to signs displaying time and temperature.
Monument Sign: A square or rectangular sign that sits directly on the ground without pole or
uprights located at the entrance to a shopping center, business park, or residential development.
Off-Site Sign: A sign which advertises goods, products,
businesses, services, or facilities which are not sold,
manufactured, or distributed on or from the property or
facilities on which the sign is located, and which is
supported by a substantial permanent sign structure with
a display surface or display surfaces designated
primarily for the purpose of painting or posting a
message thereon at periodic intervals.
Portable Sign: Any sign that is not originally designed to
be permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. A sign
originally designed, regardless of its current modification, to be moved from place
to place. These signs primarily include, but are not limited to, signs attached to
wood or metal frames and designed to be self-supporting and movable, and also
including trailer reader boards. Portable signs are not to be considered temporary
signs as defined and used in this ordinance.
Projecting Sign: A sign the face of which is not parallel to the wall on which it is
mounted, projecting more than 12 inches from a structure.
Roof Sign: A sign or any portion of which is displayed above
the highest point of the roof, whether or not such a sign also
is a wall sign.
Sign Alteration or Altered: Any change in the size, shape,
method or illumination, position, location, construction, or
supporting structure of a sign. A change in sign copy or sign
face alone shall not be considered an alteration.
Figure 3 - Portable Signs
Figure 4 –
Projecting Sign
Figure 5 - Roof signs
99
Sign Area: The area of a sign shall be the entire area within
any type of perimeter or border which encloses the outer
limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or
character. If the sign is enclosed in a frame or cabinet, the
area is based on the inner dimensions of the frame or
cabinet surrounding the sign face. When a sign is on a base
material and attached without a frame, such as a wood
board or Plexiglas panel, the dimensions of the base
material are to be used. The area of a sign having no such
perimeter, border, or base material shall be computed by
enclosing the entire area within a parallelogram or a triangle
of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire message of the sign and computing the area of
the parallelogram or the triangle. For the purpose of computing the number of signs, all writing
included within such a border shall be considered one sign, except for multi-faced signs on a
single sign structure, which shall be counted as one sign per structure. The area of multi-faced
signs shall be calculated by including only 1/2 the total area of all sign faces.
Temporary Sign: A new business is allowed a temporary sign
for a period of 90 days. This sign must be constructed in a
professional manner such as a printed banner, a frame or
sandwich board sign. Temporary signs cannot exceed the
facilities allowable sign square footage. Within that time a sign
permit must be obtained to replace with permitted signage.
Wall Sign: A sign attached to, erected against or
painted on a wall of a building or structure, with the
exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately
parallel to the face of said wall and not projecting
more than 12 inches. A sign painted on an awning in
which the face of the sign is approximately parallel to
and within 3.5 feet of the wall shall also be
considered a wall sign.
Story: That portion of building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and ceiling or roof above. If the
finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused under-floor space is more than
6 feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement, cellar or unused
under-floor space shall be considered a story. (See Definitions, Basement/Cellar. See also
Illustrations).
Street: A public road; or right-of-way dedicated, deeded or condemned, other than an alley; or
driveway, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue,
place, way, drive, land, boulevard, highway, road and other thoroughfare. The word “street”
shall include all arterial highways, freeways, traffic collector streets, road systems, and local
streets.
Figure 6 - Sign Area
Figure 8 – Wall Sign
Figure 7 - Temporary Sign
100
19.03 General Provisions:
(A) Conflicting Standards. Signs shall be allowed subject to the provisions of this
section, except when these provisions conflict with the specific standards for signs
in the subject zone.
(B) Uniform Sign Code. All signs shall comply with the provisions of the Uniform Sign
Code of the Uniform Building Code.
(C) Sign Clearances. A minimum of 8 feet above sidewalks and 15 feet above
driveways shall be provided under freestanding or wall-mounted signs that project
over a sidewalk.
19.04 Signs Generally Permitted: The following signs and sign work are permitted in all zones.
These signs shall not require a permit, and shall not be included when determining
compliance with total allowed area:
(A) Painting, change of sign face or copy and maintenance of signs legally existing. If
structural changes are made, if the sign is no longer conforming with the intent of
the code, or there is a change of use, the sign shall conform in all respects with
these regulations.
(B) Temporary signs that fall under the intent of the definition for temporary signs.
(C) Real estate signs not exceeding 6 square feet in residential zones and 16 square
feet in commercial and industrial zones, which advertise the sale, rental or lease of
premises upon which the sign is located. Real estate signs may be used up to two
years without a permit.
(D) Signs posted by or under governmental authority including legal notices, traffic,
danger, no trespassing, emergency, directional, and signs related to public services
or safety and civic events. It’s at the discretion of the City to determine what
signage may fall in this category.
(E) Incidental signs that do not exceed a total of two square feet. and fall under the
definition and intent of this code.
(F) Flags on permanent flag poles that are designed to allow raising and lowering of
the flags.
(G) Signs within a building.
(H) In a commercial zone, signs painted or hung on the inside of windows.
(I) One sign not exceeding 5 square feet giving the name, occupation, or both of the
occupant or the home occupation of the occupant of the residentially used property.
(J) Sign Permit Exemption. Unless otherwise stated within this section all signs must
obtain a sign permit.
19.05 Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited:
(A) Roof signs.
(B) Signs that emit odor, visible matter, or sound; however, an intercom system for
customers remaining in their vehicles, such as used in banks and "drive through"
restaurants, shall be allowed.
(C) Signs that use or employ side guy lines of any type.
(D) Signs that obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening used as a
means of egress.
(E) Signs closer than 24 inches horizontally or vertically from any overhead power line or
public utility guy wire.
(F) No vehicle or trailer shall be parked on a public right-of-way or public property, or on
private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way which has attached
thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of
101
providing advertisement of products or directing people to a business or activity
located on the same or nearby premises. This provision applies where the primary
purpose of a vehicle is for advertising purposes and is not intended to prohibit any
form of vehicular sign, such as a sign attached to a motor vehicle which is primarily
used for business purposes, other than advertising.
(G) Rotating/revolving signs, except by conditional use permit.
(H) Private signs that project into or over driveways and public rights-of-way, except signs
under a canopy that projects over a public sidewalk and the sign is not less than 8 feet
above the sidewalk.
(I) Signs that obstruct required vision clearance area or obstruct a vehicle driver's view of
official traffic control signs and approaching or merging traffic, or which present a
traffic hazard.
(J) Signs that interfere with, imitate, or resemble any official traffic control sign, signal or
device, emergency lights, or appears to direct traffic, such as a beacon light.
(K) Signs attached to any pole, post, utility pole or placed on its own stake and placed into
the ground in the public right-of-way.
(L) Any sign on unimproved property,
(M) Any illegible sign or sign that has 25% or more of its surface destroyed, defaced,
missing or inaccurately represents the name or nature of the current business(es)
occupying the structure.
(N) New or relocated off-site signs within the city limits are prohibited.
(O) Graffiti
19.06 Signs in Residential Zones: The following regulations apply to signs in the Residential
Single-Family and Residential Multi-Family Zones.
(A) Maximum Number. Any combination of wall, canopy, or free-standing signs not
exceeding the sign area and height limitations of this section.
(B) Maximum total sign area for property on which the building or buildings are located:
1. Single-family and two-family (duplex) dwelling - 6 square feet provided total sign
area on a free-standing sign shall be limited to a maximum of 4 square feet.
2. Multiple family dwelling - 24 square feet provided total sign area on a
freestanding sign shall be limited to a maximum of 18 square feet.
(C) Maximum Sign Height:
1. Wall, canopy, or window sign - 4 feet.
2. Freestanding sign - 6 feet.
(D) Location:
1. Wall, canopy or window sign - shall be set back from the property lines of the lot
on which it is located the same distance as the building containing the permitted
use. A sign flush with the fence (not a projecting sign) shall meet the applicable
standards for fences (see Section 22).
2. Freestanding sign - where fences are allowed (see Section 22).
(E) Illumination: Signs may only be indirectly illuminated by a concealed light source,
shall not remain illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and
shall not flash, blink, fluctuate, or produce glare.
19.07 Signs in Commercial, Industrial, and Interchange Development Zones: The following
regulations apply to signs in the Commercial, Industrial, and Interchange Development
Zones.
102
(A) Total allowed area.
1. The total allowed area of signage shall be equal to 1.5 times the length of the
building frontage up to a maximum of 150 square feet.
2. The sign area of a freestanding, monument, or projecting sign is determined by
the sign area of one side of the sign. The opposite side is not included in the
computation of total sign area.
3. A freestanding sign shall not exceed the allowable sign area for the property or
40 square feet of sign area, whichever is less.
4. A monument sign shall not exceed the allowable sign area for the property or
60 square feet of sign area, whichever is less.
(B) Number of Signs.
1. One freestanding, monument, or projecting sign is allowed per street frontage.
2. There is no limit on the number of wall or canopy signs as long as the total
allowable sign area is not exceeded.
(C) Maximum sign height:
1. Wall and canopy signs shall not project above the parapet or roof eaves.
2. Freestanding Signs - maximum total height of 20 feet.
3. Monument Signs – maximum total height of 8 feet.
4. Projecting Signs. The vertical height of a projecting sign which projects beyond
3 feet 6 inches from the face of a building to which it is attached is limited to
3 feet at 8 feet clearance. An additional 4 inches of sign height is allowed for
each additional foot of clearance above 8 feet, up to a maximum sign height of 5
feet. The vertical height of a projecting sign which projects 3 feet 6 inches or
less from the face of a building to which it is attached is not limited, except that it
shall not project more than 1 foot above the roof line at the wall, or top of the
parapet wall, whichever is higher.
(D) Location:
1. Wall signs may project up to 12 inches from the building.
2. Freestanding Sign and Monument Signs. No limitation except shall not project
over street right-of-way and shall comply with requirements for vision clearance
areas and special street setbacks.
3. Projecting Sign. Maximum projection of a sign shall be limited to 4 feet 6 inches
provided, however, that where you have a projecting sign located on a corner
approximately halfway from the 2 building faces serving 2 street frontages, the
maximum projection is 5 feet 6 inches.
(E) Special Provisions:
1. Corner Building: a building sited on the corner of two public streets may have
an additional amount of wall sign area equal to 25% of the allowable sign area
based on the longest building frontage. In this bonus circumstance, the total
computed allowable sign area shall not exceed 187.5 square feet. No more than
75% of the allowable sign area including the 25% bonus area may be located on
any single building wall. For example, if the total allowed sign area, including the
bonus area, is 160 square feet, no more than 120 square feet of sign area may
be located on a single building frontage.
2. Integrated Shopping Center: an Integrated Shopping Center may share one
single freestanding sign per street frontage. Such a joint freestanding sign shall
not exceed 100 square feet. Each individual business is still allowed a total sign
area of 1.5 times the business frontage for wall, projecting, and canopy signs.
103
19.08 Review Procedures:
(A) Permit Required. No property owner, lessee or contractor shall construct or alter
any sign, other than changing the sign copy or design without expanding the sign
area, without first obtaining a valid sign permit.
(B) Current Signs. Owners of conforming or non-conforming signs existing as of the
date of adoption of this ordinance are not required to obtain a permit.
(C) Permit Fees. Permit fees shall be established from time to time by Council
resolution.
(D) Application Requirements. An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form
prescribed by the city. The application shall include, at a minimum, a sketch drawn
to scale indicating the proposed sign and identifying existing signs on the premises,
the sign's location, graphic design, structural and mechanical design, and
engineering data which ensures its structural stability. The application shall also
contain the names and address of the sign company, person authorizing erection of
the sign and the owner of the subject property. The city shall issue a permit for a
sign unless the sign is in violation of the provisions of these regulations or other
provisions of this ordinance. Sign permits mistakenly issued in violation of these
regulations or other provisions of this ordinance are void. The city may revoke a
sign permit if the city finds that there was a material and misleading false statement
of fact in the application for the permit.
(E) Design, Construction, and Maintenance. All signs shall be designed, constructed,
and maintained according to the following standards:
1. All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building
Code in effect at the time of the sign permit application and all other applicable
structural, electrical and other regulations. The issuance of a sign permit under
these regulations does not relieve the applicant of complying with all other
permit requirements.
2. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming in all
respects with the requirements of these regulations, all signs shall be
constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the
ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame,
or structure.
3. All signs shall be maintained in a good structural condition and readable at all
times.
4. The owner shall be responsible for its erection and maintenance and its
compliance with the provisions of these regulations or other laws or ordinances
regulating signs.
19.09 Non-conforming Signs:
(A) Alteration of Non-conforming Sign Faces. When a non-conforming sign face is
damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind, or other calamity or act of nature, must
be replaced conforming to current sign standards. A sign structure or support
mechanisms so damaged shall not be replaced except in conformance with the
provisions of these regulations.
(B) Abandoned Signs. All signs for a business shall be removed within 30 days after
that business ceases to operate on a regular basis, and the entire sign structure or
structures shall be removed within 6 months of such cessation of operation. Illegal
104
and abandoned signs that are not removed or are erected in violation of this
ordinance may be removed by the city of Aumsville following notice to the property
owner. The property owner will be assessed the cost of sign removal if the owner
fails to remove the non-conforming, illegal or abandoned sign and the city exercises
its authority under this provision. Existing signs from a previous business must be
permitted by the city under current sign standards for a new business.
19.10 Variances – Signs: Any allowance for signs not complying with the standards set forth in
these regulations shall be by variance. Variances to Section 19 et seq. will be
processed according to the procedures in Section 13, but the criteria in Section 13 shall
not be used. The following criteria shall be used to review and decide sign variance
applications:
(A) There are unique circumstances or conditions of the lot, building or traffic pattern
such that the existing sign regulations create an undue hardship;
(B) The requested variance is consistent with the purpose of the chapter as stated in
Section 19.01;
(C) The granting of the variance compensates for those circumstances in a manner
equitable with other property owners and is thus not a special privilege to any other
business. The variance requested shall be the minimum necessary to compensate
for those conditions and achieve the purpose of this section;
(D) The granting of the variance shall not decrease traffic safety nor detrimentally affect
any other identified items of public welfare;
(E) The variance will not result in a special advertising advantage in relation to
neighboring businesses or businesses of a similar nature. The desire to match
standard sign sizes (for example, chain store signs) shall not be listed or
considered as a reason for a variance; and
(F) The variance request shall not be the result of a self-imposed condition or hardship.
105
SECTION 20.00
Land Divisions
20.00 LAND DIVISIONS
20.01 General Provisions
20.02 Building Requirements
20.03 Approval of Final Plats and Maps
20.04 Expiration of Land Division Approval, Time Extension, and Phasing
20.05 Public Use Areas and Parks
20.06 Property Line Adjustment
20.07 Submittal Requirements
20.08 Decision Criteria
20.09 Review Process
20.10 Effective Date of Final Approval
20.11 Expedited Land Division
20.12 PARTITION REQUIREMENTS
20.13 Partition
20.14 Application
20.15 Review
20.16 Preliminary Plat
20.17 Decision Criteria
20.18 Process for Final Plat Approval
20.19 Effective Date for Final Plat Approval
20.20 General Provisions
20.21 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS
20.22 Subdivision
20.23 Application
20.24 Public Hearing
20.25 Preliminary Plat
20.26 Decision Criteria
20.27 Process for Final Plat Approval
106
20.28 Effective Date for Final Plat Approval
20.29 General Provisions
20.30 REPLATTING
20.31 General Provisions
20.32 Replat Process/Procedures
20.33 Exception
20.34 DESIGN STANDARDS
20.35 Design Standards for Lot and Block
20.36 Public Improvements, General Provisions
20.37 Streets
20.38 Utilities
20.39 Sanitary Sewers
20.40 Storm Drainage
20.41 Water System
20.42 General Provisions
20.43 Pedestrian/Bicycle Accessways
107
SECTION 20.00
Land Divisions
20.01 General Provisions: No lot or parcel shall be divided except in compliance with this
ordinance, Chapter 92 of the Oregon Revised Statutes and the city of Aumsville's
Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
20.02 Building Requirements: A building permit shall not be issued for any lot or parcel in the
city unless the lot or parcel was legally created, and no residential building permits shall
be issued until adequate city services and utilities are available to service the proposed
dwelling.
20.03 Approval of Final Plats and Maps: The Administrative Official shall have the authority to
approve final plats where there is substantial conformance with the approved preliminary
plan or plat. A review of the Administrative Official’s decision on substantial
conformance can be requested by Administrative Official or the applicant. This review
will be determined by the Planning Commission and the Administrative Official will follow
the Planning Commission’s recommendation in approving or disapproving the final plat.
The Planning Commission’s decision is final, subject to review only as provided in
ORS 34.010 to 34.102.
20.04 Expiration of Land Division Approval, Time Extension, and Phasing: A partitioning or
subdivision plat shall be recorded within one year of the date of issuance of an Aumsville
Public Works Type B Permit, and within five years of the city land division approval
Notice of Decision. This deadline may be extended by the Commission for a period up to
one year; provided an extension request is made at least 30 days prior to the one-year
Type B Permit or five-year deadline. Only one such time extension shall be granted.
Failure to comply with the required deadlines shall require the submittal of a new land
division application.
(A) Phasing of a subdivision shall be permitted. The one-year from issuance of a
Type B Permit recordation requirement shall apply to all phases of the
development; however, the total time for all stages shall not exceed five years,
unless extended in accordance with this section. Portions platted after passage of
the first year may require modification to comply with changes in the
Comprehensive Plan, Development Ordinance or other implementing regulations.
20.05 Public Use Areas and Parks
A. Land for Public Park, Open Space, or Greenway. The provision of public spaces for
parks, playgrounds, and other open space is essential for the sound and healthy development
of residential areas. The City may require the dedication or reservation of such other areas or
sites of a character, extent, and location suitable to the needs created by such development for
parks, public utility facilities, or other public purposes.
108
1. For a residential land division (partition or subdivision) where the site is 2.0 gross
acres or larger, the developer shall designate an area of not less than 7% of the site
as a public park, open space, or greenway.
2. For a residential development that includes multi-family dwelling units (apartments,
townhouses, residential care, etc.), where the site is 2.0 gross acres or larger, the
developer shall designate an area of not less than 7% of the site as a public park,
open space or greenway.
3. For residential development on a site that is smaller than 2.0 gross acres, the City
may require dedication of up to 7% of the site for a greenway, open space, or public
park if the development site is located adjacent to an existing public school, public
park, greenway, open space or sensitive land (wetlands, flood plain, etc.) and the
City concludes the dedication is a logical extension of the existing public property or
open space.
4. The City may, at its sole discretion, require the park, open space, or greenway to be
dedicated to the City or another public agency. Dedication may be either by
dedication on a plat, deed, through conservation easement or similar device. In lieu
of dedication, the City may require the designated park, open space, or greenway to
be owned and maintained by the property owner or a homeowner’s association.
5. In lieu of dedicating or designating land for park or open space purposes under this
section, the City may require the developer pay a fee in lieu of dedication in an
amount proportionate to the value of the open space that would otherwise be
required under this section.
6. Location
a. Where the development site is adjacent to an existing public park, school,
greenway, open space or other publicly owned property, the proposed park shall
be contiguous to or connected to the existing public property.
b. Where a proposed public park, greenway or open space area shown in the
Aumsville Parks Master Plan, is located in whole or in part in a development site,
the City may require the dedication or reservation of this area.
c. Notwithstanding subsections 1, 2, and 3 above, areas along Mill Creek or
Highberger Ditch may be more suitably handled through conservation easement
whereby areas along the stream can be set aside as open space to maintain
riparian areas as habitat and where streamside pathway development may be
provided. In such cases, the City may require the developer record a
conservation easement in lieu of open space designation or dedication.
B. Standard for Dedication of a Public Park, Greenway, and/or Open Space. The
amount of land recommended for designation or dedication as a park, greenway or open space
is based on a standard of 8.5 acres of park land per 1,000 residents. The actual amount of
land shall be proportional to the impact of the residential development project.
20.06 Property Line Adjustment: A property line adjustment is a modification to lot lines or a
parcel boundary that does not result in a new lot or parcel. Property line adjustment
includes the elimination of a common property line between abutting properties also
known as the consolidation. It is recommended that the applicant confer with the city
regarding application requirements.
109
20.07 Submittal Requirements: The following information and material must be submitted by
the applicant:
(A) An application for a property line adjustment shall be submitted on forms provided
by the city to the Administrative Official and accompanied by the appropriate fee.
The application must be signed by the owners of all lots affected by the application.
(B) The application shall be accompanied by a preliminary plat drawn to scale of not
less than 1 inch equals 50 feet nor more than 1 inch equals 200 feet, and
containing at a minimum, the following:
1. Appropriate identification stating the drawing is a preliminary plat.
2. North point, scale and date.
3. Name and addresses of landowners, applicants, engineer, surveyor, planner,
architect or other individuals responsible for the plan.
4. Map number and tax lot or tax account number of the subject properties.
5. The proposed boundary lines and approximate area of the subject property
created before and after the adjustment.
6. Dimensions and size in square feet or acres of all proposed parcels.
7. The approximate location of existing streets, easements or rights-of-way
adjacent to, or within, the subject property, and, existing improvements on the
property and important features such as section, political boundary lines.
20.08 Decision Criteria: The following criteria apply to all property line adjustments:
(A) The property line adjustment cannot create an additional unit of land.
(B) Following the property line adjustment, all lots or parcels must comply with size and
dimensional standards of the applicable land use district. For non-conforming
properties, the adjustment shall not increase the degree of non-conformance of the
subject property or surrounding properties. Any proposal that will create a nonconformity
with zoning standards shall be required to obtain approval of an
appropriate variance (Section 13) prior to approval of a property line adjustment.
(C) If there are existing structures on the parcels, the property line adjustment may not
result in a setback violation.
20.09 Review Process: A property line adjustment is subject to Type I review. After a property
line adjustment is approved, the new boundary becomes effective only after one of the
following steps is completed:
(A) A metes and bounds legal description of the adjusted lots is recorded with the
Marion County Clerk; or
(B) If required by ORS Chapter 92, a final plat and boundary survey are prepared and
all new boundaries are monumented as required by ORS Chapters 92 and 209.
The final plat is submitted to the city for appropriate signatures consistent with ORS
Chapter 92. After signatures are received the applicant files the final plat in the
County Clerk's office and returns 3 copies to the city.
20.10 Effective Date of Final Approval: The approval process for a property line adjustment
shall become final upon completion of the appropriate requirement in Section 20.09
Final approval constitutes the appropriate approval necessary before a development
permit can be issued.
110
20.11 Expedited Land Division: In lieu of the partition procedures in Section 20.13, an
applicant may apply for an expedited land division. The procedures and criteria for an
expedited land division are contained in Oregon Revised Statutes, 197.360 to 380. Any
application for an expedited land division shall describe the manner in which the
proposed division complies with each of the criteria contained in ORS 197.360 and be
accompanied by the fee set by the city council for such application.
20.12 Partition Requirements
20.13 Partition: A partition is the creation of three or fewer parcel lots from one parent lot or
parcel within a calendar year. It is recommended that the applicant confer with the city
regarding application requirements. If a partition results in the creation of a large parcel
that can be subsequently divided so that there is the potential to create more than three
parcels from the original parcel that meet minimum lot area requirements, the request
shall be processed as a subdivision and subject to the design and improvement
standards for a subdivision.
20.14 Application: A partition application shall be submitted on a form provided by the city and
include the appropriate application fee along with 12 copies of a preliminary plan
together with 12 copies of any supplementary material.
20.15 Review: A partition shall be processed as a Type I-B application.
20.16 Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat for a partition shall include the following information
and data:
(A) The plan shall be drawn on a good quality paper no smaller than 8 ½” by 11” , nor
larger than 18” by 24”.
(B) The scale of the drawing shall be appropriate to the area and sufficient to show the
details of the plan and related data. A scale of 1”= 50’ or 1”= 100’ is suggested.
(C) A list of owners by address and telephone numbers within 250 feet of the property
to be divided.
(D) North arrow and date.
(E) Locations, names, pavement widths, and right-of-way of existing and proposed
streets as well as access points.
(F) The locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed easements.
(G) The location of all existing and proposed storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and other
utilities on and abutting the property.
(H) Natural features, such as rock outcroppings, marshes, wetlands, wooded areas,
and within buildable areas, trees over 12” in diameter measured at 4 1/2 feet
above the ground.
(I) The location of property within the 100-year flood plain and other areas subject to
flooding or ponding.
(J) An indication of the degree and approximate direction of the slopes.
(K) The dimensions of all existing and proposed lot lines.
(L) The proposed lot sizes in either square feet or acres.
(M) The location and present uses of all structures to remain and those to be removed.
111
(N) The proposed uses of the parcels and any deed restrictions.
(O) Location of the partition by Section, Township, and Range, and a legal description
adequate to locate the boundaries of the proposed partition.
(P) A legend that clearly defines lines, patterns, symbols, and other patterns used on
the plat.
(Q) A title block identifying the preliminary plat as “PROPOSED PARTITION”.
20.17 Decision Criteria: Approval of a partition application requires compliance with the
following criteria:
(A) Each parcel shall satisfy the dimensional standards of applicable zoning district,
unless a variance from these standards is approved.
(B) Adequate public facilities shall be available to serve the existing and newly created
parcels.
(C) The partitioning shall comply with the applicable design criteria in Section 20.
20.18 Process for Final Plat Approval: Upon final approval of a tentative partition plat, the
following shall apply to complete the partitioning process:
(A) Survey Submitted: Within 1 year of the final decision approving a preliminary plat,
a final survey of the approved plat shall be recorded. The final partitioning plat shall
be completed by a registered land surveyor and comply with all applicable
provisions contained in ORS Chapter 92.
(B) Final Approval: The mayor, city administrator, and city engineer are authorized to
sign a final partitioning plat if the partition plat is consistent with the approved
preliminary plat, and if the conditions of approval have been satisfied. One
recorded copy of the survey plat shall be marked "APPROVED" and retained for
the city's files.
(C) Recording of Approved Plat Required: No building permit shall be issued, or parcel
sold, transferred, or assigned until the final approved plat has been recorded with
the County Clerk. The applicant shall be responsible for all recording fees.
20.19 Effective Date for Final Plat Approval: An approved partition shall become final upon the
recordation of the approved partition plat under ORS 92.120 together with any required
documents with the County Clerk. An approved partition plat is void one year after
issuance of the development permit if it is not recorded. Final approval constitutes the
appropriate approval necessary before a development permit can be issued.
20.20 General Provisions:
(A) Partition approval is valid in perpetuity, upon recording of the final surveyed plat.
(B) No parcel within an approved partition may be redivided within the same calendar
year in which it was recorded, except through the subdivision process.
112
20.21 Subdivision Requirements
20.22 Subdivision: A subdivision is the creation of four or more lots from one parent lot or
parcel within a calendar year. It is recommended that the applicant confer with the city
regarding application requirements.
20.23 Application: The applicant shall complete an application on a form provided by the city
and pay the appropriate application fee along with 10 copies of a preliminary plan
together with 10 copies of any supplementary material.
20.24 Public Hearing: Subdivisions shall be processed as a Type III application. Upon a
determination that the application is complete, a public hearing shall be scheduled
before the Commission and the Council.
20.25 Preliminary Plat: A subdivision application shall include the following information and
data:
(A) Vicinity Map: At reduced scale, show the proposed subdivision in relation to the
adjacent area showing existing subdivisions, streets, and tract lines of acreage land
parcels; the names of the recorded owners of all land parcels within 100 feet or
farther if necessary to assist in locating the proposal.
(B) Names and addresses of the owner(s), engineer, and surveyor.
(C) Location of proposal by Section, Township, and Range, and a legal description
sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the proposal according to the real
estate records of the County Assessor.
(D) Date, northpoint, and scale of drawing at either 1”= 50’ or 1”= 100’.
(E) Name of the subdivision. This name must not resemble the name of any other
development within the city or within 5 miles of Aumsville.
(F) The location, widths and names of both open and unopened streets within or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision, together with easements and other important
features such as section lines, section corners, city boundary lines, monuments,
railroad rights-of-way.
(G) The location in the adjoining streets or property of existing sewers and water mains,
culverts and drainpipes, electric conduits or lines proposed to be used on the
property to be subdivided, and invert elevations of sewers at points of proposed
connections.
(H) Zoning on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(I) Existing uses of the property and adjacent property within 250 feet, including
locations of all existing structures to remain on the property.
(J) Lot layout with approximate dimensions and proposed lot numbers.
(K) Location, width, directions, and flow of all water courses.
(L) Contour lines and the elevations of all control points, which are used to determine
the contours.
(M) Location of properties within the 100-year flood plain, and the location of and
direction of drainageways or easements and the location of areas subject to
flooding and the locations of properties subject to inundation or stormwater overflow
within or adjacent to the proposed subdivisions.
113
(N) The direction of slope by means of arrows or other suitable means.
(O) Natural features such as rock outcroppings, marshes, wetlands, wooded areas and
within buildable areas, trees over 12 inches in diameter measured at 4½ feet from
the ground.
(P) The location, size, and use of all contemplated and existing public areas within the
proposed subdivision and a description of the adaptability of the area for uses
contemplated. Areas for public use approved by the Council shall be dedicated for
such use and indicated on the final plat before recording.
(Q) Proposed streets: Location, widths, names, approximate radii of curves as well as
required bikeways and pedestrian facilities. The relationship of all streets to any
projected streets as shown on the Transportation System Plan (TSP) or any
development plan adopted by the Council.
(R) Easements located on the site or abutting property, showing the width and purpose
of all easements.
(S) Proposed land uses.
(T) Proposed deed restrictions or covenants.
(U) Total acreage in the subdivision and the percent of land dedicated to the public, not
including easements.
(V) All public improvements proposed to be installed and the approximate time
installation is desired.
(W) Any special improvement to be made by the developer shall be submitted to the
Commission and Council with sufficient detail as is practical.
(X) Supplementary information, plans and details:
1. Approximate center line profiles with extensions for a reasonable distance
beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision showing the finished grade of
streets and the nature and extent of street construction.
2. A plan for showing the proposed placement of meter boxes.
3. A plan for flood control, including profiles of proposed drainageways.
4. If lots are to be graded, a plan showing the nature of cuts and fills and
information on the character of the soil.
5. Construction signs: For subdivisions under construction, the greater of
16 square feet (32 if in an RM zone) or 2 square feet per lot or property for sale,
up to a maximum of 100 square feet in sign area. The maximum dimension of
such sign shall not exceed 20 feet. Such sign may be used for only a period of
1 year. The Administrative Official may extend the time up to an additional year
if construction or sale of property or homes continues during that time.
(Y) A legend that clearly defines lines, patterns, symbols, and other patterns used on
the plat.
20.26 Decision Criteria: Approval of a subdivision application requires compliance with the
following criteria:
(A) The overall dwelling density shall be consistent with policies contained in the
Comprehensive Plan.
(B) Each lot shall satisfy the dimension standards of the applicable zoning district, with
the exception of the following:
1. The applicant may submit a variance as a part of the subdivision request to
modify dimension requirements.
2. For subdivisions exceeding 10 lots, up to 20% of the lots may be reduced
in area by a maximum of 10%, provided, the average lot size for the entire
114
subdivision meets or exceeds the minimum lot size required in the
underlying zone.
(C) Adequate public facilities including sewer, water, transportation, parks, and
telecommunications shall be available to serve the newly created lots and
transportation shall be coordinated with the school district. The subdivision shall
comply with applicable requirements of Section 22.
(D) The subdivision shall comply with the applicable design criteria in Section 20.
20.27 Process for Final Plat Approval: The applicant shall complete a final plat. The plat shall
conform to the survey requirements contained in ORS Chapter 92. Upon receipt of the
final plat, the Administrative Official shall determine its substantial conformity with the
Council's approval of the tentative plat. The Administrative Official shall advise the
developer of any changes or additions to be made. The developer shall have a
reasonable time in which to correct and resubmit the final plat. When the final plat
substantially conforms to all conditions and requirements as set forth by the Council's
approval the developer shall take the following actions:
(A) The final plat shall be signed and dated by the mayor, city administrator, and city
engineer.
(B) As required by ORS 92.110, obtain the approval signatures of the Board of
Director's, or Board's delegate, of any irrigation district, drainage district, water
control district or district improvement company if the subdivision is within such
district.
(C) Obtain the signatures of approval of the County Board of Commissioners.
(D) Obtain the approval signature of the County Assessor certifying that all taxes on the
property have been paid or bonded for in accordance with state law.
(E) Deliver the approved plat and accompanying documents to the County Clerk for
recording.
(F) Deliver, before submittal of building permit applications, four 11” x 17” photocopies
of the recorded plat, an 18” x 24” blueprint, and subdivision as-built drawings to the
city.
20.28 Effective Date for Final Plat Approval: The effective date and approval process for a
subdivision shall become final upon the recording date of the approved final subdivision
plat, recorded in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes. A final subdivision plat is
void one year after signature approval if it is not recorded. Recording of the final plat
and compliance with Section 20.31 (F) constitutes the appropriate approval necessary
before a building permit can be issued.
Unless the final plat is recorded within the timelines in Section 20.04, it shall be
resubmitted as a new land division application, which may require changes or alterations
deemed necessary because of changed conditions within the general area of the
subdivision.
115
20.29 General Provisions:
(A) Subdivisions that are not phased subdivisions may require modification to comply
with changes in the Comprehensive Plan, Development Ordinance or other
implementing regulations if construction is not complete after one year from the
recording of the final plat.
(B) Improvements/Bonding: Prior to issuance of a building permit, all improvements
required by the conditions of approval shall be constructed or the construction shall
be guaranteed through a performance bond or other instrument acceptable to the
city attorney. Phasing of the improvements and development costs shall be
permitted.
(C) The Council or the Administrative Official may withhold or delay the final approval
until a field check of the proposed subdivision has been made by the city.
(D) The approval of the final plat does not constitute or effect an acceptance by the
public of the dedication of any street or other easement shown on the plat.
20.30 Replatting
20.31 General Provisions:
(A) Replatting. Replatting is the act of platting the lots, parcels, or easements in a
recorded subdivision or partition plat to either reconfigure the existing subdivision or
partition; or, increase or decrease the number of lots within a subdivision.
(B) Applicability. Replats shall only apply to recorded partition or subdivision plats.
(C) Partial Replatting. A replatting request may apply to the entire partition or
subdivision, or, to only a portion of a partitioning or subdivision.
(D) Authority. The Commission shall have the authority to review and approve
proposed replats of a recorded plat.
(E) Utilities.
1. Replats may be used to realign, reduce, or omit utility easements.
2. Affected utility companies or public agencies shall be notified of a replat request
affecting utility easements. Notification shall be consistent with notice
requirements provided to adjacent property owners. Any utility company or
public agency that desires to maintain an easement subject to vacation must
notify the city in writing within 14 days of the mailing of the notice.
(F) Effect of Replat.
1. Replats shall not act to vacate any recorded covenants or restrictions.
2. Replats shall not prevent the vacation actions permitted in ORS Chapters 271 or
368.
3. Replats shall not serve to vacate any public street or road.
20.32 Replat Process/Procedures:
(A) Replat Review Procedures. A replat of a recorded subdivision or partition plat shall
be reviewed as a new request for a subdivision or partition and shall be subject to
all provisions of this chapter. This requirement shall also include applicable public
hearing and notice requirements.
(B) Final Replat Review. Final review of a replat shall comply with the final plat review
procedures for a partitioning or subdivision, whichever is applicable to the request.
116
20.33 Exception:
(A) Building Permits Not Meeting Parcel Requirements. When a building permit
authorizes construction that does not meet the parcel requirements of the
Development Ordinance, the applicant may treat adjacent lots under the same
ownership as a single unit of land, notwithstanding the fact that they are separate
legal parcels; and
(B) Sale of Either Lot Prohibited. Sale of any portion of either lot or parcel prior to
bringing the permitted use into compliance with the Development Ordinance
requirements will be in violation of the Development Ordinance and is prohibited.
20.34 Design Standards
20.35 Design Standards for Lot and Block:
(A) Development shall provide for the continuation or projection of existing public
streets in surrounding areas or conform with the plan for the neighborhood or any
development plan adopted by the Commission.
(B) Lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for
reason of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all
lots in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance with the exception of lots
designed for open space.
(C) Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of this ordinance. When
lots are more than double the minimum area designated by the district, the approval
authority shall require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision
and the opening of future streets where it would be necessary to serve such
potential lots.
(D) Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide
separation of residential developments from streets of collector and arterial street
status or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and/or orientation.
When driveway access from arterials is necessary for several adjoining lots, the
Commission shall require that such lots be served by a combined access driveway
in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such streets. The driveway should be
designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on
arterials.
(E) The side property lines of a lot shall, as far as practical, run at right angles to the
street upon which it faces, except that on a curved street the side property line shall
be radial to the curve.
(F) Blocks shall not exceed 600 feet between street lines unless the adjacent layout or
special conditions justify greater length. Except where topography or other physical
features make it otherwise, block widths shall not be less than 200 feet or more
than 400 feet.
(G) Cul-de-sacs shall be as short as possible and shall have a maximum length of
400 feet. In any residential division, no more than 5 lots shall have access on a culde-
sac bulb except that additional lots may be permitted where one additional offstreet
parking space is created for each lot which has access on the bulb. The
minimum frontage of a lot on a cul-de-sac shall be 20 feet as measured
perpendicular to the radius. Cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets shall have turnarounds
with a radius of not less than 45 feet to the curb line.
117
(H) Lots are required to have frontage on a public right-of-way. A private access
easement does not fulfill this requirement.
20.36 Public Improvements, General Provisions: The standard specifications for construction,
reconstruction or repair of streets, bikeways, sidewalks, streetlights, curbs, gutters, and
other public improvements within the city area as approved in the city's Public Works
Design and Construction Standards. Unless otherwise provided in the particular
specifications for work authorized, public facility work shall be according to the Public
Works Design and Construction Standards. The city engineer may make changes or
supplements to the Public Works Design and Construction Standards consistent with the
application of engineering principles to the conditions in the city. The city engineer shall
incorporate amended or new specifications in the Public Works Design and Construction
Standards. In the event of discrepancies between these provisions and the Public
Works Design and Construction Standards, the Public Works Design and Construction
Standards shall apply.
20.37 Streets:
(A) General Provisions.
1. No land use approval or building permit shall be issued unless the development
has an approved irrevocable access to a public street. Streets, sidewalks and
bikeways within a development shall be improved in accordance with this
ordinance. Any new street or additional street width planned as a portion of an
approved street plan shall be dedicated and improved in accordance with this
ordinance.
2. Streets shall be created through the approval of a subdivision plat or partition;
however, the Council may approve the creation of a street by acceptance of a
deed provided that such street is deemed essential by the Council for the
purpose of general traffic circulation. Such conditions as are deemed desirable
and which are not at variance with the objectives of ordinance, may be required
by the Council prior to the approval of the creation of any street.
3. Development proposals shall provide for the continuation of all streets,
bikeways, and pedestrian facilities within the development and to existing and
planned streets, bikeways, and pedestrian facilities outside the development.
(B) Location, Width. The location, width, and grade of all streets shall conform to the
TSP and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
bikeways and pedestrian facilities, to topographic conditions, to public convenience
and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be
served by such streets. The Aumsville TSP shall take preference over any other
approved street plan. Street grades shall be approved by the city engineer who
shall give consideration to adequate drainage and traffic safety. Where location of
a street is not shown in an approved street plan, the arrangement of streets in a
development shall either:
1. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets
in the surrounding areas; or
2. Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other
conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical or
where no plan has been previously adopted.
118
In determining the location of new streets in a development or street plan,
consideration shall be given to maximizing available solar access for adjoining
development sites. Unless otherwise indicated on an approved street plan, the
street right-of-way, sidewalk, bikeway, and roadway widths shall not be less than
the minimum width in feet shown in the following table. Where a range is indicated,
the width shall be determined by the city.
Type of Street Minimum
Right-of-Way
Width
Minimum
Roadway
Width
Sidewalk
Width
Bike lane
Width
Arterials1 60-104 feet 40-84 feet 5 feet 6 feet
Collectors 60-94 feet 40-74 feet 5 feet 6 feet2
Local3 60 feet 40 feet 5 feet
Cul-de-sac 50 feet 40 feet 5 feet
Cul-de-sac bulb 60 foot radius 45 foot radius 5 feet
1 Or consistent with county standards.
2 As determined by the City Engineer.
3 Curb extensions will be provided at intersections of local streets subject to approval of the
City
(C) Street Extensions. Where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory
future division of adjoining land, streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of
the tract to be developed. A barricade shall be constructed at the end of the street
by the property owners, the cost of which shall be included in the street
construction cost; and it shall not be removed by any party until authorized by the
city.
(D) Alignment. As far as practical, streets shall be dedicated and constructed in
alignment with existing streets by continuing the centerlines thereof. In no case
shall the staggering of streets making "T" intersections be designed such that jogs
of less than 200 feet on such streets are created, as measured from the center line
of such street.
(E) Intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. Proposed intersections of two streets at an acute angle of less than
80 degrees is not acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an
intersection to provide at least 100 feet of street at right angles with the intersection.
Not more than 2 streets shall intersect at anyone point.
(F) Dead-end streets longer than 400 feet may be approved by the Commission if no
other feasible means is available for development of the property and special
provisions are made for public facilities, pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and
119
emergency service access. The use of cul-de-sacs and other dead-end streets
shall be discouraged and shall only be approved upon a showing by the applicant
of unusual or unique circumstances justifying the use of such a street.
1. In cases where cul-de-sacs are determined to be justified they shall only be
permitted subject to the following conditions:
(a) There shall be no cul-de-sacs more than 400 feet in length.
(b) All cul-de-sacs shall terminate with circular turn-a-rounds, except where the
Commission finds that a "pear” or “hammerhead” turn-around is more
appropriate given topography, natural or build features, and expected use.
(c) An accessway shall be provided consistent with the standards for
accessways, as determined by the Commission to be necessary to insure
safe, efficient, and convenient multi-modal access.
2. For purposes of this section:
(a) “Unusual or unique circumstances” exist when one of the following
conditions prevent a required street connection:
1. Excess slope (8% or more);
2. Presence of a wetland or other body of water; or
3. Existing development on adjacent property prevents a street connection.
(b) “Accessway" means a walkway that provides pedestrian and or bicycle
passage either between streets or from a street to a building or other
destination such as a school, park, or transit stop. Accessways generally
include a walkway and additional land on either side of the walkway, often in
the form of an easement or right-of-way, to provide clearance and separation
between the walkway and adjacent uses. Accessways through parking lots
are generally physically separated from adjacent vehicle parking or parallel
vehicle traffic by curbs or similar devices and include landscaping and
lighting. Where accessways cross driveways, they are generally raised,
paved or marked in a manner which provides convenient access for
pedestrians.
(G) Partial Streets. A partial width street, while generally not acceptable, may be
approved where reasonably essential to the development when in conformity with
the other requirements of these standards and when it will be practical to require
the dedication of the other portion when the adjoining property is developed.
Whenever a partial street is adjacent to a tract to be developed, the other portion of
the street shall be provided within such tract. Reserve strips may be required to
preserve the objectives of partial width streets.
(H) Existing Streets. Full street improvements to all existing streets adjacent to, within
or necessary to serve the development shall be required at the time of partitioning
or subdivision unless the developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city
engineer that the condition and sections of the existing streets meet all city
standards and are in satisfactory condition to handle projected traffic loads. The city
may allow the developer to record an approved “Waiver of Rights to Remonstrance
for Streets and Public Utility Improvements” in lieu of full street improvements
where the following criteria are met:
1. The development is a partition; and
2. The existing street to be improved is more than 500 feet from any street or
segment with full or ¾ street improvements; and
3. The existing roadway condition and sections are adequate to handle existing
and projected traffic loads; and
120
4. Existing public utilities (water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer) located within
the existing roadway are adequate, or can be improved without damaging the
existing roadway surface.
(I) 3/4 Street Improvements. 3/4 streets, while generally not acceptable, may be
approved in lieu of full street improvements where essential to the reasonable
development of an area and when the city finds it to be practical to require the
completion of the other 1/4 street improvement when the adjoining property is
developed. 3/4 street improvements shall not be allowed unless the following
criteria are met:
1. The adjoining land abutting the opposite side of the street is undeveloped; and
2. The adjoining land abutting the opposite side of the street is within the city limits
and the urban growth boundary; and
3. The proposed street improvement will encompass the entire paved surface of
the existing street.
(J) Slope and Curves. Slope shall not exceed 6 percent on arterials, 10 percent on
collector streets, or 12 percent on other streets. Center line radii of curves shall not
be less than 300 feet on major arterials, 200 feet on secondary arterials, or 100 feet
on other streets, and shall be to an even 10 feet. Where existing conditions,
particularly the topography, make it otherwise impractical to provide buildable sites,
the Commission may accept steeper grades and sharper curves. In flat areas,
allowance shall be made for finished street grades having a minimum slope,
preferably, of at least 0.5 percent.
(K) Railroad Right-of-Way and Intersections.
1. Whenever a proposed development contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-ofway,
provisions may be required for a street approximately parallel to and on
each side of the railroad right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate
use of the land between each street and the railroad. The distance shall be
determined with due consideration at each cross street of the minimum distance
required for approach grades to a future grade separation and to provide
sufficient depth to allow screen planting along the railroad right-of-way in nonindustrial
areas.
2. Where an adjacent development results in a need to install or improve a railroad
crossing, the cost for such improvements may be a condition of development
approval or other equitable means of cost distribution shall be determined by the
Council.
(L) Arterial Access. Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the development design shall provide adequate protection for
residential properties and shall separate residential access and through traffic, or if
separation is not feasible, the design shall minimize the traffic conflicts. The design
requirements may include any of the following:
1. A parallel access street along the arterial.
2. Lots of suitable depth abutting the arterial to provide adequate buffering with
frontage along another street.
3. Screen planting at the rear or side property line to be contained in a non-access
reservation along the arterial.
4. Other treatment suitable to meet the objectives of this subsection.
(M) Private Streets. Private streets are permitted within manufactured home parks and
singularly owned developments of sufficient size to warrant interior circulation on
private streets. Design standards for private streets shall be established by the city
121
engineer but shall not exceed the requirements for public streets. The Commission
may require legal assurance for the continued maintenance of private streets.
(N) Traffic Signals. The location of planned traffic signals shall be noted on approved
street plans. Where a proposed street intersection will result in an immediate need
for a traffic signal, a signal that meets approved city specifications shall be installed
and the cost may be included as a condition of development approval or other
equitable means of cost distribution shall be determined by the Council. Where a
single development or concurrent group of development will create a need for a
traffic signal at an intersection, the cost for such installation may be attached as a
condition of development if approved by the Commission.
(O) Street Names. Except for extensions of existing streets, no street names shall be
used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an existing street. Street
names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the city and shall be
subject to the approval of the city administrator.
(P) Street Signs. The city shall install all street signs, relative to traffic control and
street names, as specified by the city engineer for any development. The cost of
signs and installation shall be included in the project costs, and the city shall be
reimbursed for all materials and labor.
(Q) Bikeways. If appropriate to the extension of a system of bikeways, existing or
planned, the Commission may require the installation of separate bicycle lanes
within streets and separate bicycle paths. Where possible, bikeways should be
separated from other modes of travel including pedestrians. Minimum width for
bikeways shall be 6 feet per travel lane.
(R) Sidewalks. Except where exempted by the Council, sidewalks shall be constructed,
replaced, or repaired to city standards and shall be located as follows:
1. On both sides of all city streets to be built at the time of street construction;
2. On both sides of all previously constructed streets, and in pedestrian easements
and rights-of-way and are to be constructed along all portions of the property
designated for pedestrian access ways in conjunction with any development of
the property. Curbs and sidewalks shall be required for all streets, public or
private, access easements, driveways, and other ways used for vehicular travel,
which are 24 feet wide or wider.
3. On one side of any industrial street to be constructed at the time of street
construction or after determination of curb cut locations if rolled curbing is not
used.
4. The City may require a planter strip separation of at least 5 feet between curb
and sidewalk in the design of any arterial or collector street where parking is
prohibited adjacent to the curb, except where the following conditions exist:
inadequate right-of-way, curb side sidewalks already exist on predominant
portions of the street; and, conflict with utilities.
5. Sidewalks adjacent to all streets shall be 5 feet in width. Width of sidewalks
shall be measured from the back of the curb.
6. Maintenance of sidewalks and pedestrian walks, curbs, and planter strips shall
be the continuing obligation of the adjacent property owner.
7. Accessways shall be installed when required for cul-de-sac or dead-end streets.
8. The Public Works Director shall inspect the construction of sidewalks for
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and the Public Works Design
and Construction Standards.
122
20.38 Utilities:
(A) Undergrounding. Except as otherwise provided, all utility lines, cables, or wires,
including but not limited to those used for electricity, communication, street lighting,
and cable television, constructed upon or within land subdivided or prepared for
development after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be required to be
placed underground. The intent of the city is that no poles, towers, or other
structures associated with utility facilities shall be permitted on any street or lot
within a subdivision. Overhead facilities shall be permitted for the following in which
case the above provisions shall not apply:
1. Emergency installations of electric transmission lines or to through feeders
operating at distribution voltages which act as a main source of supply to
primary laterals and to direct connected distribution transformers and primary
loads. Should it be necessary to increase the capacity of major power
transmission facilities for service to the area, such new or revised installations
shall be made only on rights-of-way or easements on which existing overhead
facilities exist at the time of such capacity increase.
2. Appurtenances and associated equipment such as surface-mounted
transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets, telephone
cable closures, connection boxes, and the like.
3. Structures without overhead wires, used exclusively for fire alarm boxes,
streetlights, or municipal equipment installed under the supervision and with the
approval of the city engineer.
4. Power substations, pumping plan, and similar facilities necessary for
transmission or distribution of utility services shall be permitted subject to
compliance with all zoning regulations and other applicable land use
regulations. Plans showing landscaping and screening shall be approved by the
Commission for all such facilities prior to any construction being started.
5. Television antennas.
6. Industrial developments except for those utility lines, cables, and/or wires
providing service to an individual lot. Such lines must be placed underground
from the nearest power pole to the facility ultimately being operated on the
individual lot. Certain industries requiring exceptionally large power supplies
may request direct overhead power as a condition of approval. Underground
utilities may be required in industrial park developments and planned
developments in industrial districts.
(B) Future Installations. The owner or contract purchaser of subdivided real property
within a subdivision shall provide in the instrument conveying such interest, a
covenant not to erect or allow to be erected upon the property conveyed, any
overhead utility facilities, except such facilities as are exempt from underground
installation. Such covenant shall require grantees to install, maintain, and use
underground electric, telephone, cable television, or other utility services used or to
be used to serve the premises. A copy of the covenant shall be submitted with the
final plat.
(C) Easements. A property owner proposing a development shall make arrangements
with the city and each utility franchise for the provision and dedication of utility
easements necessary to provide full service to the development. The standard width
for public utility easements adjacent to street right-of-way shall be 7 feet. The
123
minimum width for all other public utility easements shall be 20 feet unless otherwise
specified by the utility company or city engineer. Where feasible, utility easements
shall be centered on a corner lot.
20.39 Sanitary Sewers:
(A) General Provisions.
1. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve each new development to existing
mains.
2. The city engineer shall approve all sanitary sewer plans and proposed systems
prior to issuance of development permits involving sewer service.
3. Proposed sewer systems shall include consideration of additional development
within the area as projected by the Comprehensive Plan.
4. Proposed developments shall make provisions for any right-of-way, easement,
trunk line, or pumping station specifically designed in an approved master
sewerage plan or capital improvements plan. The cost for such provisions shall
be assessed as specified in the master sewerage plan or capital improvements
plan.
5. Development permits may be restricted by the Administrative Official where a
deficiency exists in the existing sewer system or portion thereof which cannot be
rectified within the development and which if not rectified will result in a threat to
public health and safety, surcharging of existing mains, or violations of state or
federal standards pertaining to operations of the sewage treatment system.
20.40 Storm Drainage:
(A) General Provisions. The Administrative Official shall issue a development permit
only where adequate provisions for storm and flood water run-off have been made
as determined by the city engineer. The stormwater drainage system shall be
separate and independent of any sanitary sewerage system. Where possible,
inlets shall be provided so surface water is not carried across any intersection or
allowed to flood any street. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown on
every development proposal plan.
(B) Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course and such
further width as will be adequate for conveyance and maintenance. Streets or
parkways parallel to watercourses may be required.
(C) Accommodation of Upstream Drainage. A culvert or other drainage facility shall,
and in each case be large enough to, accommodate potential run-off from its entire
upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside of the development. The city
engineer shall determine the necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions
of the construction standards and specifications and assuming conditions of
maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Comprehensive Plan.
(D) Effect of Downstream Drainage. Where it is anticipated by the city engineer that
the additional run-off resulting from the development will overload an existing
drainage facility, the Commission shall withhold approval of the development until
provisions have been made for improvement of said potential condition.
(E) Drainage Management Practices. In the absence of a drainage basin master plan,
124
a development may be required to employ drainage management practices
approved by the city engineer which would minimize the amount and rate of surface
water run-off into receiving streams. Drainage management practices may include,
but are not limited to:
1. Temporary ponding of water.
2. Permanent storage basins.
3. Minimization of impervious surfaces.
4. Emphasizing natural water percolation and natural drain ways.
5. Prevention of water flowing from the roadway in an uncontrolled fashion.
6. Stabilization of natural drainageways as necessary below drainage and culvert
discharge points from a distance sufficient to convey the discharge without
channel erosion.
7. Run-off from impervious surfaces shall be collected and transported to a natural
drainageway with sufficient capacity to accept the discharge.
20.41 Water System: Each development site shall be provided potable water; and fire
hydrants and mains shall be installed as required by the fire chief.
20.42 General Provisions:
(A) Improvements for Partitions. The same improvements shall be installed to serve
each building site of a partition as is required of a subdivision. However, if the
Commission finds that the nature of development in the vicinity of the partition
makes installation of some improvements unreasonable, the Commission shall
except those improvements. In lieu of excepting any improvement, the
Commission may recommend to the Council that the improvements be installed in
the area under special assessment financing or other facility extension policies of
the city.
(B) Property Monumentation. Upon completion of a street improvement and prior to
acceptance by the city, all property corners shall be re-established and protected.
20.43 Pedestrian/Bicycle Accessways:
(A) Pedestrian/bicycle accessways shall be provided as follows:
1. Pedestrian/bicycle access shall be provided in cul-de-sacs to either adjacent
streets or undeveloped properties, excluding cul-de-sacs under 300 feet in
length.
2. Pedestrian/bicycle accessways shall be provided to adjacent parks or schools
when out of direction travel is more than 400 feet.
3. Subdivisions shall provide a street connection at least every 600 feet or an
accessway every 400 feet to adjacent or parallel streets.
(B) Pedestrian/Bicycle Accessway Development Standards.
1. The accessway shall be a 10-foot-wide paved or concrete surface constructed
within a 15-foot right-of-way.
2. The accessway shall be as short as possible. The accessway shall not be more
than 250 feet in length. There shall be vision clearance from one end of the
accessway to the other end.
3. The accessway shall be lit.
4. The pedestrian and bicycle accessway shall be signed.
125
5. The accessway shall be dedicated to the public for maintenance and security.
6. The accessway shall be constructed at sidewalk grade. Ramps from the street
to the accessway shall be provided as required by the city engineer.
(C) The Commission may waive the accessway requirement under any of the following
circumstances:
1. Where the establishment of the accessway is contrary to public safety; or
2. Where there are other available ways or absence of any need for such
accessways; or
3. Where limited by topography or other natural features.
126
SECTION 21.00
Site Development Review
21.01 Purpose
21.02 Application and Fee
21.03 Applicability of Provisions
21.04 Site Development Review – Application Review Procedure
21.05 Site Development Review – Application Submission Requirements
21.06 Site Development Review – Approval Criteria
21.07 Expiration of Approval
21.08 Financial Assurances
21.09 Development in Accordance With Permit Approval
127
SECTION 21.00
Site Development Review
21.01 Purpose: The purpose of this section is to:
(A) Carry out the development pattern and plan of the city and its Comprehensive Plan
policies and related ordinances;
(B) Provide rules, regulations and standards for efficient and effective administration of
site development review;
(C) Ensure safe, functional, energy-efficient developments which are compatible with
the natural and built environment;
(D) Resolve potential conflicts that may arise between proposed developments and
adjacent uses;
(E) Promote the public health, safety and general welfare;
(F) Lessen or avoid congestion in the streets, and secure safety from fire, flood,
pollution and other dangers;
(G) Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and facilitate
adequate provisions for transportation, water supply, sewage and drainage.
21.02 Application and Fee: An application for site development review shall be filed with the
Administrative Official and accompanied by the appropriate fee. It shall be the
applicant’s responsibility to submit a complete application that addresses the review
criteria of this section.
21.03 Applicability of Provisions:
(A) Site development review shall be required for all new developments and
modifications of existing developments except:
1. Regular maintenance, repair and replacement of materials (e.g., roof, siding,
awnings, etc.), parking resurfacing, and similar maintenance and repair;
2. Single-family detached dwellings (including accessory dwelling units and
manufactured homes);
3. A single duplex, up to two single-family attached units, or a single triplex which
is not being reviewed as part of any other development, and parking on the
same lot;
4. Building additions in commercial, industrial and public zones of not more than
600 square feet and any residential building addition not creating additional
dwelling units;
5. Interior modification or change in use within an existing building that meets one
of the following:
(a) A modification or change in use when the change requires less than a 25%
net increase in the number of parking spaces required (not existing) for the
current use; or
(b) A modification or change in use when the change generates less than an
average of 100+ trips per day per 1000 gross square feet of building as
documented in the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers or other qualified source; or
(c) The modification or change in use does not create any additional daily
shipping and delivery trips by vehicles over 20,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight.
128
6. Accessory structures in all zones with 600 or less square feet of floor area are
exempt. In residential zones accessory structures over 600 square feet is a
Type I action.
7. Home occupation;
8. Land Divisions and associated public improvements.
9. Improvements by city departments on land zoned Public; except when the City
Administrator determines the proposed improvement has potential impacts,
such as traffic, lighting, and noise, such that the public review embodied in the
Site Development Review process is needed to help determine appropriate
mitigation.
10.Other development, when required by a condition of approval.
(B) Site Development Review.
1. Unless otherwise exempted by provisions in Section 12, all other activities
subject to a site development review shall be reviewed as a Type II
discretionary review conducted by the Commission with a public hearing.
(See Section 12.00 for review procedure.)
2. These procedures in (B) apply to all developments in the city, except those
specifically listed in item (A) above.
21.04 Site Development Review – Application Review Procedure: Site development review
shall be conducted as a Type II procedure, using the procedures in Section 12, and
using the approval criteria contained in Section 21.06.
21.05 Site Development Review – Application Submission Requirements:
Site Development Review Information. An application for site development review shall
include the following information, as deemed applicable by the Administrative Official:
(A) Site Analysis Map. At a minimum the site map shall contain the following:
1. The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property to a distance
sufficient to determine the location of the development in the city, and the
relationship between the proposed development site and adjacent property and
development. The property boundaries, dimensions and gross area shall be
identified;
2. Topographic contour lines at intervals determined by the city;
3. Identification of slopes greater than 10%;
4. The location and width of all public and private streets, drives, sidewalks,
pathways, rights-of-way, and easements on the site and adjoining the site;
5. Potential natural hazard areas, including any areas identified as subject to a
100-year flood, areas subject to high water table, and areas mapped by the city,
county, or state as having a potential for geologic hazards;
6. Resource areas, including marsh and wetland areas, streams, wildlife habitat
identified by the city or any natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring
protection;
7. Site features, including existing structures, their size and dimension, pavement,
drainageways, and ditches;
8. Locally or federally designated historic and cultural resources on the site and
adjacent parcels or lots;
9. The location, size and species of trees and other vegetation having a caliper
(diameter) of 4 inches or greater at 4 feet above grade;
129
10. North arrow, scale, names and addresses of all persons listed as owners on the
most recently recorded deed;
11. Name and address of project designer, engineer, surveyor, and/or planner, if
applicable;
12. Other information, as determined by the city administrator. The city may require
studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site
features.
(B) Proposed Site Plan. The site plan shall contain the following information, if
applicable:
1. The proposed development site, including boundaries, dimensions, and gross
area;
2. Features identified on the existing site analysis map which are proposed to
remain on the site;
3. Features identified on the existing site map, if any, which are proposed to be
removed or modified by the development;
4. The location and dimensions of all proposed public and private streets, drives,
rights-of-way, and easements;
5. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, utilities,
pavement and other improvements on the site. Setback dimensions for all
existing and proposed buildings shall be provided on the site plan;
6. A calculation of the total impervious surface before development and the total
effective impervious surface after development;
7. The location and dimensions of all storm water or water quality treatment,
infiltration and/or retention facilities;
8. The location and dimensions of entrances and exits to the site for vehicular,
pedestrian, and bicycle access;
9. The location and dimensions of all parking and vehicle circulation areas (show
striping for parking stalls and wheel stops, as applicable);
10. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas, including sidewalks, internal pathways,
pathway connections to adjacent properties, and any bicycle lanes or trails;
11. Loading and service areas for loading, deliver and waste disposal;
12. Outdoor recreation spaces, common areas, plazas, outdoor seating, street
furniture, and similar improvements, as applicable;
13. Location, type, and height of outdoor lighting;
14. Name and address of project designer, if applicable;
15. Locations, sizes, and types of signs;
16. Other information, determined by the city administrator. The city may require
studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site
features (e.g., traffic, noise, environmental features, natural hazards, etc.) in
conformance with this ordinance.
(C) Architectural Drawings. Architectural drawings shall be submitted showing:
1. Building elevations (as determined by the city administrator) with building height
and width dimensions;
2. Building materials, color and type;
3. The name of the architect or designer.
(D) Preliminary Grading Plan. A preliminary grading plan prepared by a registered
engineer shall be required for developments which would result in the grading (cut
or fill) of 1,000 cubic yards or greater. The preliminary grading plan shall show the
location and extent to which grading will take place, indicating general changes to
130
contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of
retaining walls, if proposed. Surface water detention and treatment plans may also
be required.
(E) Landscape Plan. A landscape plan is required and shall show the following:
1. The location and height of existing and proposed fences and other buffering or
screening material;
2. The location of existing and proposed terraces, retaining walls, decks, patios,
shelters, and play areas;
3. The location, size, and species of the existing and proposed plant materials (at
time of planting);
4. Existing and proposed building and pavement outlines;
5. Specifications for soil at time of planting, irrigation if plantings are not drought
tolerant (may be automatic or other approved method or irrigation) and
anticipated planting schedule.
(F) Sign drawings shall be required in conformance with the city’s sign regulations
(Section 19).
(G) Copies of all existing and proposed restrictions and covenants.
(H) Letter or narrative report documenting compliance with the applicable approval
criteria contained in Section 21.06
(I) Transportation Impact Analysis: If applicable, prepare a Transportation Impact
Analysis (TIA) in accordance with the provisions of Section 22.14 Transportation
Impacts.
21.06 Site Development Review – Approval Criteria: The review authority shall make written
findings with respect to all of the following criteria when approving, approving with
conditions, or denying an application:
(A) The application is complete, as determined in accordance with Section 12 and
Section 21.05;
(B) The application complies with all of the applicable provisions of the underlying land
use zone, including: building and yard setbacks, lot area and dimensions, lot
coverage, and other special standards as may be required for certain land uses;
(C) Characteristics of adjoining and surrounding uses;
(D) The application complies with the supplementary zone regulations contained in
Sections 18, 19, and 22;
(E) Conditions required as part of a land division (Section 20), conditional uses
(Section 14), or other approval shall be met;
(F) Provision for adequate noise and/or visual buffering from non-compatible uses;
(G) Drainage and erosion control needs;
(H) Public health factors;
(I) Problems that may arise due to development within potential hazard area; and
(J) Retention of existing natural features on site.
21.07 Expiration of Approval:
(A) Site development review approval shall be effective for a period of 2 years from the
date of approval, if the building permit has not been issued within the 2-year period.
(B) The Planning Commission may upon written request by the applicant and payment
of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period for a period not to
exceed a total of 5 years from the original Site Development Review Notice of
Decision, provided that:
131
1. No major modifications are made to the approved site development review plan;
2. The applicant can show intent to initiate to complete construction on the site
within the extension period;
3. There have been no changes to the applicable ordinance provisions on which
the approval was based. If there have been changes to the applicable
ordinance provisions and the expired plan does not comply with those changes,
then the extension shall not be granted; in this case, a new site development
review shall be required; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that failure to obtain building permits and
substantially begin construction within 2 years of site development approval was
beyond the applicant’s control.
(C) Site development review approval shall be voided immediately if development on
the site is a departure from the approved plan or development use, or approved
modified plan and development as provided for in Section 21.09(B)
21.08 Financial Assurances: If required site improvements cannot be completed before the
issuance of an occupancy permit, a performance bond or other guarantee acceptable to
the city attorney may be required, as provided for in Section 12.
21.09 Development in Accordance With Permit Approval:
(A) Developments shall not commence until the applicant has received all of the
appropriate land use and development approvals (i.e., site development review
approval) and building permits. Construction of public improvements shall not
commence until the city has approved all required public improvement plans (e.g.,
utilities, streets, public land dedication, etc.). The city may require the applicant to
enter into a development agreement (e.g., for phased developments and
developments with required off-site public improvements), and may require bonding
or other assurances for improvements, in accordance with Section 21.08. Site
development review approvals shall be subject to the standards and limitations of
(B) and (C), below.
(B) Modifications to Approved Plans and Developments. Minor modifications of an
approved plan or existing development shall be processed as a Type I procedure
(See also Section 21.09(c)(3)(d). Major modifications, as defined in Section 1, shall
be processed as a Type II procedure and shall require site development review.
(C) Phased Development. Phasing of development may be approved with the site
development review application, subject to the following standards and procedures:
1. A phasing plan shall be submitted with the site development review application.
2. The Commission shall approve a time schedule for developing a site in phases,
but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than 3 years
without reapplying for site development review.
3. Approval of a phased site development review proposal requires satisfaction of
all of the following criteria:
(a) The public facilities required to serve each phase are constructed in
conjunction with or prior to each phase;
(b) The development and occupancy of any phase dependent on the use of
temporary public facilities shall require Council approval. Temporary
facilities shall be approved only upon city receipt of bonding or other
assurances to cover the cost of required public improvements, in accordance
with Section 21.05 A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed
132
to the applicable city standard, subject to review by the city engineer.
(c) The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other
property owners to construct public facilities that were required as part of the
approved development proposal; and
(d) An application for phasing may be approved after site development review
approval as a minor modification to the approved plan.
133
SECTION 22.00
Supplementary Zone Regulations
22.01 Clear Vision Area
22.02 Exception to Height Regulations
22.03 Fences, Hedges, and Walls
22.04 Residential Accessory Structures
22.05 Parking in Required Yards
22.06 Average Yard Setback Adjacent to a Street
22.07 Yard Exceptions
22.08 Outside Storage
22.09 Access Spacing Standards
22.10 Transportation Mobility Standards
22.11 Transportation Impacts
22.12 Interchange Area Management Plan Boundary
22.13 Home Occupation
22.14 Temporary Use for Hardship
22.15 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)
22.16 House of Worship Uses
134
SECTION 22.00
Supplementary Zone Regulations
22.01 Clear Vision Area:
(A) A clear vision area shall be maintained on corner lots at the intersection of public or
private streets, and at the intersection of any street with an alley or driveway.
(B) A clear vision area is a triangular area, two sides of which are lot lines starting from
the corner at the intersection and measured for a distance of 20 feet. In the case of
driveways, the 20 feet shall be measured from the intersection of the property line
with the centerline of the driveway, or the centerline for two-way drives. Where lot
lines or intersections have rounded corners, the lines shall be extended in a straight
line to a point of intersection (making a corner) and so measured. The third side of
the triangle shall be a line connecting the non-intersecting ends of the other two
lines. (See Illustrations following Section 27).
(C) Clear vision shall also include all areas adjacent to a street, 10 feet from the face of
the curb, regardless of property line.
(D) A clear vision area shall contain no planting, sight-obscuring fence wall, hedge,
structure, vehicle parking, or any temporary or permanent obstruction exceeding
36 inches measured from the adjacent curb elevations or established street grade if
no curb exists. Trees may be located in this area, provided all branches and foliage
are removed up to a height of 8 feet above the ground. The vision clearance area
may be increased by the Council, Planning Commission, or Administrative Official
upon finding that more sight distance is required for safety reasons. (i.e., due to
traffic speeds, roadway alignment, etc.)
22.02 Exception to Height Regulations: The height limitations contained in the zoning district
do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or
other appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended
for human occupancy.
22.03 Fences, Hedges, and Walls:
(A) Location and Height.
1. Residential and Commercial Fences and Walls. Fences and walls shall
comply with Clear Vision Area requirements. Fences and walls shall not
exceed 8 feet in height, and are subject to the following:
(a) The placement of a fence or wall shall require a city permit; and,
(b) Fences cannot be installed on top of a retaining wall unless the
retaining wall is properly backfilled to create a measurable adjacent
grade; and,
(d) No fence or wall located within a front yard facing a street shall
exceed a height of 36 inches in height; and homes with two street
facing sides shall have a setback of 10 feet on the street side other
than the front side.
(e) Fences and walls shall not be located within the city’s right-of-way;
and
135
(f) Fences and walls cannot be constructed on the property line
(g) Street facing fences shall have the finished side out. If on corner lot,
both street facing sides shall be finished-side out.
2. Industrial and Public Fences and Walls. Fences and walls shall comply with
Clear Vision Area requirements. Fences and walls shall not exceed 8 feet in
height, including any security barbed wire.
3. Hedges.
(a) Hedges shall be planted in compliance with the Clear Vision Area
requirements in Section 22.01 and Property provisions in Section 22.02(B);
(b) No hedge located within a yard facing a street shall exceed 36-inches in
height.
(c) Hedges shall be maintained to be healthy and not overgrow onto adjacent
properties or sidewalks. Plants forming hedges shall be replaced within
6 months after dying or becoming diseased;
(d) Hedges that are dead or diseased, or poses a hazard to personal safety,
property, or the health of other vegetation such as trees and hedges, shall
be removed by the property owner; and
(e) Hedges and other landscaping may be established to provide visual
screening and privacy within the side and rear yards; while leaving front
yards and building entrances mostly visible for security purposes.
(B) Property.
1. Damage. Where a private fence, wall, hedgeplantings or other structure or
landscaping exists on city property, easements or rights-of-way, the city is not
liable for any damage to the structure or landscaping resulting from the city
accessing the existing easements or rights-of-way to install, remove, fix, repair,
or replace utilities.
2. Notification. Property owners that have fences, walls, hedges, or plantings
located in an existing easement or right-of-way shall be notified 10 days in
advance of any city work requiring the property owner to remove fences, walls,
hedges, or plantings.
3. Access. In all instances, fences, walls, and hedges shall not be placed within
3 feet of a fire hydrant or utility service equipment, e.g., water meter, valve box,
television/telephone pedestal, or power transformer.
4. Injury. Where fences, walls, or plantings exist on city property or easement
rights-of-way, the adjoining property owner shall be liable to any person
suffering personal injury caused thereby.
5. In the case of an emergency, the city may take any and all necessary steps to
ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Aumsville. Said steps
may include the removal or damage of fences, walls, hedges, or plantings,
which may be on the city’s property, easements, or rights-of-way. The city may
take all reasonable steps necessary to remove any encroachments upon the
city right-of-way to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. Said
steps shall be taken by the city without any requirement of notification to the
person responsible for the placement of the encroachment upon the city’s
property, easements, or rights-of-way.
136
(C) Materials.
1. Fences and walls shall not contain any material that could cause bodily harm,
such as barbed wire (except where explicitly permitted by this section), broken
glass, spikes, or any other hazardous or dangerous materials. Electric fences
are not permitted.
2. Chain link fences in Industrial and Public Zones that are at least 7 feet in height
may be topped with up to 1 foot of barbed wire. The barbed wire shall be
straight up or slanted into the property, if new, existing fencing may match
existing angle and the total height shall not exceed 8 feet.
22.04 Residential Accessory Structures
(A) The following shall apply to residential accessory structures:
1. Location and Number. Accessory structures shall be located within the
rear yard and shall be prohibited in any yard located adjacent to a street
except when the house sits on a corner lot In this situation, the shed may
be located on the side yard Opposite to the street, provided, a minimum
6-foot sight obscuring fence screens the shed from the street. A maximum
number of two are permitted.
2. Height. The maximum allowable height is 16 feet, except that the accessory
structure wall shall not exceed the height of the primary building wall.
3. Property Setbacks. When a wall adjacent to a property line is 9 feet or less in
height, the minimum setback shall be 3 feet. For each one-foot increase in
the wall height above 9 feet, the setback shall increase one additional foot.
The minimum setback adjacent to an alley shall be five feet. Under no
circumstances shall the roof overhang permit stormwater run-off unto
adjacent property or adjacent right-of-way.
4. Building Size and Lot Coverage. In no case shall the accessory structure
occupy more than 30% of the entire rear or side yard. The building size
limitation shall be considered the maximum allowable area permitted for all
accessory structures.
5. Exterior Finish. Accessory structures greater than 200 square feet in area
shall have an exterior finish that is residential in character. Metal siding shall
be prohibited on accessory structures exceeding 200 square feet in area.
22.05 Parking in Required Yards: See Section 18.
22.06 Average Yard Setback Adjacent to a Street: Every building requiring a front yard shall
set back from the front property line at least 20 feet, except in the case where on the
same side of the street, buildings are between 20 and 10 feet from the front property
line, then the average depth may be used. Average depth is calculated from the closest
part of the foundation of the existing buildings to the front property line. If existing
buildings are within 10 feet of the property line, then no less than 10 feet shall be used in
figuring the average. If existing buildings are more than 20 feet from the property line
then the minimum requirement of 20 feet shall be used in figuring the average.
22.07 Yard Exceptions: The following exceptions to the yard setbacks shall apply:
(A) Front Yard Projections. Decorative planter boxes (not raised gardens), chimneys
and flues, steps, cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters,
137
lintels, and other ornamental features of not more than 24 inches, from main
buildings need not be included when determining the setbacks. Uncovered
porches,and covered but unenclosed porches when not more than one story high
and which do not extend more than 5 feet beyond the front walls of the building, are
exempt from the front yard setback provisions and need not be included when
determining the setback.
(B) Side and Rear Yard Projections.
1. Planter boxes, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels,
gutters and other ornamental features, may project not more than 2 feet into a
required yard, but shall not be erected within 3 feet of the property line.
2. A fire escape, balcony, outside stairway, cornice, or other unenclosed, unroofed
projections may project not more than 5 feet into a required yard and shall not
be erected within 3 feet of property line.
3. Steps, uncovered porches, and covered but unenclosed porches, including
covered patios when not more than one story high and not more than 3 feet
above grade, are exempt from side and rear yard setback requirements, but
shall not be erected within 3 feet of property line.
4. Uncovered decks and patios attached to the main building, when measured
directly beneath the outside edge of the deck or patio, may be extended to the
interior yard property line when they are 3 feet or less in height from ground
level.
(C) Commercial Yard Projections. Decorative planter boxes, benches, steps, cornices,
eaves, gutters, and ornamental features need not be included when determining
the setbacks.
(D) Detached accessory structures less than 36 inches in height shall be set back at
least 3 feet from property lines.
22.08 Outside Storage: Unless otherwise restricted elsewhere in the Development Code,
outside storage shall be subject to the following:
A. Residential Zones. Outside storage of materials, junk, or similar items shall not
be permitted anywhere within the front yard. This shall not prohibit the temporary
installation of displays during holidays.
B. Non-residential Zones. Outdoor storage of materials, junk, parts, equipment, or
merchandise shall be screened with a solid, durable structure that is
architecturally related to the building, complying with adopted design standards.
The screening provisions shall not apply to activities that normally include the
outdoor display of merchandise such as automobile or farm equipment sales,
service station merchandise, or nursery stock.
138
22.09 Access Spacing Standards
(A) Access spacing standards between streets and/or driveways are:
Spacing Requirements for Accesses on State, County, and City Roadways
Functional Classification Distance(1)
Expressway (ODOT) 1,320 feet from interchange ramp termini
Arterial (County) 400 feet from any intersection with a state
highway, arterial, or major collector
300 feet from any other intersection or private
access
Collector (County) 250 feet from any intersection with an arterial
or state highway
150 feet from any other intersection or private
access
Collector (Aumsville) 200 feet from any intersection with an arterial
or state highway
100 feet from any other intersection or private
access
Local (Aumsville) 50 feet from any other intersection or private
access unless no other reasonable access is
available
Notes: (1) Distances are measured from centerline to centerline of driveways and roadways
1. Where access spacing standards cannot be satisfied, joint and cross access and
shared driveways are encouraged pursuant to Section 18.
2. New property access shall not be permitted within 50 feet of an intersection unless
no other reasonable access to property is available. Where no other alternatives
exist, the city may allow construction of an access connection at a point less than
50 feet from an intersection, provided the access as far away from the intersection
as possible. In such cases, the city may impose turning restrictions (i.e., right in/out,
right in only, or right out only).
139
22.10 Transportation Mobility Standards
The mobility standards identified in the following table shall be used to define the acceptable
intersection traffic operation threshold within the Aumsville Urban Growth Boundary and to
determine the need for transportation system improvement.
Traffic Operations Standards
Roadway 1 Intersection Type Operations Standard
City Street or County Road
within Aumsville UGB
Signalized, All-way Stop &
Roundabout
LOS D
0.85 V/C
Unsignalized LOS D 2
0.85 V/C
State Highway 3 Statewide Highway Ramps
- Eastbound intersection with
OR 22
- Westbound intersection with
OR 22
0.85 V/C
0.50 V/C
Notes:
1) For intersections where state owned roadways cross city or county owned roadways, state
traffic operations standards are used in place of city and/or county standards.
2) Up to LOS F for one movement may be allowed at unsignalized intersections under County
jurisdiction if the movement has relatively low volume (as determined by the city in
consultation with County staff) and there is no indication that a safety problem will be
created
3) Oregon Department of Transportation operations standards apply to OR 22 interchange
ramp termini within the City of Aumsville.
22.11 Transportation Impacts
A transportation impact analysis (TIA) provides an objective assessment of the
anticipated modal transportation impacts associated with a specific land use action.
Throughout the development of the TIA (and beginning as early as possible),
cooperation between City of Aumsville staff, the applicant, and the applicant’s traffic
engineer is encouraged to provide an efficient and effective process. The City of
Aumsville assumes no liability for any costs or time delays (either direct or
consequential) associated with the preparation and review of a transportation impact
analysis. City of Aumsville staff may, at its discretion, and depending on the specific
situation, require additional study components in a TIA beyond what is outlined in this
section or waive requirements deemed inappropriate.
(A) When a Transportation Impact Analysis is Required. A TIA shall be required when:
(1) The development generates 25 or more peak-hour trips or 250 or more daily
trips, or
(2) An access spacing exception is required for the site access driveway(s) and
the development generates 10 or more peak-hour trips or 100 or more daily
trips, or
(3) The development is expected to impact intersections that are currently
operating at the upper limits of the acceptable range of level of service during
the peak operating hour, or
140
(4) The development is expected to significantly impact adjacent roadways and
intersections that have previously been identified as high crash locations,
areas that may have other operational or safety concerns, or areas that
contain a high concentration of pedestrians or bicyclists such as a school, or
(5) Based on the engineering judgment of the City Engineer, the development or
land use action would significantly affect the adjacent transportation system.
Examples include, but are not limited to, proposals for non single-family
development in single family residential areas, proposals adding traffic to or
creating known or anticipated safety or neighborhood traffic concerns, or
proposals that would generate a high percentage of truck traffic (more than 5%
of site traffic).
(6) A zone change will increase the development capacity of the affected real
property.
(B) When a Transportation Assessment Letter is Required. If a TIA is not required, the
applicant’s traffic engineer shall submit a transportation assessment letter to the
City indicating the proposed development or land use action is exempt. This letter
shall outline the trip-generating characteristics of the proposed land use and verify
that the site-access driveways or roadways meet City of Aumsville visual clearance
requirements and roadway design standards.
The City may waive the requirement for a transportation assessment letter if a clear
finding can be made that the proposed land use action does not generate 25 or
more peak hour trips or 250 or more daily trips.
(C) Traffic Impact Analysis Preparation. A TIA shall be prepared by a professional
engineer registered in the State of Oregon in accordance with the requirements of
the road authority. In addition, the preparer should have extensive experience in
the methods and concepts associated with transportation impact analysis. If the
road authority is the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), consult
ODOT’s regional development review planner and OAR 734-051-180.
(D) Contents of a Transportation Impact Analysis. As a guide in the preparation of a
TIA, the City of Aumsville recommends the following format be used to document
the analysis.
(1) Table of Contents. Listing of all sections, figures, and tables included in the
report.
(2) Executive Summary. Summary of the findings and recommendations
contained within the report.
(3) Introduction. Proposed land use action, including site location, building square
footage, and project scope. Map showing the proposed site, building footprint,
access driveways, and parking facilities. Map of the study area, which shows
site location and surrounding roadway facilities.
(4) Existing Conditions. Existing site conditions and adjacent land uses. Roadway
characteristics (all transportation facilities and modal opportunities located
within the study area, including roadway functional classifications, street cross
section descriptions, posted speeds, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, on-street
parking, and transit facilities). Existing lane configurations and traffic control
devices at the study area intersections. Existing traffic volumes and
operational analysis of the study area roadways and intersections. Roadway
and intersection crash history analysis.
141
(5) Background Conditions (without the proposed land use action). Approved
developments and funded transportation improvements in the study area.
Traffic growth assumptions. Addition of traffic from other planned
developments. Background traffic volumes and operational analysis.
(6) Full Build-out Traffic Conditions (with the proposed land use action).
Description of the proposed development plans. Trip-generation
characteristics of the proposed development (including trip reduction
documentation). Trip distribution assumptions. Full build-out traffic volumes
and intersection operational analysis. Intersection and site-access driveway
queuing analysis. Expected safety impacts. Recommended roadway and
intersection mitigations (if necessary).
(7) Site Circulation Review. Evaluate internal site access and circulation. Review
pedestrian paths between parking lots and buildings. Ensure adequate throat
depth is available at the driveways and that vehicles entering the site do not
block the public facilities. Review truck paths for the design vehicle.
(8) Turn Lane Warrant Evaluation. Evaluate the need to provide turn lanes at the
site driveways.
(9) Conclusions and Recommendations. Bullet summary of key conclusions and
recommendations from the TIA.
(10) Appendix. Traffic counts summary sheets, crash analysis summary sheets,
and existing/background/full build-out traffic operational analysis worksheets.
Other analysis summary sheets such as queuing and signal warrant analyses.
(11) Figures. The following list of figures should be included in the TIA: Site Vicinity
Map; Existing Lane Configurations and Traffic Control Devices; Existing Traffic
Volumes and Levels of Service (all peak hours evaluated); Future Year
Background Traffic Volumes and Levels of Service (all peak hours evaluated);
Proposed Site Plan; Future Year Assumed Lane Configurations and Traffic
Control Devices; Estimated Trip Distribution Pattern; Site-Generated Traffic
Volumes (all peak hours evaluated); Full Build-out Traffic Volumes and Levels
of Service (all peak hours evaluated).
(E) Elements of a Transportation Impact Analysis Report
(1) Study Area. The study area shall include, at a minimum, all site-access points
and intersections (signalized and unsignalized) adjacent to the proposed site.
If the proposed site fronts an arterial or collector street; the study shall include
all intersections along the site frontage and within the access spacing
distances extending out from the boundary of the site frontage.
Beyond the minimum study area, the TIA shall evaluate all intersections that
receive site-generated trips that comprise at least 10% or more of the total
intersection volume. In addition to these requirements, the City Engineer (or
his/her designee) shall determine any additional intersections or roadway links
that might be adversely affected as a result of the proposed development. The
applicant and the City Engineer (or his/her designee) will agree on these
intersections prior to the start of the TIA.
(2) Study Years to be Analyzed in the Transportation Impact Analysis. A level-ofservice
analysis shall be performed for all study roadways and intersections
for the following horizon years:
142
(a) Existing Year. Evaluate all existing study roadways and intersections under
existing conditions.
(b) Background Year. Evaluate the study roadways and intersections in the
year the proposed land use is expected to be fully built out, without traffic
from the proposed land use. This analysis should include traffic from all
approved developments that impact the study intersections, or planned
developments that are expected to be fully built out in the horizon year.
(c) Horizon Year. The horizon year of a TIA is the most distance future year
that shall be considered in the TIA. The horizon year will be a specified
number of years after the development opens, and this number will vary
depending on the size of the development, any land use plan changes
necessary to allow it, its uses, and the anticipated time until full build-out
the following table shows the TIA horizon year (expressed in years after
the development is planned to open) for developments expected to
generate less than 5% truck traffic:
Development Type/Trip Generation per Day Horizon Year
Any Zone Change 20 years
Other Development, Less than 1,000 0 years
Other Development, 1,000 to 1,999 5 years
Other Development, 2,000 to 4,999 10 years
Other Development, 5,000 or more 20 years
For developments expected to generate more than 5% truck traffic, consult
city staff for the TIA horizon year. City staff may, at their discretion, reduce
the horizon year in cases where less future study is necessary.
(d) Evaluate the expected roadway, intersection, and land use conditions
resulting from the background growth and the proposed land use action
assuming full build-out and occupancy. For phased developments, an
analysis shall be performed during each year a phase is expected to be
completed.
(e) Twenty-Year Analysis. For all land use actions requesting a
Comprehensive Plan Amendment and/or a Zone Change or that are
expected to generate more than 5,000 daily trips, a long-term level-ofservice
analysis shall be performed for all study intersections assuming
build-out of the proposed site with and without the comprehensive plan
designation and/or zoning designation or proposed development in place.
The analysis should be performed using the future year traffic volumes
identified in the Transportation System Plan (TSP). If the applicant’s traffic
engineer proposes to use different future year traffic volumes, justification
for not using the TSP volumes must be provided along with documentation
of the forecasting methodology.
(3) Study Time Periods to be Analyzed in the Transportation Impact Analysis.
Within each horizon year, a level-of-service analysis shall be performed for the
time period(s) that experience the highest degree of network travel. These
periods typically occur during the midweek (Tuesday through Thursday)
morning (7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.), mid-week evening (4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.),
and Saturday afternoon (12:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.) periods. The TIA should
143
always address the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours when the proposed
land use action is expected to generate 25 trips or more during the peak time
periods. If the applicant can demonstrate that the peak-hour trip generation of
the proposed land use action is negligible during one of the two peak study
periods and the peak trip generation of the land use action corresponds to the
roadway system peak, then only the worst-case study period need be
analyzed.
Depending on the proposed land use action and the expected trip-generating
characteristics of that development, consideration of non-peak travel periods
may be appropriate. Examples of land uses that have non-typical trip
generating characteristics include schools, movie theaters, and churches. The
City Engineer (or his/her designee) and applicant should discuss the potential
for additional study periods prior to the start of the TIA.
(4) Traffic Count Requirements. Once the study periods have been determined,
turning movement counts should be collected at all study area intersections to
determine the base traffic conditions. These turning movement counts should
typically be conducted during the time period(s) that experience the highest
degree of network travel as identified in (3) above depending on the proposed
land use. Historical turning movement counts may be used if the data are less
than 12 months old, but must be factored to meet the existing traffic conditions.
(5) Trip Generation for the Proposed Development. To determine the impacts of a
proposed development on the surrounding transportation network, the tripgenerating
characteristics of that development must be estimated. Tripgenerating
characteristics should be obtained from one of the following
acceptable sources:
(a) Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual (latest
edition).
(b) Specific trip generation studies that have been conducted for the particular
land use action for the purposes of estimating peak-hour trip-generating
characteristics. The City Engineer (or his/her designee) should approve the use
of these studies prior to their inclusion in the TIA.
(c) In addition to new site-generated trips, several land uses typically generate
additional trips that are not added to the adjacent traffic network. These trips
include pass-by trips and internal trips and are considered to be separate from
the total number of new trips generated by the proposed development. The
procedures listed in the most recent version of the Trip Generation Handbook
(ITE) should be used to account for pass-by and internal trips.
(6) Trip Distribution. Estimated site-generated traffic from the proposed
development should be distributed and assigned on the existing or proposed
arterial/collector street network. Trip distribution methods should be based on a
reasonable assumption of local travel patterns and the locations of off-site
origin/destination points within the site vicinity. Acceptable trip distribution
methods should be based on one of the following procedures:
(a) An analysis of local traffic patterns and intersection turning movement
counts gathered within the previous 12 months.
144
(b) A detailed market study specific to the proposed development and
surrounding land uses.
(7) Intersection Operation Standards. The City of Aumsville evaluates the
intersection operational performance of city-owned intersections based on levels
of service standards. It should be noted that the Oregon Department of
Transportation (ODOT) and Marion County have their own operations
performance standards that apply to their facilities. The ODOT roadways
operational performance is measured with volume-to-capacity analysis and
Marion County’s roadways operational performance is measured with volumeto-
capacity analysis and level of service standards. Intersection operational
performance standards for all road authorities within the City of Aumsville are as
found in Section 22. When evaluating the volume-to-capacity ratio, the total
traffic demand shall be considered.
(a) A capacity analysis should be performed at all intersections within the
identified study area.
(b) The City of Aumsville requires all intersections within the study area to
maintain an acceptable level of operations per Section 22.14 upon full build-out
of the proposed land use action. Calculations should be made using the
methods identified in the most recent version of the Highway Capacity Manual
(or by field studies), published by the Transportation Research Board. Any
intersections not operating at standards described in Section 22.11 will be
considered to be unacceptable.
(c) All signalized intersection and all way-stop controlled intersections shall
operate at a Level of Service D or better (all individual movements shall operate
at LOS E or better). Other unsignalized intersections (including unsignalized
private access) shall operate at a Level of Service D or better, although LOS F
may be allowed if the movement has a relatively low volume (as determined by
City staff) and there is no indication that a safety problem will be created.
Intersections at state highways shall also meet the standards of the Oregon
Department of Transportation.
(8) Recommendations and Conclusions. Provide descriptions and analysis of the
appropriate conclusions, mitigation measures and recommended improvements
necessary for compliance with the applicable standards. Include analysis
showing that these measures will bring identified intersections and locations into
compliance and include signal, turn lane, or other warrant analyses as
appropriate. The TIA shall also specify the timing and phasing of any new traffic
signals and the length of any new turn lanes. Any new parking facility needs
shall be identified and the conformance of the proposed parking facilities to
applicable standards. Any new pedestrian and bicycle transportation needs
arising from the development shall also be identified.
Any and all mitigation measures recommended in the TIA shall be physically
and economically feasible, and this feasibility may need to be demonstrated in
questionable cases. In addition, the recommendations and conclusions
presented in the TIA shall be consistent with and supported by the data,
calculations, and analysis in the report. Inconsistent and/or unsupported
conclusions will not be accepted, and may lead to the TIA being returned to the
applicant’s traffic engineer for correction.
145
(F) Review Policy and Procedure. The following criteria should be used in reviewing a
TIA as part of a subdivision or site development review.
(1) The road system is designed to meet the projected traffic demand at full buildout
in terms of safety, adequacy of property access, connectivity, width, rightof-
way, and capacity based on the mobility standards in Section 22.11.
(2) Proposed driveways do not adversely affect the functional character of the
surrounding roadways.
(3) Adequate intersection and stopping sight distance is available at all driveways.
(4) Proposed driveways meet the city’s access spacing standard or sufficient
justification is provided to allow a deviation from the spacing standard.
(5) Opportunities for providing joint or crossover access have been pursued.
(6) The site does not rely upon the surrounding roadway network for internal
vehicular circulation.
(7) The road system provides adequate access to buildings for residents, visitors,
deliveries, emergency vehicles, and garbage collection.
(8) Bicycle and pedestrian circulation is provided per Section 18.
(G) Conditions of Approval. The City of Aumsville, Marion County (if access to a County
roadway is proposed), and ODOT (if access within the IAMP boundary is proposed)
will be required to identify conditions of approval needed to meet operations and
safety standards and provide the necessary right-of-way and improvements to
develop the future planned transportation system. Conditions of Approval that
should be evaluated as part of subdivision and site development reviews include
the criteria identified above in Section (F)(1) and include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Consideration of joint and cross access and joint use driveways for
developments that do not meet the designated access spacing policy.
(2) Right-of-way dedications for future planned roadway improvements.
(3) Half or three-quarter street improvements along site frontages that do not have
full-build-out improvements in place at the time of development.
(H) Transportation Impact Analysis Checklist. As part of the TIA review process, all
transportation impact analyses submitted to the City of Aumsville must satisfy the
requirements illustrated in the Checklist for Acceptance of a Transportation Impact
Analysis. Incomplete and/or unacceptable TIAs will be returned to the applicant’s
traffic engineer for completion and/or correction.
Provide three (3) copies of the TIA report for City staff to review. If any portion of
the study area falls within another jurisdiction (such as Marion County or ODOT
roadways), consult that jurisdiction to determine the number of additional copies
needed for review.
22.12 Interchange Area Management Plan Boundary
Within the Interchange Area Management Plan Boundary identified on the Official
Zoning Map, the following conditions shall apply:
(A) Transportation Impact Analyses shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements of Section 22.11.
(B) ODOT shall be consulted and provided with an opportunity to review all land
development applications, zoning and/or comprehensive plan modifications, and
146
applications for urban growth boundary expansions.
(C) The access spacing requirements of OAR 734, Division 51, as amended, shall be
applied to Shaw Highway/1st Street, except where deviations are approved by
ODOT.
22.13 Home Occupation. Where identified, home occupations shall be subject to the
following standards:
(A) The home occupation shall be secondary to the main use of the dwelling
as a residence;
(B) All aspects of the home occupation shall be contained and conducted
within a completely enclosed building;
(C) The home occupation shall be limited to either a pre-existing garage or
accessory structure, or not over twenty-five percent of the floor area of the
main floor of a dwelling. If located within an accessory structure or a
garage, the home occupation shall not utilize over five hundred square
feet of floor area;
(D) No structural alteration, including the provision of an additional entrance,
shall be permitted to accommodate the home occupation, except when
otherwise required by law. Such structural alterations shall not detract from
the outward appearance of the property as a residential use;
(E) No persons other than those residing within the dwelling shall be engaged
in the home occupation;
(F) No window display and no sample commodities displayed outside the
dwelling are allowed;
(G) No materials or mechanical equipment shall be used which are
detrimental to the residential use of the dwelling or any nearby dwellings
because of vibration, noise, dust, smoke, odor, interference with radio or
television reception, or any other factor;
(H) Any instruction shall be limited to one pupil at a time.
(I) No parking of customers' vehicles in a manner or frequency so as to
cause disturbance or inconvenience to nearby residents or so as to
necessitate off-street parking shall be allowed. A maximum of two
customers' vehicles shall be permitted at one time;
(J) Signage shall be subject to the provisions in Section 19.
22.14 Temporary Use for Hardship. The Council may temporarily allow a non-conforming
use by resolution for a period not to exceed six months if:
(A) the applicant has already applied for the first required land use action to allow the
use,
(B) agrees in writing to apply for all subsequent required land use actions as soon as
practicable,
(C) and it appears to the Council that the application would be granted.
The applicant shall enter into a non-remonstrance agreement with the city which does
not hold the city liable if the application is denied and they are caused to discontinue
the non-conforming use. Where more than two land use actions are required, the
Council may grant by resolution one six-month extension where it still appears to the
council that the applications will be approved.
147
22.15 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs).
Where permitted, an accessory dwelling unit shall meet the following use and development
standards:
(A) Only one ADU is permitted per detached single-family dwelling in association with
a primary residence.
(B) Location. The ADU shall be located within the side or rear yard, but not in a side
yard adjacent to a street.
(C) A detached ADU shall be physically separated from the primary residence by a
minimum distance of 6 feet. A covered walkway, which contains no habitable
space, may connect the two buildings without violation of the setback
requirements.
(D) Entrance.
1. Attached: The entrance to an attached ADU shall not face the street on the
same side as the entrance for the primary residence.
2. Detached: The entrance to a detached ADU shall not face the street on the
same side as the entrance for the primary residence, unless the entrance for
the ADU cannot be seen from the street.
(E) Design.
1. Detached ADUs in the RS zone shall meet the General Requirements for
single-family dwellings outlined in Section 5.11.
2. Detached ADUs in the RM zone shall meet the General Requirements for
single-family dwellings outlined in Section 6.11.
3. Exterior finish materials, roof pitch, trim, eaves, window orientation and
dimension must be the same or visually match those of the primary dwelling.
4. Area. The ADU shall contain a minimum of 200 square feet and the lesser of
50 percent of the floor area of the primary residence or 800 square feet.
(F) Setbacks. The ADU shall conform to the setback requirements of the primary
residence in the zone in which it is located.
(G) Height. The ADU shall not exceed the height of the primary dwelling.
22.16 House of Worship Uses
House of worship uses include, but are not limited to:
(A) Worship services;
(B) Religious classes;
(C) Weddings;
(D) Funerals;
(E) Meal programs;
(F) Child care, but not including private or parochial school education for prekindergarten
through grade 12 or higher education;
(G) Where a house of worship is in a residential district, the housing permitted
outright or permitted conditionally in the district is allowed in accordance with the
development standards of the residential district and is not required to comply
with the requirements listed below.
(H) Where a house of worship is in a residential district, in addition to, or in place of,
the housing allowed in the zone in which it is located, housing or space for
housing in a building that is detached from the place of worship, is allowed
provided:
148
1. At least 50 percent of the residential units provided under this section are
affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60 percent of the
median family income for the county in which the real property is located;
2. The real property is in an area zoned for residential use that is located within
the urban growth boundary;
3. The housing or space for housing complies with applicable land use
regulations and meets the standards and criteria for residential development
for the underlying zone; and
4. Housing and space for housing provided under this section must provide a
covenant appurtenant that restricts the owner and each successive owner of
the building or any residential unit contained in the building from selling or
renting any residential unit described in this section, as housing that is not
affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60 percent of the
median family income for the county in which the real property is located for a
period of 60 years from the date of the certificate of occupancy.
149
SECTION 23.00
Landscaping Design
Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish standards for landscaping,
buffering and screening of land use within Aumsville in order to enhance the aesthetic
environmental quality of the city. Landscaping is a significant factor in maintaining the
livability and economic viability of the community. Plant materials eliminate pollutants
from the air we breathe, and maintain physical health mental equilibrium by fulfilling
our instinctive need for contact with the natural environment.
Major gateways to the city and key travel routes through the city and urbanized areas
give a lasting impression to the visitor for good or ill, an impression critical to our
tourist economy. The knowledgeable use of plant materials by experienced
professionals can achieve these extraordinary benefits at very little cost:
? By using plant materials to define spaces and articulate the uses of specific
areas;
? By using trees and other landscaping materials to mitigate the effects of the sun,
wind, noise and lack of privacy by the provision of buffering and screening;
? By promoting the retention and use of existing vegetation;
? By restoring natural communities through re-establishment of native plants, urban
wildlife and mitigate for loss of natural resource values.
23.01 Purpose
23.02 Scope
23.03 Minimum Area Requirements
23.04 General Provisions
23.05 Screening and Buffering
23.06 Commercial, Industrial, Institutional Streetscapes
23.07 Planting and Maintenance
23.08 Revegetation in Unlandscaped or Natural Landscaped Areas
23.09 Street Trees Species
150
SECTION 23.00
Landscaping Design
23.01 Purpose.
(A) To guide the planting and maintenance of landscaping materials.
(B) To enhance the appearance of the city, provide areas for outdoor recreation and
to:
1. Provide shade and windbreaks where appropriate to conserve energy in
building and site development;
2. Buffer and screen conflicting land uses;
3. Provide for vegetation of streetscapes within the commercial, industrial and
interchange development zones;
4. Provide for the landscaping of parking areas to facilitate vehicular movement
and break up large areas of impervious surface;
5. Promote public safety through appropriate design principles.
(C) To prevent or reduce erosion potential on steep terrain by providing appropriate
landscape materials.
23.02 Scope. All construction, expansion, or redevelopment of structures or parking lots for
commercial, institutional, or industrial uses shall be subject to the landscaping
requirements of this section. Landscaping plans shall be processed as follows:
(A) Landscape plans shall be included in all required Type II Site Development
Reviews, and where applicable, Conditional Use, Variance and Land Division
requests.
(B) Request to modify the landscaping provisions contained in Section 23.04, shall
be processed as a Type II Site Development Review.
(C) Otherwise, new or replacement landscape plans shall be processed as a Type I
application.
23.03 Minimum Area Requirements.
(A) The following area requirements shall be the minimum areas devoted to
landscaping as listed below:
1. Commercial Developments. A minimum of 5 percent of the gross land area
shall be devoted to landscaping in commercial developments. Landscaping
located in rights-of-way shall be included in the minimum requirement, and
shall include the use of streets, tree insets within sidewalks, or sidewalk
planters. Landscaping located in rights-of-way shall be maintained by the
property owner.
2. Industrial Developments. A minimum of 10 percent of the gross land area
shall be devoted to landscaping in industrial developments.
3. Interchange Development. A minimum of 15 percent of the gross land area
shall be devoted to landscaping in interchange development.
4. Multi-family Residential Development and Public Use. A minimum of
20 percent of the gross land area shall be devoted to landscaping in multifamily
developments and public uses such as schools and churches.
151
5. Residential Development. All required street side yards, exclusive of
accessways, shall be devoted to landscaped area for all other development in
residential zones.
(B) For the expansion of existing developments and parking lots, or a change of use,
requirements in this section shall only apply whenever a site development review
or other land use application is required to complete the expansion or stablish the
change in use. Such expansion or change of use shall be subject to the
landscaping provisions in this section.
(C) Landscaped areas may include landscaping:
1. Around buildings;
2. In open spaces and outdoor recreation areas;
3. In islands and perimeter planting areas in parking and loading areas;
4. Along street frontages; and
5. In areas devoted to buffering and screening as required in this section and
elsewhere in this ordinance.
23.04 General Provisions.
(A) For purposes of satisfying the minimum requirements of this ordinance, a
"landscaped area" is any combination of mature living plants such as trees,
shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf grasses; and may include
structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, plazas, works of art,
reflective pools, fountains, or the like. Also includes irrigation systems, mulches,
decorative rock ground cover, topsoil, and re-vegetation or the preservation,
protection, and replacement of trees.
(B) Landscaping shall be designed, developed, and maintained to satisfy the specific
functional and aesthetic objectives appropriate to the development, considering
the following:
1. Type, variety, scale, and number of plants used;
2. Placement and spacing of plants;
3. Size and location of landscaped areas;
4. Contouring, shaping, and preparation of landscaped areas;
5. Use and placement of non-plant elements within the landscaping;
6. Use of root barrier planting techniques to prevent root infiltration of utility lines
and limit possible surface cover damage.
(C) The landscape design shall incorporate existing significant trees and vegetation
preserved on the site.
(D) Specific Landscape Requirements. The following provisions shall apply for all
landscaping improvements:
1. Total landscaped area (percentages) shall comply with provisions in
Section 23.03.
2. Walkways, drives, parking areas, and buildings shall be excluded from
the landscaping calculation.
3. All street facing yard areas shall be landscaped. This requirement
recognizes the landscaped area may exceed minimum percentage
requirements in Section 23.03.
4. At least 25% - but no more than 50% - of the required landscaped area
shall be planted in shrubs and trees. The area for trees shall be based
on their accepted mature canopy. Regardless of the mix of shrubs and
trees, at least one tree shall be included in the landscaping plan. For the
152
purpose of this Section, the minimum requirement for a tree upon
maturity shall be 8 feet in height . See additional requirements under
Street Tree Species 23.09.
5. The remaining landscaped area shall be planted with suitable living
ground cover, lawn, ivy, flowers, and other plantings exclusive of
decorative design elements such as walkways, fountains, benches,
sculptures and similar elements placed within the required landscaping
area. Fountains, walkways sculptures cannot be more than 5% of the
overall landscaping.
6. No more than 20% of the area identified in 23.03, shall contain rocks,
bark or other decorative ground cover.
7. Modifications to these requirements shall be processed per provisions in
Section 23.02
(E) Landscape Completion: Required landscaping, tree plantings, buffering,
screening, and fencing shall be installed prior to building occupancy. Occupancy
shall be permitted prior to the complete installation of all required landscaping if
security equal to 150% of the cost of materials and labor, as determined by the
City Administrator, is filed with the city assuring such installation within nine
months of issuance of the Occupancy Permit. An extension of three months may
be granted by the City Administrator when circumstances beyond the control of
the owner prevent completion. If the installation of the landscaping is not
completed within the required period, the security may be used by the city to
either complete the installation, or the security may be held by the city and other
enforcement actions taken to ensure the improvements are completed.
23.05 Screening and Buffering:
(A) Screening shall be used to eliminate or reduce the visual impacts of the following
uses and are two separate issues for the purpose of meeting the requirements:
1. Commercial and industrial uses when abutting residential uses.
2. Industrial uses when abutting commercial uses.
3. Service areas and facilities, including garbage and waste disposal containers,
recycling bins, and loading areas.
4. Outdoor storage areas.
5. At and above-grade electrical and mechanical equipment, such as
transformers, heat pumps, and air conditioners.
6. Any other area or use as required by this ordinance.
(B) Screening may be accomplished by the use of sight-obscuring plant materials
(generally evergreens), earth berms, walls, fences, building parapets, building
placement, or other design techniques.
(C) Buffering shall be used to mitigate adverse visual impacts, dust, noise, or pollution,
and to provide for compatibility between dissimilar adjoining uses. Where buffering
is determined to be necessary, one of the following buffering alternatives shall be
employed:
1. Planting Area: Width not less than 15 feet, planted with the following materials:
(a) At least 1 row of deciduous or evergreen trees staggered and spaced not
more than 15 feet apart.
(b) At least 1 row of evergreen shrubs which will grow to form a continuous
hedge at least 5 feet in height within 1 year of planting.
(c) Lawn, low-growing evergreen shrubs or evergreen ground cover covering
153
the balance of the area.
2. Berm Plus Planting Area: Width not less than 10 feet, developed in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) Berm form should not slope more than 40 percent (1:2.5) on the side away
from the area screened from view. The slope for the other side (screened
area) may vary,
(b) A dense evergreen hedge shall be located so as to most effectively buffer
the proposed use.
3. Wall Plus Planting Area: Width must not be less than 5 feet developed in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) A masonry wall or fence or similar materials not less than 5 feet in height.
Wall plus planting shall not be allowed in the Commercial District.
(b) Lawn, low-growing evergreen shrubs, and evergreen ground cover covering
the balance of the area.
4. Other methods which produce an adequate buffer considering the nature of the
impacts to be mitigated as approved by the planning commission.
23.06 Commercial, Industrial, Institutional Streetscapes. In addition to the General
Requirements in Section 23.04, trees shall be installed at street frontages as follows:
(A) Types of trees. Street trees shall be limited to a city recommended list in
Section 23.09
(B) Minimum installation size. Street trees shall be a minimum caliper of 2 inches
when measured 4 feet in height at the time of installation, with a clearance of 7-
feet from the ground to the first foliage.
(C) Spacing. The spacing of street trees by mature tree size shall be 25 feet, unless
otherwise modified based on placement approval.
(D) Placement. The placement of trees is subject to the site development review
process. Tree placement shall not interfere with utility poles, light standards, power
lines, utility services, visual clearance areas, or sidewalk access.
23.07 Planting and Maintenance:
(A) No sight-obscuring plantings exceeding 36 inches in height shall be located within
any required clear-vision area as defined in Section 22.00 of this ordinance.
(B) A recommended maintenance plan shall be included with the application and
planting plan. Approved landscaping shall continually be maintained. Failure to
maintain approved landscaping plan shall be considered a violation of the
Development Ordinance.
23.08 Revegetation in Unlandscaped or Natural Landscaped Areas:
(A) Areas where natural vegetation has been removed or damaged through grading
or construction activity in areas not affected by the landscaping requirements and
that are not to be occupied by structures or other improvements shall be
replanted.
(B) Plant material shall be watered at intervals sufficient to assure survival and
growth.
(C) The use of native plant materials or plants acclimated to the Pacific Northwest is
encouraged to reduce irrigation and maintenance demands.
154
23.09 Street Trees Species:
The City shall maintain a list of approved and prohibited street trees. All street tree
plantings shall comply with the City’s approved list. Alternate selections may be
approved by the City Administrator following written request.
155
SECTION 24.00
Severability
24.00 Severability: The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any section, sentence,
clause or phrase of this ordinance, or its application to any statute, is determined by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, such
determination shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the ordinance and its
application to any other statute, but shall continue to be in effect.
156
SECTION 25.00
Flood Hazard Regulations
25.01 Statutory Authority
25.02 Statement of Purpose.
25.03 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
25.04 Definitions
25.05 Application of Special Flood Hazard Areas
25.06 Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas
25.07 Coordination with State of Oregon Specialty Codes
25.08 Compliance and Penalties
25.09 Abrogation and Severability
25.10 Interpretation.
25.11 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
25.12 Administration
25.13 Establishment of a Development Permit
25.14 Variance Procedure
25.15 General Standards
25.16 Subdivision Proposals and Other Proposed Developments
25.17 Use of Other Base Flood Data
25.18 Structures Located in Multiple or Partial Flood Zones
25.19 Specific Standards for Riverine (Including All Non-Coastal)
Flood Zones
25.20 For Riverine (Non-Coastal) Special Flood Hazard Areas with
Base Flood Elevations
25.21 Below Grade Crawl Spaces
25.22 Manufactured Dwellings
25.23 Recreational Vehicles
25.24 Appurtenant (Accessory) Structures
25.25 Floodways
25.26 Standards for Shallow Flooding Areas
25.27 Standards for AH Zones
25.28 Standards for AO Zones
157
SECTION 25.00
Flood Hazard Regulations
25.01 Statutory Authority. The State of Oregon has in ORS 197.175 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt flood plain management regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the City of Aumsville does ordain the following findings of fact:
(A) The flood hazard areas of City of Aumsville are subject to periodic inundation
which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(B) These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
special flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and velocities, and
when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are
inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage
also contribute to flood loss.
25.02 Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote public health,
safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding
in flood hazard areas by provisions designed to:
(A) Protect human life and health;
(B) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(C) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(D) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(E) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains;
electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in special
flood hazard areas;
(F) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood hazard areas so as to minimize blight areas caused by
flooding;
(G) Notify potential buyers that the property is in a special flood hazard area
(H) Notify those who occupy special flood hazard areas that they assume
responsibility for their actions
(I) Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief.
25.03 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this
ordinance includes methods and provisions for:
(A) Restricting or prohibiting development which is dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(B) Requiring that development vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(C) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
(D) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
158
(E) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
25.04 Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage.
Appeal: A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or
a request for a variance.
Area of shallow flooding: A designated Zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a
1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR. “Special flood
hazard area” is synonymous in meaning and definition with the phrase “area of special
flood hazard”.
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE): The elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise
during the base flood.
Basement: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on
all sides.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Flood or Flooding:
1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
c. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as
defined in paragraph (a)(2) of this definition and are akin to a river of
liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as
when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path
of the current.
2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of
water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually
high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or
by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal
surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this definition.
Flood elevation study: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards
and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination,
evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion
hazards.
159
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map of a community, on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made
available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): See “Flood elevation study”.
Flood proofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood damage to real estate
or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Also referred to
as "Regulatory Floodway."
Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless
it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure: Any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior;
or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior or
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
Manufactured dwelling: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured dwelling"
does not include a "recreational vehicle" and is synonymous with “manufactured
home”.
Manufactured dwelling park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale.
160
Mean sea level: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood
Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
New construction: For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective
date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Aumsville and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is:
1. Built on a single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Special flood hazard area: See “Area of special flood hazard” for this definition.
Start of construction: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement
of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured dwelling.
Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost
of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement.
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure.”
Variance: A grant of relief by the City of Aumsville from the terms of a flood plain
management regulation.
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
161
community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
25.05 Application of Special Flood Hazard Areas. This code shall apply to all special flood
hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Aumsville. The degree of flood
protection required by this Code is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This Code does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Code
shall not create liability on the part of the City of Aumsville, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this Code or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
25.06 Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas. The special flood hazard areas
identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report
entitled the “Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Marion County and Incorporated Areas”,
Volumes 1 and 2, dated October 18, 2019 with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this Code. The Flood Insurance Study and FIRM panels are on file at
the Aumsville City Hall, 555 Main Street, Aumsville, Oregon 97325.
25.07 Coordination with State of Oregon Specialty Codes. Pursuant to the requirement
established in ORS 455 that the City of Aumsville administers and enforces the State
of Oregon Specialty Codes, the City of Aumsville does hereby acknowledge that the
Oregon Specialty Codes contain certain provisions that apply to the design and
construction of buildings and structures located in areas of special flood hazard.
Therefore, this code is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with
the Oregon Specialty Codes.
25.08 Compliance and Penalties. All development within special flood hazard areas is subject
to the terms of this ordinance (Section 25) and required to comply with its provisions
and all other applicable regulations.
25.09 Abrogation and Severability
(A) This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(B) This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. If any section clause, sentence, or phrase of the Ordinance is held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Ordinance.
162
25.10 Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions
shall be:
(A) Considered as minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
25.11 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
(A) The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(B) This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Aumsville, any
officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administrator for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
25.12 Administration
(A) The City Administrator is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and
enforce this ordinance by granting or denying development permits in
accordance with its provisions. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate
authority to implement these provisions.
(B) Duties of the floodplain administrator, or their designee, shall include, but not be
limited to:
1. Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:
a. The permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied;
b. All other required local, state, and federal permits have been
obtained and approved.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in a floodway. If located in the floodway
assure that the floodway provisions of this ordinance in Section
25.25 are met; and
d. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in an area where Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) data is available either through the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) or from another authoritative source. If BFE data is not
available then ensure compliance with the provisions of Section
25.17; and
e. Provide to building officials the Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
applicable to any building requiring a development permit.
f. Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development qualifies as a substantial improvement as
defined in Section 25.04.
g. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development activity is a watercourse alteration. If a watercourse
alteration is proposed, ensure compliance with the provisions in
Section 25.15(A).
163
h. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development activity includes the placement of fill or excavation.
2. Information Maintenance. The following information shall be obtained
and maintained and shall be made available for public inspection as
needed:
a. Obtain, record, and maintain the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements) and all
attendant utilities of all new or substantially improved structures
where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided through the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS), Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM),
or obtained in accordance with Section 25.
b. Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the natural grade of the building site for a structure prior to the
start of construction and the placement of any fill and ensure that
the requirements of Section 25.25 and Section 25.12 (B) 1 b, are
adhered to.
c. Upon placement of the lowest floor of a structure (including
basement) but prior to further vertical construction, obtain
documentation, prepared and sealed by a professional licensed
surveyor or engineer, certifying the elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement).
d. Where base flood elevation data are utilized, obtain As-built
certification of the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) prepared and sealed by a
professional licensed surveyor or engineer, prior to the final
inspection.
e. Maintain all Elevation Certificates (EC) submitted to City of
Aumsville;
f. Obtain, record, and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure and all attendant utilities were
floodproofed for all new or substantially improved floodproofed
structures where allowed under this ordinance and where Base
Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or
obtained in accordance with Section 2517.
g. Maintain all floodproofing certificates required under this
ordinance;
h. Record and maintain all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance;
i. Obtain and maintain all hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed as required under Section 25.25.
j. Record and maintain all Substantial Improvement and Substantial
Damage calculations and determinations as required under
Section 25.12(G).
k. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this ordinance.
(C) Community Boundary Alteration. The Floodplain Administrator shall notify the
Federal Insurance Administrator in writing whenever the boundaries of the
community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise
assumed authority or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain
164
management regulations for a particular area, to ensure that all Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps (FHBM) and Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) accurately
represent the community’s boundaries. Include within such notification a copy of
a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new
corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or
relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.
(D) Watercourse Alterations. Notify adjacent communities, the Department of Land
Conservation and Development, and other appropriate state and federal
agencies, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. This
notification shall be provided by the applicant to the Federal Insurance
Administration as a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) along with either:
1. A proposed maintenance plan to assure the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained;
or
2. Certification by a registered professional engineer that the project has
been designed to retain its flood carrying capacity without periodic
maintenance.
The applicant shall be required to submit a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
(CLOMR) when required under Section 25.11(E). Ensure compliance with all
applicable requirements in Section 25.11(E) and Section 25.14(A).
(E) Requirements to Submit New Technical Data. A community’s base flood
elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting
flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after
the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the
Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or
scientific data in accordance with Section 44 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR), Sub-Section 65.3. The community may require the
applicant to submit such data and review fees required for compliance with this
section through the applicable FEMA Letter of Map Change (LOMC) process.
(F) The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
1. Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
2. Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway.
An applicant shall notify FEMA within six (6) months of project completion when
an applicant has obtained a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) from
FEMA. This notification to FEMA shall be provided as a Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR).
(G) Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Assessments and
Determinations. Conduct Substantial Improvement (SI) (as defined in Section
2.0) reviews for all structural development proposal applications and maintain a
record of SI calculations within permit files in accordance with Section 25.12(B)
2. Conduct Substantial Damage (SD) (as defined in Section 2.0) assessments
when structures are damaged due to a natural hazard event or other causes.
Make SD determinations whenever structures within the special flood hazard
area (as established in Section 25.05) are damaged to the extent that the cost
165
of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
25.13 Establishment of a Development Permit
(A) Floodplain Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be
obtained before construction or development begins within any area horizontally
within the special flood hazard area established in Section 25.05. The
development permit shall be required for all structures, including manufactured
dwellings, and for all other development, as defined in Section 25.04, including
fill and other development activities.
(B) Application for a Development Permit. Application for a development permit
may be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. In riverine flood zones, the proposed elevation (in relation to mean sea
level), of the lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant utilities
of all new and substantially improved structures; in accordance with the
requirements of Section 25.12 (B) 2.
2. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect licensed in
the State of Oregon that the floodproofing methods proposed for any
non-residential structure meet the floodproofing criteria for nonresidential
structures in Section 25.19.
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated.
5. Base Flood Elevation data for subdivision proposals or other
development when required per Sections 25.12 (B) 1 and 25.16.
6. Substantial improvement calculation for any improvement, addition,
reconstruction, renovation, or rehabilitation of an existing structure.
7. The amount and location of any fill or excavation activities proposed.
25.14 Variance Procedure
(A) The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Flood
insurance premium rates are determined by federal statute according to
actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
(B) Conditions for Variances
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, in conformance with the provisions of Section
25.13 (B) and 25.15 (C). As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre,
the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases.
2. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
166
4. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant;
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or
ordinances.
5. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria of
Section 25.13 (B) 2. To 4., are met, and the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(C) Variance Notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the Base Flood Elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases
risks to life and property. Such notification and a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance shall be maintained in accordance with
Section 25.12 (B) 2.
25.15 General Standards
In all special flood hazard areas, the following standards shall be adhered to:
(A) Alteration of Water Courses. Require that the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. Require that
maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse to ensure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
Require compliance with Sections 25.12 (D) and (E).
(B) Anchoring
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
2. All manufactured dwellings shall be anchored per Section 25.22.
(C) Construction Materials and Methods
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(D) Utilities and Equipment
1. Water Supply, Sanitary Sewer, and On-site Waste Disposal Systems
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
167
c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding
consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.
2. Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing and Other Equipment. Electrical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing, duct systems, and other
equipment and service facilities shall be elevated at or above the base
flood level or shall be designed and installed to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy,
during conditions of flooding. In addition, electrical, heating, ventilating,
air-conditioning, plumbing, duct systems, and other equipment and
service facilities, if replaced as part of a substantial improvement shall
meet all the requirements of this section.
3. Tanks
1. Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.
2. Above-ground tanks shall be installed at or above the base flood
level or shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement under conditions of the base flood.
25.16 Subdivision Proposals and Other Proposed Developments
(A) All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including
proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) greater than 50
lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such proposals,
Base Flood Elevation data.
(B) All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments (including
proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) shall:
1. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
2. Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
3. Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
25.17 Use of Other Base Flood Data
(A) When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
Section 25.05 the local floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation data available from a federal, state,
or other source, in order to administer Sections 25. All new subdivision
proposals and other proposed new developments (including proposals for
manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) must meet the requirements of
Section 25.15.
(B) Base Flood Elevations shall be determined for development proposals that are
5 acres or more in size or are 50 lots or more, whichever is lesser in any A zone
that does not have an established base flood elevation. Development proposals
located within a riverine unnumbered A Zone shall be reasonably safe from
flooding; the test of reasonableness includes use of historical data, high water
marks, FEMA provided Base Level Engineering data, and photographs of past
flooding, etc. where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in
these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
168
25.18 Structures Located in Multiple or Partial Flood Zones
In coordination with the State of Oregon Specialty Codes:
(A) When a structure is located in multiple flood zones on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) the provisions for the more restrictive flood zone
shall apply.
(B) When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire
structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial
improvements.
25.19 Specific Standards for Riverine (Including All Non-Coastal) Flood Zones
These specific standards shall apply to all new construction and substantial
improvements in addition to the General Standards contained in Section 25.15 of this
ordinance.
(A) Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) are subject to the
following requirements. Enclosed areas below the Base Flood Elevation,
including crawl spaces shall:
1. Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters;
2. Be used solely for parking, storage, or building access;
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed all of the following minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings,
b. The total net area of non-engineered openings shall be not less
than one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area,
where the enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the
enclosure walls,
c. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
d. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they shall allow the automatic
flow of floodwater into and out of the enclosed areas and shall be
accounted for in the determination of the net open area.
e. All additional higher standards for flood openings in the State of
Oregon Residential Specialty Codes Section R322.2.2 shall be
complied with when applicable.
(B) Garages. Attached garages may be constructed with the garage floor slab
below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) in riverine flood zones, if the following
requirements are met:
1. If located within a floodway the proposed garage must comply with the
requirements of Section 25.25.
2. The floors are at or above grade on not less than one side;
3. The garage is used solely for parking, building access, and/or storage;
4. The garage is constructed with flood openings in compliance with
Section 25.19 (A) to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
5. The portions of the garage constructed below the BFE are constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
169
6. The garage is constructed in compliance with the standards in Section
25.15; and
7. The garage is constructed with electrical, and other service facilities
located and installed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood.
(C) Detached garages must be constructed in compliance with the standards for
appurtenant structures in Section 25.23 or non-residential structures in Section
25.19(C) depending on the square footage of the garage.
25.20 For Riverine (Non-Coastal) Special Flood Hazard Areas with Base Flood Elevations.
In addition to the general standards listed in Section 25.15 the following specific
standards shall apply in Riverine (non-coastal) special flood hazard areas with Base
Flood Elevations (BFE): Zones A1-A30, AH, and AE.
(A) Before Regulatory Floodway. In areas where a regulatory floodway has not
been designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on
the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), unless it is demonstrated
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(B) Residential Construction
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one
(1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
2. Enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall comply with the flood
opening requirements in Section 25.19 (A).
(C) Non-Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall:
1. Have the lowest floor, including basement elevated at or above the Base
Flood Elevation (BFE) together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities,
2. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
3. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
4. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this section based on their
development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and
plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator as set forth Section 25.12 (B).
5. Non-residential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, shall
comply with the standards for enclosed areas below the lowest floor in
Section 25.20 (C).
6. Applicants floodproofing non-residential buildings shall be notified that
flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one (1) foot
below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base
flood level will be rated as one (1) foot below.
170
25.21 Below Grade Crawl Spaces
Where a structure contains a below grade crawl space, the following shall apply:
(A) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and
the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through the required flood
openings stated in Section 25.19 (A). Because of hydrodynamic loads,
crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater
than five (5) feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design
professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other
types of foundations are recommended for these areas.
(B) The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and,
as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent
opening can be no more than one (1) foot above the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
(C) Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the
crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other
materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice
is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE.
(D) Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above BFE
or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system
components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be
placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.
(E) The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two
(2) feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
(F) The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of
the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall must not exceed
four (4) feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable
unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building
code requirements for flood hazard areas.
(G) There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the
interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a
reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary
because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil
types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained
soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles or gravel or
crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means.
(H) The velocity of floodwaters at the site shall not exceed five (5) feet per second
for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five (5) feet per second, other
foundation types should be used.
171
25.22 Manufactured Dwellings
(A) New or substantially improved manufactured dwellings supported on solid
foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings that comply with
Section 25.19 (A);
(B) The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be at or above Base
Flood Elevation;
(C) New or substantially improved manufactured dwellings shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during the base flood.
Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home
Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques), and;
(D) Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches
above Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
25.23 Recreational Vehicles
Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices,
and has no permanently attached additions; or
(C) Meet the requirements of Section 25.22, including the anchoring and elevation
requirements for manufactured dwellings.
25.24 Appurtenant (Accessory) Structures
Relief from elevation or floodproofing requirements for residential and non-residential
structures in Riverine (Non-Coastal) flood zones may be granted for appurtenant
structures that meet the following requirements:
(A) Appurtenant structures located partially or entirely within the floodway must
comply with requirements for development within a floodway found in Section
25.25.
(B) Appurtenant structures must only be used for parking, access, and/or storage
and shall not be used for human habitation;
(C) In compliance with State of Oregon Specialty Codes, appurtenant structures on
properties that are zoned residential are limited to one-story structures less than
200 square feet, or 400 square feet if the property is greater than two (2) acres
in area and the proposed appurtenant structure will be located a minimum of
20 feet from all property lines. Appurtenant structures on properties that are
zoned as non-residential are limited in size to 120 square feet.
(D) The portions of the appurtenant structure located below the Base Flood
Elevation must be built using flood resistant materials;
(E) The appurtenant structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the base flood.
(F) The appurtenant structure must be designed and constructed to equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls and comply with the requirements for
flood openings in Section 25.19 (A);
(G) Appurtenant structures shall be located and constructed to have low damage
potential;
172
(H) Appurtenant structures shall not be used to store toxic material, oil, or gasoline,
or any priority persistent pollutant identified by the Oregon Department of
Environmental Quality unless confined in a tank installed incompliance with
Section 25.15 (D) 3.
(I) Appurtenant structures shall be constructed with electrical, mechanical, and
other service facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood.
25.25 Floodways
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 25.05 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to
the velocity of the floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
potential, the following provisions apply:
(A) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway
unless:
1. Certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided
demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;
OR,
2. A community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations,
provided that a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is applied
for and approved by the Federal Insurance Administrator, and the
requirements for such revision as established under Volume 44 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, section 65.12 are fulfilled.
(B) If the requirements of Section 25.25 (A) are satisfied, all new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development shall comply with all other
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 25.14 to 25.17.
25.26 Standards for Shallow Flooding Areas
Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations or as
AH zones with Base Flood Elevations. For AO zones the base flood depths range from
one (1) to three (3) feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.
Such flooding is usually characterized as sheet flow. For both AO and AH zones,
adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
25.27 Standards for AH Zones
Development within AH Zones must comply with the standards in Sections 25.15, 25.18
and 25.25.
25.28 Standards for AO Zones
In AO zones, the following provisions apply in addition to the requirements in Sections
25.15 and 25.25:
173
(A) New construction and substantial improvement of residential structures and
manufactured dwellings within AO zones shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, at
minimum to or above the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. For
manufactured dwellings the lowest floor is considered to be the bottom of the
longitudinal chassis frame beam.
(B) New construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures
within AO zones shall either:
1. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade of the building site, at minimum to or above the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) at least
two (2) feet if no depth number is specified; or
2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely
floodproofed to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM or a
minimum of two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth
number is specified, so that any space below that level is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. If this method is used,
compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as stated in Section 25.19(C)4.
(C) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO Zones on the community’s
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) shall either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
3. Meet the elevation requirements of Section 25.20, and the anchoring and
other requirements for manufactured dwellings of Section 25.22.
(D) In AO zones, new and substantially improved appurtenant structures must
comply with the standards in Section 25.24.
(E) In AO zones, enclosed areas beneath elevated structures shall comply with the
requirements in Section 25.19(A).
174
SECTION 26.00
TEMPORARY USES
26.01 Purpose
26.02 Permitted Uses
26.03 Permit Required
175
SECTION 26.00
TEMPORARY USES
26.01 Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to provide standards for the
establishment of temporary businesses and similar uses within the City of Aumsville.
26.02 Permitted Uses. Where allowed in the underlying zone, the following temporary uses
shall be permitted subject to the following limitations and requirements:
(A) Tree and Fireworks. Christmas tree or fireworks sales are permitted subject to
the following:
1. The sales shall be limited to Commercial of Industrial zones, except that
sales may occur on those properties containing public or semi-public
uses, such as schools or churches, regardless of the underlying zone.
2. Unless otherwise excepted by provisions in this Section, the sales
activity shall be subject to provisions in Section 26.
3. Temporary uses located within Residential zones shall not operate
beyond 9:00 PM.
(B) Commercial Activities. Amusement and recreational services and retail sales
and services are permitted in the Commercial zone, subject to the following:
1. The business may be operated from a vehicle, temporary structure, or a
vacant building.
2. The activity is located on the same lot for no more than 90 days in any
calendar year.
3. The required parking for the primary uses on the same lot is not reduced
below Code requirements.
4. The use does not block driveways, driveway entrances, or parking aisles.
5. The activity conforms to all signage requirements in Section 19.
6. The activity conforms to all setback requirements applicable to the lot
and zone.
7. The operator of a temporary use shall obtain all permits required by other
agencies including those required for food handling and sales, and the
sale of fireworks.
(C) Food Services. Individual food services are subject to the requirements in
Section 26.02(B) except that they may be located on the same lot for 180 days
with unlimited renewals and the appropriate health certificates are obtained. In
addition, food services are subject to the following:
1. Food services may be located on those properties containing public or
semi-public uses, such as schools or churches, regardless of the
underlying zone.
2. Food services facilities (carts, trucks, etc.) shall be removed from the site
daily.
3. For sites containing more than three food service facilities, requirements
in Section 27 apply.
(D) Temporary Construction Facilities. Mobile offices, temporary power equipment,
and temporary structures used by personnel and to store equipment during
construction, provided the structures are located on the construction site and
not used as dwellings. There is no restriction as to the zoning.
176
(E) Yard Sales and Auctions. Yard sales or auctions in any zone, provided there
are not more than four sales in a calendar year, with each sale not to exceed
three consecutive days. Merchandise and signs shall remain on private
property. This Section does not limit the number of times, or duration, that a
public agency may conduct sales or auctions regard agency land, equipment,
supplies or other materials.
(F) Additional Permitted Temporary Uses. The City Council may, by resolution,
authorize additional permitted temporary uses during a specific event or festival
and set forth reasonable types of uses, appropriate zones for such uses, and
any time restrictions the Council finds necessary to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the public.
26.03 Permit Required. Unless otherwise waived by provisions in this Section, all temporary
uses shall be subject to a permit. The City shall establish a permit application and fee
and shall review the application as a Type I Site Development Review.
177
SECTION 27.00
MOBILE FOOD SERVICES
27.01 Purpose.
27.02 Definitions.
27.03 Standards
27.04 Permit Required.
178
SECTION 27.00
MOBILE FOOD SERVICES
27.01 Purpose. The purpose of this Section 27 is to permit mobile food carts, vehicles and
similar facilities to be sited on private property in the applicable zones on a year-round
basis.
27.02 Definitions. The following definitions apply to provision in this Section:
(A) Abutting property owners and occupants. Any owner or occupant of property
that abuts the subject site, excluding public right-of-way.
(B) Accessible Route. A continuous unobstructed path of travel connecting all
publicly accessible elements and spaces of a building or facility.
(C) Clearances. Clearances referenced in this Section are measured horizontally
from the outside edge of the subject property line to any obstruction on the
ground greater than one-half inch in height, or to an adjacent projection.
(D) Mobile food cart. A vehicle that is propelled, or can be pulled or pushed down a
sidewalk, street, or highway, on which food is prepared, processed, or
converted, or is used in selling and dispensing food to the customer.
(E) Operator of mobile food cart. Any person, partnership, corporation, association,
or other business entity operating a mobile food unit.
(F) Property owner. The owner or agent of a private property where mobile food
units are proposed to be located.
27.03 Standards
(A) Location. Year-round siting of mobile food units is limited to private property
located in the applicable zones. In addition, the following shall apply:
1. Up to three units may be located on a single parcel subject to the
Temporary Use provisions in Section 26.
2. While there is no limit to the number of units that may be placed on an
individual property, sites containing more than three units shall be
subject to provisions in Section 27.
(B) Unit Size. A mobile food cart is limited in size to sixteen (16) feet in length
and/or 128 square feet. Towing arms, tow hitch and tongue are exempted from
this calculation.
(C) Setbacks. A mobile food cart that orients the service window toward the public
right-of-way shall maintain a minimum two-foot setback from the public right-ofway.
Otherwise, there is no minimum setback requirement.
(D) Accessways. Accessible route clearances shall be no less than four (4) feet in
width and no less than seven (7) feet in height for the entire length of the
accessible route. Radiuses along an accessible route shall be no less than four
(4) feet in width.
(E) Separation. A minimum 10-foot separation is required between a food carts,
other food carts on the property and permanent common outdoor eating areas.
(F) Seating Provisions. Individual temporary seating areas may be placed near a
mobile food cart but must maintain a minimum four-foot accessible clearance
area between the seating area and the mobile food cart, and must be oriented
so that the relief valves on any propane tanks associated with mobile food units
179
are facing away from the seating area. Tables and chairs or benches used for
individual seating areas must be constructed of non-flammable materials.
(G) Structures. Decks, patios, and similar structures are not permitted within
10 feet of a mobile food cart. Structures may be subject to building code
requirements. Park or picnic benches are permitted but must be maintained at
least 10-feet from mobile food carts. Common seating areas shall be
maintained on the subject property and shall not obstruct the adjacent public
sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(H) Restroom Facilities. The property owner shall either provide restroom facilities
or secure written permission from an adjacent business or a property owner
within 1/8 mile of the subject site allowing mobile food cart operators and
customers to access restroom facilities. This requirement may be waived if
there is a public restroom facility located within 1/8 mile of the subject site.
Information regarding the location of an approved off-site restroom shall be
provided on-site.
(I) Trash Receptacles. Trash receptacles shall be provided on site, and must be
regularly emptied and maintained. Trash receptacles shall be provided at a rate
of one receptacle for every two mobile food carts, with a minimum on of one per
lot. Where the property owner proposes to provide a common seating area a
minimum of one trash receptacle shall be provided in the common seating area.
All trash receptacles shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from combustible
fuel tanks on mobile food units.
(J) Signs. Signs may be permanently affixed to a mobile food cart and are exempt
from sign requirements in Section 19. Additional signage is subject to the
following:
1. One temporary sign per mobile food unit is permitted to be placed on the
subject site. Temporary signs may be no larger than six (6) square feet,
may only be placed on private property, and must not obstruct pedestrian
pathways.
2. Temporary signs shall not be located within the public right-of-way.
3. Temporary signs allowed under these provisions shall only be displayed
during operating hours.
4. Permanent sign shall comply with provisions in Section 19.
(K) Services. Fully contained mobile food carts are permitted. Carts that require a
water source, power source, or waste disposal location are permitted only
where appropriate city service connections are available, as determined by the
city.
27.04 Permit Required.
(A) A permit issued by the city is required before a mobile food cart can be
established in the city. The permit shall require the mobile food cart to comply
with applicable health and building requirements.
(B) A site for mobile food carts requires a Type II Site Development Review.
180
ILLUSTRATIONS
How to Calculate Clear-Vision Area
How to Determine a Story or Basement
How to Establish Building Lines, Front and Rear for Odd Shaped Lots
Lot Types
181
HOW TO CALCULATE CLEAR-VISION AREA
182
183
184
Lot Types
5-2 Aumsville Ordinances 5-2.2
1
ORDINANCE NO. 171
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE PARKING OF VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
ON THE CITY STREETS OF AUMSVILLE AND PRIVATE OR PUBLIC
PROPERTY; SETTING FORTH REGULATIONS AND PENALTIES FOR
VIOLATIONS; AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
The city of Aumsville does ordain as follows:
Section 1. Definitions. Except where the context indicates otherwise, the singular
number includes the plural, and the masculine gender includes the feminine, and
the following mean:
(1) City. City of Aumsville.
(2) Person. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or
corporation, whether he or it is acting for himself, itself, or as the clerk,
servant, employee, or agent of another.
(3) Vehicle. Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered or animaldrawn,
but excluding human propelled. The term includes any trailer in
tow of any size, kind, or description. Exception is made for vehicles in
the service of the city parks.
(4) Trailer. Any piece of machinery designed to be towed by a vehicle.
(5) City Street. As defined in Ordinance No. 167, Article 17.
(6) Sidewalk. As defined in Ordinance No. 167, Article 16.
(7) City Council. Governing body of the city.
(8) Camper. A structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle, and
is not permanently attached thereto, and is designed to provide facilities
for human habitation, or for camping.
(9) Recreational Vehicle. Means a vehicle with or without motive power,
which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for
recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes; including any camper
mounted upon a motor vehicle.
(10) Park. A park, playground, creek, recreation center, or any other area in
the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
[Section 1 amended by Ord. No. 263 passed April 16, 1981; Ord. No. 482
passed October 23, 2000]
Section 2. Offenses Against the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to
commit, or allow to be committed, with any vehicle including recreational vehicles
under their control any of the following (See also Development Ordinance Sections
18.08(B) and 22.05):
(1) Parking of any vehicle, including recreational vehicles, on or across any
portion of a sidewalk.
(2) Parking of a trailer on a city street, for a period of more than five days in
any 30-day period
5-2.3 Aumsville Ordinances 5-2.16
1
(3) Parking of a wrecked, inoperative, or non-currently licensed vehicle,
including recreational vehicles on a city street at any time.
(4) Parking a vehicle, including recreational vehicles, within 15 feet of an
intersection.
(5) Parking of a vehicle, including recreational vehicles, so as to block any
private or public driveway.
(6) Parking within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
(7) Parking in a "NO PARKING" Zone that has been designated by the city,
and posted as prescribed by the city.
(a) It is unlawful; for the purpose to prohibit or restrict parking in front of
any sidewalk, dwelling house, business hours, or in any alley, for any
person to letter, mark, or paint in any manner any letters, marks, or
signs on any sidewalk, curb, street, or alley, or to post anything
designed or intended to prohibit or restrict parking on a parking strip;
except as authorized by the city council.
(8) Parking of an unattended vehicle with the engine running, on any city
street, or public property.
(9) Parking of an unattended vehicle on a city street, or any publicly owned
property with the key in the ignition.
(10) Parking of a commercial vehicle of over 10,000 pounds gross weight on
a city street overnight.
(11) Parking of a vehicle or trailer on a city street, to make any mechanical
repairs, other than those of a minor nature, and not to involve more than
four hours to complete.
(12) Parking of an unattended vehicle, trailer, or camper on a city street, or
public property, that has any part thereof suspended by a vehicle jack, or
any other unstable device.
(13) Parking a vehicle in any alley, except to load or unload persons or
materials.
(14) Parking upon any street for the principal purpose of displaying such
vehicle for sale.
(15) Parking upon any street for the principal purpose of storing, or permitting
to be stored, a motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or other
personal property. It shall constitute prima facie evidence of storage of a
motor vehicle if the same is not moved for a period of 72 hours. The
continuity of the time shall not be deemed broken by movement of the
vehicle elsewhere on the block unless the movement removes the
vehicle from the block where it was located before it is returned.
(16) Parking perpendicular or diagonally to the sidewalk or curb, except in
areas designated and posted for this type parking.
(a) No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve
inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or
signed for angle parking.
5-2.17 Aumsville Ordinances 5-4
1
(17) Placing a camper on a city street at any time, when not mounted on a
motor vehicle.
(18) Parking a recreational vehicle on a city street for a period of more than
five days in any 30-day period. The chief of police may grant an
extension up to 10 days in a 30-day period and the Aumsville City
Council may grant a longer extension.
(19) No person in a park shall:
(a) Drive any vehicle on any area except gravel or paved park roads,
parking areas or other such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking by an elected official, city
administrator or designee.
(b) Park a vehicle in other than an established parking area or other
such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as
temporary parking by an elected official, city administrator or
designee.
(c) Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a
park official or traffic officer.
[Section 2 amended by Ord. No. 263 passed April 16, 1981; Ord. No. 482
passed October 23, 2000; amended by Ord. No. 598, March 8, 2010]
Section 3. Violation. Violation of Section 2, or any subsection thereof, of this
ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. [Section 3
amended by Ord. No. 482 passed October 23, 2000; amended by Ord. No. 598,
passed March 8, 2010]
Section 4. [Emergency Clause.] This ordinance being necessary for the
immediate preservation of public peace and safety, an emergency is hereby
declared and this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from the date of its
passage.
PASSED by the council and signed by the mayor November 4, 1974.
5-3 Aumsville Ordinances 5-3.4
1
ORDINANCE NO. 306
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING PARKING IN THE CITY OF AUMSVILLE;
SETTING TIME LIMITS ON CERTAIN STREETS; PROVIDING FOR THE
ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL PARKING PERMITS; SETTING FORTH PENALTIES
AND SETTING FORTH A BAIL SCHEDULE.
WHEREAS, the city of Aumsville, Oregon, by its Resolution No. 11-84, passed by
the council of such city at its meeting on August 13, 1984, set forth certain areas
designated by official traffic signs to be parking for two (2) hours only.
WHEREAS, there is a need for a fine to be set and a bail schedule to be imposed;
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. [Maximum Time Limit.] No person shall park in areas designated by
an official traffic sign longer than the maximum time set forth by said sign.
Section 2. [Movement of Vehicle.] Where maximum parking time limits are
designated by an official traffic sign, movement of a vehicle within a block shall not
extend the time limits for parking.
Section 3. [Residential Parking Permits.] Permits shall be issued by the recorder
to residents living along the specified route limiting maximum parking time. Such
permit shall be displayed in the windshield of the vehicle occupying the parking
space and no citations shall be issued to those vehicles displaying the permit.
Section 4. Bail and Fines.
(1) Violation of this ordinance is punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the municipal court of
Aumsville that establishes bail or sets a fine for violation of this ordinance
shall not establish the bail or impose a fine of an amount less than $5.00.
This section does not require the Aumsville Municipal Court to impose
bail upon the person if the court determines that the person may be
released without bail.
PASSED unanimously by the council and signed by the council president
September 10, 1984.
4-1 Aumsville Ordinances 4-1.4
2
ORDINANCE NO. 311
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING STATE LAWS RELATING TO GAMBLING
PERMITTING CERTAIN SOCIAL GAMES BY NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 41 AND SETTING FORTH PENALTIES.
The city of Aumsville does hereby ordain as follows:
Section 1. Adoption of State Law.
(A) Sections 167.100 - 167.167 are hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this chapter.
(B) All acts which are made unlawful by the above sections of ORS shall be
considered as offenses against the city when committed within its
boundaries and shall be punished as set forth in Section 3 of this
ordinance.
(C) Monies found in any gambling device or used in gambling or other
prohibited conduct under this ordinance shall be confiscated and paid into
the general fund of the city.
[Section 1 amended by Ord. No. 497, sec. 1, passed October 25, 2001.]
Section 2. Social Games Permitted. Social games as defined in ORS 167.117
are hereby totally prohibited in the city of Aumsville except as set forth below:
(1) People who gather in private homes at the invitation of the home owner
may engage in social games as defined in ORS 167.117 so long as no
house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no house
income from the operation of the social games.
(2) Charitable, fraternal, religious organizations, other non-profit
organizations, and private businesses conducting social games for
charity, must apply to the city council of the city of Aumsville for a permit
or license to conduct said games. Each day shall constitute a separate
event and a license shall be required for each event.
(a) Each organization shall apply to the city council of the city of
Aumsville at least 30 days prior to the planned event. The license or
permit application shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 and shall
provide the council with sufficient information to determine the status
of the organization and for what purposes any funds derived from the
social games will be used. Information required may include but not
be limited to a Department of Justice license, proof of non-profit status
by Oregon Department of Revenue and/or the Department of Internal
Revenue, Articles of Incorporation, Charters, Bylaws and other such
documents as may be required by the council.
(b) No charitable, fraternal, religious or non-profit organization or private
business may be granted more than three (3) license or licenses or
permit or permits per calendar year.
4-1 Aumsville Ordinances 4-1.4
2
[Section 2 amended by Ord. No. 497, passed October 25, 2001; Sect. 2.2 by Ord.
No. 620 passed July 23, 2012.]
Section 3. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $2,500.00, as determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction. The chief of police shall have jurisdiction to enforce this ordinance by
citation. It is the responsibility of the city attorney to cause a person cited under this
ordinance to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction for determination of
appropriate fine. [Section 3 amended by Ord. No. 497, sec. 3, passed October 25,
2001.]
Section 4. [Repeal.] Ordinance No. 41, enacted on January 30, 1913, is hereby
repealed.
PASSED and unanimously adopted by the council and signed by the mayor March
11, 1985.
3
CITY OF AUMSVILLE
595 Main Street
Aumsville, Oregon 97325
Phone 749-2030
SOCIAL GAMING APPLICATION
Name of Non-Profit Organization ________________________________________
Proof of Non-Profit Status ______________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
Date of Event ________________________________________________________
Funds to be used for __________________________________________________
This is the _______ application for a social gaming license this organization has
applied for since January 1, ________.
_____________________________
Representative
_____________________________
Date
$10.00 application fee received ____________________ Receipt No. ___________
To be set before the Aumsville City Council at their regularly scheduled meeting to
be held on _________________________________, 7:00 p.m., Community Center.
Representative will attend meeting YES ________
NO ________
_____________________________
City Administrator
APPROVED ________
DISAPPROVED ________
Council action dated ____________________________
_____________________________
Mayor
4-2 Aumsville Ordinances 4-2.5
1
ORDINANCE NO. 316
AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING THE POSTING, PLACING, DISPLAYING AND
ATTACHING OF SIGNS OR ANY ADVERTISING MATTER TO ANY TREE, POLE
OR POST SITUATED ON ANY PUBLIC PROPERTY WITHIN THE CITY AND
REGULATING ERECTION, PLACEMENT OR DISPLAY OF ADVERTISING
MATTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
The city of Aumsville, Oregon, ordains as follows:
Section 1. [Prohibited.] Except as otherwise specifically permitted, no person
may:
(A) Attach by any means whatsoever any advertising matter to any tree, pole
or post situated on any public property within the city.
Section 2. [Posting on Private Property.] No person may display any advertising
matter on or across any private property within the city without the express consent
of the owner or person in charge of such property.
Section 3. [Exceptions.] Exceptions to ban on public advertising:
(A) The banner displaying the date of the Corn Festival shall be permitted
each year.
(B) Upon request, the council may permit any person to display advertising
for meetings or entertainment sponsored by public, civic, welfare,
charitable, religious, or fraternal groups, notwithstanding the provisions of
Sections 1 and 2 above. Any person desiring such permission shall
apply to the city recorder who shall forward the request to the city council.
If the council finds that such sign is not likely to endanger any person or
property, it may grant the application, providing the terms and conditions
for such posting, or it may reject such application.
(C) Nothing in Sections 1 and 2 above will prohibit the proper display of
notices of any election to be held by the federal, state, or city
governments, or any postings called for in the ordinances of the city of
Aumsville.
Section 4. Abatement.
(A) The law enforcement agency of the city of Aumsville shall immediately
remove any advertising matter or sign or other devise displayed within
the city in violation of any of the terms of this ordinance.
Section 5. Penalty.
(A) Violations of this ordinance shall be deemed an offense punishable by a
fine not to exceed $250. Every full business day during which a violation
of this ordinance shall continue shall be a separate offense.
PASSED by the council November 18, 1985 and signed by the mayor November 19,
1985.
4-3 Aumsville Ordinances 4-3.2
1
ORDINANCE NO. 344
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING ALL AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES MADE TO
THE OREGON REVISED STATUTES CONCERNING THE OREGON CRIMINAL
CODE BY THE 1987 LEGISLATURE AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
The city of Aumsville, Oregon, ordains as follows:
Section 1. General Provisions. The city of Aumsville does hereby adopt and
incorporate by reference into the existing Aumsville ordinances, all amendments and
changes made by the 1987 Oregon Legislature to the Oregon Revised Statutes
concerning the Oregon Criminal Code. All changes and definitions adopted in the
Oregon Revised Statutes at a date later than the adoption of this ordinance are also
adopted by reference and made a part of this ordinance.
Section 2. Emergency Clause. It is hereby adjudged and declared that the
existing conditions are such that this ordinance is necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health and safety of the city of Aumsville.
Emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this ordinance shall take effect and be in
full force and effect when signed by the mayor and passed by this council.
PASSED unanimously by the council and signed by the mayor November 16, 1987.
5-4 Aumsville Ordinances 5-4.3
3
ORDINANCE NO. 349
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE USE OF BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS,
SCOOTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR APPARATUS WITHIN THE CITY,
PROVIDING FOR A PENALTY THEREOF AND REPEALING ORDINANCES 21
AND 56.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Definitions.
(A) Bicycle. A vehicle as is defined in ORS 861.150.
(B) Skateboard. A board of any material with wheels on the bottom designed
to be ridden by a person.
(C) Scooter. A vehicle consisting of a narrow board mounted between two
wheels (or more) with an upright steering handle attached to the front
wheel.
(D) Roller Skates. Two metal or plastic framed objects with wheels designed
to be attached to or worn on the feet of a person.
Section 2. Prohibited Riding Areas. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle,
scooter, skateboard or other similar apparatus upon a sidewalk in the business
district of Aumsville. Said business district to be defined as Mill Creek Road
between First Street and Eleventh Street. Any person operating a bicycle, scooter,
skateboard, roller skates or other similar apparatus upon any other sidewalk shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians.
Section 3. Bicycle Safety Regulations.
(A) Every bicycle operated upon the streets or other public place shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop
and to hold the bicycle.
(B) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than with his feet on the
pedals and facing the front of the bicycle.
(C) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(D) All bicycles shall be equipped with safety reflector lights, both front and
back.
(E) Every person operating a bicycle upon a street or other public place shall
ride as near to the right-hand side of the street as practical, exercising
due care when passing a pedestrian or a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction.
(F) Persons riding bicycles upon a street or other public place shall not ride
more than two abreast.
5-4.4 Aumsville Ordinances 5-4.6
3
Section 4. Skateboards, Roller Skates, Scooters Safety Regulations.
(A) Use of a skateboard, scooter, roller skates, or other similar apparatus in
other areas than the business district is permitted so long as the use and
the operation is safe. A person commits the offense of unsafe operation
of the above mentioned apparatus if the person does one of the following:
(1) Operates the skateboard, roller skates, scooter or similar apparatus
so as to suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and move into
the path of a vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian that is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
(2) Operates a skateboard, roller skates, scooter or other similar
apparatus and does not give an audible warning before overtaking
and passing a pedestrian and does not yield the right of way to all
pedestrians.
(3) Operates a skateboard, roller skates, scooter or other similar
apparatus in a careless manner that endangers or would be likely to
endanger any person or property.
(4) Operates a skateboard, roller skates, scooter or similar apparatus at
a speed greater than an ordinary walk when approaching or entering
a crosswalk, approaching or crossing a driveway or crossing a curb
cut or pedestrian ramp and a motor vehicle is approaching the
crosswalk, driveway, curb cut or pedestrian ramp.
Section 5. Prohibited Riding Times.
(A) No person shall ride a skateboard, roller skates, scooter or other similar
apparatus upon any street or sidewalk between one hour after sunset
and one hour before sunrise unless the apparatus or rider is equipped
with lighting equipment that meets the described requirements:
(1) The lighting equipment must be used during limited visibility
conditions.
(2) The lighting equipment must show a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front of the apparatus.
(3) The lighting equipment must have a red reflector or lighting device or
material of such size or characteristic and so mounted as to be visible
from all distances up to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
Section 6. Seizure.
(A) At such time as a citation is issued to a skateboard, bicycle, scooter, roller
skates or other similar apparatus rider who is in violation of this
ordinance, the police may seize the apparatus upon which the violator
was riding.
(B) Said apparatus may be recovered from the Aumsville Police Department
by an adult rider 24 hours after being seized.
5-4.7 Aumsville Ordinances 5-4.9
3
(C) Said apparatus may be recovered from the Aumsville Police Department
by a juvenile offender 24 hours after being seized provided the offender is
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
Section 7. Procedure. A citation to appear in Aumsville Municipal Court for
violation of this ordinance shall be issued to the alleged violator stating the date,
time and place to appear and the date, time and place of the alleged offense. At the
request of the offender, a trial shall be conducted without a jury. All juvenile
offenders shall be cited to juvenile court.
Section 8. Penalty. The penalty for violation of any provision of this ordinance
shall be a fine not less than $5.00 and not more than $100.00.
Section 9. Repeal. Ordinances 21 and 56 are repealed in their entirety.
PASSED by the council June 13, 1988 and signed by the mayor June 14, 1988.
5-5 Aumsville Ordinances 5-5.7
1
ORDINANCE NO. 363
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO MOTOR VEHICLE TRAFFIC, ESTABLISHING A
TRUCK ROUTE, REPEALING ORDINANCE 246 and 249, AND DECLARING AN
EMERGENCY.
The city of Aumsville, Oregon, ordains as follows:
Section 1. [Boundaries Established.] Market Road No. 89 (commonly known as
11th Street) from the northern boundary of the city south to the intersection of
Market Road No. 28 (commonly known as Main Street); Market Road No. 28 from
the western boundary of the city easterly to the eastern boundary of the city; Market
Road No. 88 (commonly known as First Street) from Market Road No. 88 to the
northern boundary of said city; 8th Street from the Mill Creek Bridge north to the
intersection of Market Road No. 28 is hereby designated as a truck route.
Section 2. [Length Restriction.] It shall be unlawful to operate any truck over
thirty (30) feet in total length or any truck and trailer or truck and semi-trailer
combination upon any public street within the city unless such street has been
designated as a truck route.
Section 3. Weight Restriction. It shall be unlawful to operate any truck of 20,000
pounds gross weight upon any public street within the city unless such street has
been designated as a truck route. [Section 3 amended by Ord. No. 499, sec. 1,
passed December 10, 2001]
Section 4. Loading and Unloading. Vehicles being operated on public streets for
the specific reason of picking up or discharging goods at any business
establishment or residence located on other than a designated truck route; or trucks,
with business at adjacent industrial sites, parked temporarily, shall be exempt from
the provisions of this ordinance. [Section 4 amended by Ord. No. 531, passed
February 23, 2004]
Section 5. Penalty. Any violation of this ordinance is hereby declared a nuisance
and any person found guilty thereto, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.). A violation of this ordinance shall be considered
a separate offense for each day the violation continues.
Section 6. Repeal. Ordinances No. 246 and 249 are hereby repealed.
Section 7. Emergency Clause. Whereas it is necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public heath, peace and welfare of the citizens of the city of
Aumsville that this ordinance become effective at the earliest time possible,
therefore, this ordinance shall become effective immediately upon it's passage by
the city council and signature of the Mayor.
PASSED unanimously by the city council December 11, 1989 and signed by the
mayor December 13, 1989.
5-6 Aumsville Ordinances 5-6.3
1
ORDINANCE NO. 370
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING ALL AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES MADE TO
THE OREGON REVISED STATUTES CHAPTERS 801, 802, 803, 805, 806, 807,
808, 810, 811, 813, 815, 816, 818, 820, 821, 822, and 823 CONCERNING THE
OREGON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE BY THE 1989 OREGON LEGISLATURE,
REPEALING ORDINANCE 345 AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
The city of Aumsville, Oregon, ordains as follows:
Section 1. General Provisions. The city of Aumsville does hereby adopt and
incorporate by reference into the existing Aumsville ordinances, all amendments and
changes made by the 1989 Oregon Legislature to the Oregon Revised Statutes
Chapters 801, 802, 803, 805, 806, 807, 808, 810, 811, 813, 815, 816, 818 820, 821,
822, and 823 concerning the Oregon Uniform Traffic Code.
Section 2. Repeal. Ordinance No. 345 is hereby repealed.
Section 3. Emergency Clause. It is hereby adjudged and declared that the
existing conditions are such that this ordinance is necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health and safety of the city of Aumsville.
Emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this ordinance shall take full force and
effect when passed by the council and signed by the mayor.
PASSED unanimously by the city council December 11, 1989 and signed by the
mayor December 25, 1989.
4-8 Aumsville Ordinances 4-8.2
1
ORDINANCE NO. 410
AN ORDINANCE IMPOSING A CURFEW WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF
THE CITY OF AUMSVILLE AND IMPOSING CIVIL PENALTIES UPON PARENTS
OF CHILDREN WHO VIOLATE CURFEW AND REPEALING ORDINANCE NO.
367 AND ALL OTHER SECTIONS OF ORDINANCES OR ORDINANCES IN
CONFLICT THEROF.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Minors Nighttime Curfew. No person under 18 years of age shall be in
or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning, Sunday through Thursday and
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following morning, Friday and Saturday unless the
minor is:
(A) Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 18 years of age or
over and authorized by the parent or by law to have care and custody of
the minor; or
(B) Engaged in lawful pursuit or activity which requires the presence of the
minor in such public places during the hours specified in this section; or
(C) Emancipated pursuant to ORS 419B.550 to 419B.558.
[Section 1 amended by Ord. No. 495, sec. 1, passed September 24, 2001.]
Section 2. Minors Daytime Curfew.
(A) No minor between the ages of 7 and 18 years, who has not completed
the 12th grade shall be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other
public place during regular school hours; except while attending school
as required by ORS 339.010 to 339.065; unless the minor is:
(1) Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 18 years of age
or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have care and
custody of the minor;
(2) Engaged in lawful pursuit or activity which requires the presence of
the minor in such public places during regular school hours and is
authorized by the minor’s parent, guardian, or other person having
the legal care and custody of such minor;
(3) Emancipated pursuant to ORS 419B.550 to 419B.558; or
(4) The minor is authorized and approved to be away from the school as
provided in ORS 339.030 and 339.065, but is not suspended or
expelled.
(B) For the purpose of this section, regular school hours are: those hours for
the fulltime school which the child would attend in the school district in
which the child resides, on any day for which school is in session unless
such day is a scheduled vacation or holiday observed by the school.
[Section 2 added by Ord. No. 495, sec. 1, passed September 24, 2001.]
4-8.3 Aumsville Ordinances 4-8.6
2
Section 3. Parental Responsibility.
(A) No parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of a minor
person under the age of 18 years shall allow or permit the minor to be in
violation of Section 1 above.
(B) No parent, guardian, or person having the legal care and custody of a
minor between the ages of 5 and 18 years who has not completed the
12th grade shall allow such minor to be in violation of Section 2 above.
(C) Violating parental responsibility under this section is a violation subject to
a maximum fine of $250.00.
[Section 2 renumbered to Section 3 as amended by Ord. No. 495, sec. 1, passed
September 24, 2001.]
Section 4. Enforcement.
(A) Any police officer or any other law enforcement officer is authorized and
empowered to take into custody a minor violating any provision of Section
1 and/or Section 2 above. A minor who has been taken into custody may
be taken to the police department. The officer shall use due diligence to
find the parent or guardian or person having custody of the minor, and
shall release the minor to such person at the police department. For
violations of Section 2, a police officer may, in lieu of holding the minor
person in custody for delivery to a parent or legal guardian, release the
minor to the principal or other designated official at the school at which
the minor is enrolled.
(B) It shall be unlawful and shall be considered a separate offense for any
parent, guardian, or any other adult person having the legal care and
custody of any person under the age of 18 years to refuse to come to the
police officer and take the minor person under his or her custody
immediately to the minor’s home upon being notified by the police
department in accordance with this section.
[Section 3 renumbered to Section 4 as amended by Ord. No. 495, sec. 1, passed
September 24, 2001.]
Section 5. Subsequent Violations. Upon subsequent violations the parent,
guardian or person having legal care and custody shall be served with a citation to
appear before the Aumsville Municipal Court with the minor to show cause why this
ordinance has been violated again. The municipal court may, upon a finding of a
second violation, impose the civil penalty set forth above. [Section 4 renumbered to
Section 5 as amended by Ord. No. 495, sec. 1, passed September 24, 2001.]
Section 6. Repeal. Ordinance No. 367 is hereby repealed. Further, any and all
other ordinances or sections of ordinances that are in conflict with this Ordinance
No. 410 are hereby repealed. [Section 5 renumbered to Section 6 by Ord. No. 495,
sec. 1, passed September 24, 2001.]
PASSED by the council and signed by the mayor October 10, 1994.
4-9 Aumsville Ordinances 4-9.4
1
ORDINANCE NO. 433
AN ORDINANCE MAKING IT UNLAWFUL TO POSSESS GRAFFITI
IMPLEMENTS, PROVIDING FOR THEIR SEIZURE AND PROVIDING
PENALTIES.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Definitions.
(A) Aerosol Paint Container. Any aerosol container adopted or made for
spraying paint.
(B) Etching Device. A glass cutter, awl or any device capable of scratching
or etching the surface of any structure or personal property.
(C) Felt Tip Marker. Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip,
which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth inch.
(D) Graffiti. Any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched,
scratched, drawn or painted on any surface that is not authorized by the
owner or person in charge of the property.
(E) Graffiti Implement. Any aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, an
etching device or a graffiti stick.
(F) Graffiti Stick. A device containing a solid form paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or
other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure,
and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-fourth of an inch in
width.
Section 2. Unlawfully Possessing Graffiti Implement. No person may possess,
with the intent to unlawfully apply graffiti on any real or personal property of another,
any graffiti implement.
Section 3. Seizure Impoundment. In addition to any citation issued, a graffiti
implement possessed in violation of this ordinance may be immediately seized and
impounded by the Aumsville Police Department. The court, upon disposition of the
issued citation, shall determine whether the instrument shall be returned to the
defendant or deemed contraband and disposed of according to state law.
Section 4. Penalty. A conviction for the violation of Section 2 of this ordinance
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $3,000, in conjunction with the fine,
community service shall also be ordered, as required in Section 5 below. [Section 4
amended by Ord. No. 461 passed October 11, 1999]
4-9.5 Aumsville Ordinances 4-9.8
2
Section 5. Community Service. In conjunction with a fine that may be imposed for
violation of this ordinance the court shall order community service. To the extent
possible, the community service shall be applied for the removal of graffiti and
restoration of all surfaces to their original condition prior to the graffiti damage.
[Section 5 amended by Ord. No. 461 passed October 11, 1999]
Section 6. Parental Responsibility. If a minor is determined to have violated
Section 2 of this ordinance the minor’s parent, guardian or other person having the
legal custody of the minor may be charged with violation of Aumsville Ordinance No.
434 dealing with parental responsibility.
Section 7. Parental Civil Liability. In addition to any other remedy provided by
law, the parent or parents of an unemancipated minor child shall be liable for actual
damages to person or property in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by
said child in accordance with the provisions of ORS 30.765.
Section 8. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the 30th day after its
enactment.
PASSED by the council September 9, 1996 and signed by the mayor September 16,
1996.
4-10 Aumsville Ordinances 4-10.3
1
ORDINANCE NO. 434
AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR PARENTS,
LEGAL GUARDIANS AND PERSONS WITH THE LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE SAFETY AND WEFARE OF A CHILD UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE,
CREATING OFFENSES, PROVIDING A REMEDY FOR VICTIMS, AND STATING
AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, the residents of the city of Aumsville are concerned with the
proliferation of illegal activity by minors in violation of the municipal code and state
law; and
WHEREAS, parents and other responsible persons of minors should strive to
exercise the supervision and care that will avoid the occurrence of unlawful juvenile
incidents and further to enhance the protection of juveniles by the adults responsible
for their actions.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms
shall have the meanings hereafter stated. When not inconsistent with the content,
the singular shall include the plural, plural shall include singular, masculine shall
include feminine, and present tense shall include future tense. The word “shall” is
mandatory and not merely directory.
Minor. Any person under the age of 18 who has not been recognized as an adult
according to ORS 419B.550 to 419B.558.
Parent. The natural or adoptive mother or father, legal guardian or other adult
person having the legal responsibility for the safety and welfare of a minor who has
not been emancipated pursuant to ORS 419B.550 to 419B.558.
Section 2. Offenses. A parent commits the offense of FAILING TO SUPERVISE A
MINOR if the minor has been found on private property, public property or premises
open to the public and is cited for any violation of any provision of city ordinance or
state law and sufficient facts exist to find that the minor committed the violation or
offense.
Section 3. Court. It shall be a defense to the failing to supervise a minor offense if
the minor’s citation for violation of any provision of city ordinance or state law
occurred in the presence of the parent cited. It shall be a defense to the failing to
supervise a minor offense if the citation was issued pursuant to an occurrence on
private property of the parent cited. It shall be a further affirmative defense that the
parent:
(A) Took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the minor at the time the
parent is alleged to have failed to supervise; or
(B) Reported the act to the appropriate authorities.
4-10.4 Aumsville Ordinances 4-10.8
2
Section 4. Remedy for Victims. In addition to any fine or penalty imposed
pursuant to this ordinance, the court may order the parent to pay any restitution to a
victim of the minor’s conduct. The amount of restitution ordered pursuant to this
ordinance shall not exceed that allowed by state law. The municipal court shall
credit the parent ordered to pay restitution the actual dollars paid by the minor
pursuant to any juvenile court order or juvenile code agreement. [Section 4
amended by Ord. No. 463 passed November 8, 1999]
Section 5. Penalty. The offense described in this ordinance of failing to supervise
a minor is a violation punishable by a maximum fine of $1,000.00. [Section 5
amended by Ord. No. 463 passed November 8, 1999]
Section 6. Parent Effectiveness Program. The court may suspend all or a portion
of the fine set forth in Section 5 above if the parent successfully participates and
completes a parent effectiveness program to the satisfaction of the court.
Section 7. Jurisdiction. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to confine
jurisdiction of the Aumsville Municipal Court over a minor in violation of state law.
Section 8. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the 30th day after its
enactment.
PASSED by the council September 9, 1996 and signed by the mayor September 16,
1996.
9-5 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.3
Page 1
ORDINANCE NO. 460
A MASTER TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE ORDINANCE
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Short Title: This Ordinance may be referred to as the
“Communications Ordinance”.
[Section 1 amended by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 2. Jurisdiction and Management of the Public Rights of Way:
A. The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all public
rights of way within the City under authority of the City charter and state law.
B. The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each
public right of way whether the City has a fee, easement, or other legal
interest in the right of way. The City has jurisdiction and regulatory
management of each right of way whether the legal interest in the right of
way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation,
condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.
C. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right of way without the
permission of the City. The City grants permission to use rights of way by
franchises and permits.
D. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a public right of
way by the City is not official acceptance of the right of way, and does not
obligate the City to maintain or repair any part of the right of way.
E. The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move any communications
facilities located within the public rights of way of the City, as the City may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to a public
health or safety emergency.
[Section 2 amended by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 3. Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax:
A. The fees and costs provided for in this Ordinance, and any compensation
charged and paid for use of the public rights of way provided for in this
Ordinance, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state,
local, and City charges as may be levied, imposed, or due from a
communications provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the
lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of communications services.
B. The City has determined that any fee provided for by this Ordinance is not
subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of
the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property
owners.
C. The fees and costs provided for in this Ordinance are subject to applicable
federal and state laws.
9-5.4 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.4
Page 2
[Section 3 amended by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
DEFINITIONS
Section 4. Definitions: For the purpose of this Ordinance the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the
meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable
Act, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the
Telecommunications Act. If not defined there, the words shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
Cable Act shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §
521, et seq.
Cable Service is to be defined consistent with federal laws and means the one-way
transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service;
and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such
video programming or other programming service.
City means the City of Aumsville, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals
authorized to act on the City’s behalf.
City Council means the elected governing body of the City of Aumsville, Oregon.
Control means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
City Property means and includes all real property owned by the City, other than
public rights of way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all
property held in a proprietary capacity by the City, which are not subject to right of
way franchising as provided in this Ordinance.
Communications Facilities means the plant and equipment, including but not
limited to the poles, conduits, ducts, cable and wires, located or to be located
within, under or above the rights of way and used or to be used by a
communications provider to provide communications service.
Communications Provider means any provider of communications services and
includes, but is not limited to, every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls,
operates or manages communications facilities within the City.
9-5.4 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.4
Page 3
Communications Service means any service provided using communications
facilities for the purpose of transmission of information including, but not limited to:
voice, video, or data, without regard to the transmission protocol employed and
whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself.
Communications service includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video,
data, or information transport, but does not include: (1) cable service; (2) open
video system service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. 76: (3) private communications system
services provided without using the public rights of way; (4) over-the-air radio or
television broadcasting to successor thereto; and (5) direct-to-home satellite service
within the meaning of Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act.
Communications System – see “Communications facilities” above.
Conduit means any structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more ducts,
conduits, manholes, hand holes, bolts, or other facilities used for any telegraph,
telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications conductors, or cable right
of way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by one or more public utilities.
Construction means any activity in the public rights of way resulting in physical
change thereto, including excavation or placement of structures, but excluding
routine maintenance or repair of existing facilities.
Days means calendar days unless otherwise specified.
Duct means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.
Emergency has the meaning provided for in ORS 401.025.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the federal administrative
agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee communications
carriers, services and providers on a national level.
Franchise means an agreement between the City and a grantee which grants a
privilege to use public right of way and utility easements within the City for a
dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.
Grantee means the person to which a franchise is granted by the City.
Oregon Public Utilities Commission or PUC means the statutorily created state
agency in the State of Oregon responsible for licensing and regulation of certain
communications as set forth in Oregon Law, or its lawful successor.
Overhead Facilities means utility poles, utility facilities and communications
9-5.4 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.4
Page 4
facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and
foundations for such facilities.
Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock
company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.
Private Communications Network means a system, including the construction,
maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion
of a service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person for their use and not
for resale, directly or indirectly. "Private communications network" includes services
provided by the State of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.
Public Rights of Way or Right of Way - include, but are not limited to, streets,
roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements, and
other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these
areas, but does not include parks, parkland or other City property not generally
open to the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the City's
right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such areas
for communications facilities. “Public rights of way” shall also include utility
easements as defined below.
State means the State of Oregon.
Telecommunications Act means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as
amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996
(47 U.S.C. Section 151 et seq.).
Underground Facilities means utility and communications facilities located under
the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for
"Overhead facilities."
Utility Easement means any easement granted to or owned by the City and
acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes. “Utility
easement” does not include any easement dedicated solely for City facilities or
where the proposed use by the communications provider is inconsistent with the
terms and conditions of any easement granted to the City.
Utility Facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including but not
limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant and equipment
located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right of way
of the City and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or
communications services.
[Section 4 amended by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
9-5.5 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.6
Page 5
REGISTRATION OF COMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS
Section 5. Purpose. The purpose of registration is:
A. To assure that all communications facilities and/or communications providers
that provide services within the City comply with the ordinances, rules and
regulations of the City.
B. To provide the City with accurate and current information concerning
communications providers who offer to provide communications services within
the City, or that own or operate communications facilities within the City.
A. To assist the City in the enforcement of this Ordinance and the collection of any
city franchise fees or charges that may be due the City.
[Section 5 amended by Ord. No. 486 passed February 12, 2001; amended by Ord.
No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 6. Registration Required:
A. Except as provided in Section 8 hereof, all communications providers having
communications facilities within the corporate limits of the City and all
communications providers that offer or provide communication services to any
customer within the City, shall register within 45 days of the effective date of
this Ordinance. Any communications provider that desires to have
communications facilities within the corporate limits of the City or to provide
communications services to any customer within the City after the effective date
of this Ordinance shall register prior to such installation or provision of service.
B. The appropriate application and license from: a) the Oregon Public Utility
Commission (PUC); or b) the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
qualifies as necessary registration information. To the extent not included in
the application and license materials submitted pursuant to this subsection 6.B,
applicants also shall provide the following information:
1. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including the name address,
and telephone number of the duly authorized officer, agent, or employee
responsible for the accuracy of the registration information.
2. The name, address, and telephone number of the duly authorized officer,
agent, or employee to be contacted in case of an emergency.
3. A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed communications
facilities within the City, a description of the communications facilities that
the registrant intends to construct, and a description of the
communications services that the registrant intends to offer or provide to
persons, firms, businesses, or institutions within the City.
4. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination,
or receipt of the communications services provided, or to be provided, by
the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to the City’s
business license requirements. A copy of the business license must be
provided.
9-5.6 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.11
Page 6
[Section 6 amended by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; amended by Ord.
No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 7. Registration Application Fee:
A. Every communications provider shall pay a registration fee in an amount to be
determined by resolution of the City Council sufficient to fully recover all of the
City's costs of administering the registration program.
B. The registration fee required by this Section shall be subject to all applicable
limitations imposed by federal or state law.
[Section 7 repealed and replaced with Section 8 by Ord. No. 486, passed February
12, 2001; Renumbered to Section 8 and New Section 7 added by Ord. No.635
passed February 23, 2015]
Section 8. Exceptions to Registration: The following communications providers
are excepted from registration:
A. Communications facilities that are owned and operated exclusively for its own
use by the State or a political subdivision of this State.
B. A private Communications network, provided that such network does not
occupy any public rights of way of the City.
[Former Section 7 renumbered to Section 8 and amended by Ordinance No. 635
passed February 23, 2015]
Section 9. General. No person shall commence or continue with the construction,
installation or operation of communications facilities within a public right of way
except as provided in Sections 11 through 26, and with all applicable codes, rules,
and regulations.
[Section 9 renumbered to Section 8 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001;
Section 8 renumbered to Section 9 and amended by Ord. No. 635 February 23,
2015]
Section 10. Construction Codes. Communications facilities shall be constructed,
installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state
and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the
National Electrical Safety Code.
[Section 10 renumbered to Section 9 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001;
Section 9 renumbered to Section 10 and amended by Ord. No. 635 February 23,
2015]
Section 11. Construction Permits. Except in an emergency, no person shall
construct or install any communications facilities within a public right of way without
first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee
established in Section 15 of this Ordinance. No permit shall be issued for the
construction or installation of communications facilities within a public right of way:
9-5.11 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.12
Page 7
A. Unless they have first filed a registration statement with the City pursuant to
Sections 5 through 8 of this Ordinance; and if applicable,
B. Unless the communications carrier has first applied for and received a franchise
pursuant to Sections 29 through 46 of this Ordinance.
In the event of an emergency, a franchisee or its contractor may perform work on its
communications facilities without first obtaining a permit from the City; provided that,
to the extent reasonably feasible, it attempts to notify the City prior to commencing
the emergency work and in any event applies for a permit from the City and pays the
permit fee as soon as reasonable practicable, but not more than 48 hours after
commencing the emergency work. As used in this Section 11, “emergency” means
a circumstance in which immediate repair to damaged or malfunctioning
communications facilities is necessary to restore lost service or prevent immediate
harm to persons or property.
[Section 11 amended and renumbered to Section 10 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 10 renumbered to Section 11 and amended by Ord. No.
635 February 23, 2015]
Section 12. Permit Applications. Applications for permits to construct
communications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the City
and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to
demonstrate:
A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes,
rules and regulations.
B. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise
agreement.
C. The location and route of all facilities to be installed aboveground or on
existing utility poles.
D. The location and route of all new facilities on or in the public rights of way to
be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade
proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public
rights of way. Applicant’s existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans
from new construction. A cross section shall be provided showing new or
existing facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right of way.
E. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures,
fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights of way, and
description of any improvements that applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate.
F. Permit applications are not required for 1) Customer service
connections/drops, repairs or maintenance that does not require cutting or
breaking of the roadway, curb or sidewalk, and 2) Routine maintenance or
repair of Equipment, and the installation of new replacement cables or wires
on existing aerial facilities, when the installation, maintenance or repair will
not impact vehicular traffic by closing or blocking a lane of vehicular travel for
9-5.12 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.18
Page 8
more than 2 hours. All other construction is subject to the Communications
Ordinance Construction Standards.
[Section 12 amended and renumbered to Section 11 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 11 renumbered to Section 12 and amended by Ord. No.
635 February 23, 2015]
Section 13. Applicant’s Verification: All permit applications shall be
accompanied by the verification of a registered professional engineer, or other
qualified and duly authorized representative of the applicant, that the drawings,
plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable
technical codes, rules and regulations.
[New Section 13 added by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 14. Construction Schedule. All permit applications shall be accompanied
by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of
construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the public works
director. [Section 13 repealed and replaced with Section 14 which was amended and
renumbered to Section 12 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 12
renumbered to Section 14 and amended by Ord. No. 635 February 23, 2015]
Section 15. Construction Permit Fee. Prior to issuance of a construction permit,
the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount set forth by the City of Aumsville
Public Works Standards. Such fees shall be designed to defray the costs of city
administration of the requirements of this ordinance. [Section 15 amended and
renumbered to Section 13 by Ord. No 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 13
amended and renumbered to Section 15 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 16. Issuance of Permit. If satisfied that the applications, plans and
documents submitted comply with all requirements of this Ordinance and the
franchise agreement, city hall shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the
facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the
time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or
appropriate. [Section 16 is renumbered to Section 14 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 14 amended and renumbered to Section 16 by Ord. No.
635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 17. Notice of Construction. Except in the case of an emergency, the
permittee shall notify the public works director not less than two working days in
advance of any excavation or construction in the public rights of way. [Section 17 is
renumbered to Section 15 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 15
renumbered to Section 17 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 18. Compliance with Permit. All construction practices and activities shall
be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the
facilities. The public works director and their representatives shall be provided
9-5.18 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.22
Page 9
access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure
compliance with such requirements. [Section 18 is renumbered to Section 16 by
Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 16 renumbered to Section 18 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 19. Noncomplying Work. Subject to the notice requirements in Section
27, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans
and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this Ordinance, shall be
removed at the sole expense of the permittee. The City is authorized to stop work in
order to assure compliance with the provision of this Ordinance.
[Section 19 is amended and renumbered to Section 17 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 17 amended and renumber to Section No. 19 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 20. Completion of Construction. The permittee shall promptly complete
all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights of way and
other public and private property. All construction work within city rights of way,
including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of
the construction permit unless an extension or an alternate schedule has been
approved by the appropriate city official as contemplated by Section 14.
[Section 20 is amended and renumbered to Section 18 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 18 amended and renumber to Section No. 20 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 21. As-Built Drawings. If requested by the City for a necessary public
purpose, as determined by the City, the permittee shall furnish the City with up to 2
complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the City as accurately
depicting the location of all communications facilities constructed pursuant to the
permit. These plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer or designee within 60
days after completion of construction, in a format acceptable to the City.
[Section 21 is amended and renumbered to Section 19 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 19 amended and renumber to Section No. 21 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 22. Restoration of Public Rights of Way and City Property.
A. When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or
affecting any public rights of way or city property, it shall, at its own expense,
promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property
to the condition of the property that existed prior to construction.
B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required
by this Section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights of way
or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole
expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required
permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent
such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the
9-5.22 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.24
Page 10
construction schedule may be subject to approval by the City.
C. If the permittee fails to restore rights of way or property to the condition of the
property that existed prior to construction, the City shall give the permittee
written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not
exceeding 30 days to restore the rights of way or property. If, after said notice,
the permittee fails to restore the rights of way or property to as good a condition
as existed before the work was undertaken, the City shall cause such
restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee. The City will allow
additional time for restoration of rights of way in case of acts of God or other
unforeseen circumstances not within the permittee’s control.
D. A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades,
flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the
safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to
any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such
rights of way or property.
[Section 22 is amended and renumbered to Section 20 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 20 amended and renumber to Section No. 22 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 23. Performance and Completion Bond. Unless otherwise provided in a
franchise agreement, a performance bond or other surety acceptable to the City,
equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost of construction permittee’s
communication facilities within the public rights of way of the City, shall be provided
before construction is commenced.
A. The surety shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of
the work, as determined in writing by the City, including restoration of public
rights of way and other property affected by the construction.
B. The surety shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the City:
1. Timely completion of construction;
2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes
and standards;
3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the City;
4. Restoration of the public rights of way and other property affected by the
construction; and
5. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor,
material, or services provided in connection with the work.
[Section 23 amended and renumbered to section 21 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 21 amended and renumber to Section No. 23 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
LOCATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section 24. Location of Facilities. All facilities located within the public right of
9-5.24 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.26
Page 11
way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the terms of the
permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities, the franchise,
and all applicable City codes, rules and regulations. Unless otherwise specified in a
franchise agreement, whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
communications facilities are located underground within a public right of way of the
City, a grantee occupying the same public right of way must also locate its
communications facilities underground at its own expense.
[Section 24 amended and renumbered to Section 22 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 22 amended and renumber to Section No. 24 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 25. Interference with the Public Rights of Way. No grantee may locate
or maintain its communications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use
of the public rights of way by the City, by the general public or by other persons
authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights of way. All use of public
rights of way shall be consistent with City codes, ordinances and regulations.
[Section 25 is renumbered to Section 23 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section No. 23 amended and renumber to Section No. 25 by Ord. No. 635
passed February 23, 2015]
Section 26. Relocation or Removal of Facilities.
A. The City shall have the right to require, when in the public interest, the
temporary or permanent removal or relocation, of any communications
facilities within the public rights of way, in a like manner (aerial to aerial,
underground to underground); unless mutually agreeable to both parties and
except as provided in Section 24
B. Nothing in this Section 26 shall be deemed to preclude grantee from
requesting reimbursement or compensation from a third party, pursuant to
applicable laws, regulations, tariffs or agreements, provided that grantee shall
timely comply with the requirements of this Section 26 regardless of whether
or not it has requested or received such reimbursement or compensation.
C. The City shall provide written notice of the time by which grantee must
remove, relocate, change, alter or underground its facilities. If grantee fails to
remove, relocate, alter or underground any facility as requested by the City
and by the date established by the City, grantee shall pay all costs incurred
by the City due to such failure, including but not limited to costs related to
project delays, and the City may cause the facility to be removed, relocated,
altered or undergrounded at grantee’s sole expense using qualified personnel
or contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and
regulations. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, grantee shall
reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within 30 days.
[Section 26 amended and renumbered to Section 24 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 24 amended and renumber to Section No. 26 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
9-5.27 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.29
Page 12
Section 27. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the City, any grantee, communications provider, or other person that
owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized communications system, facility, or
related appurtenances within the public rights of way of the City shall, at its own
expense, remove such facilities and/or appurtenances from the public rights of way
of the City. A communications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
A. One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee's communications
franchise, unless the City has provided written authorization for abandonment
in place.
B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights of way of the City. A
facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or
not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or
longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of
service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced. The
City shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the communications provider
before concluding that a facility is abandoned. A facility may be abandoned in
place and not removed if authorized in writing by the City and there is no
apparent risk to the public safety, health, or welfare.
C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the appropriate
prior authority at the time of installation.
D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted
by the grantee's communications franchise or other legally sufficient permit.
[Section 27 amended and renumbered to Section 25 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 25 amended and renumber to Section No. 27 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 28. Coordination of Construction Activities. All grantees are required to
make a good faith effort to cooperate with the City.
A. By January 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the City with a schedule
of their known proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public rights of way.
B. If requested by the City, each grantee shall meet with the City annually or
as determined by the City, to schedule and coordinate construction in the
public rights of way. At that time, City will provide available information on
plans for local, state, and/or federal construction projects. C. All
construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as
ordered by the public works director or designee, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.
[Section 28 amended and renumbered to Section 26 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section No. 26 renumber to Section No. 28 by Ord. No. 635
passed February 23, 2015]
9-5.29 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.31
Page 13
COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
Section 29. Communications Franchise.
A. A Communications franchise shall be required of any communications
provider who desires to occupy public rights of way of the City.
B. Any person whose communications facilities occupy the public rights of way
without a valid franchise agreement from the City must comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance, including payment of the franchise fee pursuant
to Section 36.
[Section 29 is renumbered to Section 27 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section 27 amended and renumbered to Section 29 by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
Section 30. Application.
A. Any person that desires a communications franchise must register as a
communications provider, and shall file an application with city hall; which
includes the following information:
1. The identity of the applicant.
2. A description of the communications services that are to be offered or
provided by the applicant over its communications facilities
3. Engineering plans, specifications, and a network map in a form
customarily used by the applicant, and if required by the City, in a specific
computerized format of the facilities located or to be located within the
public rights of way in the City, including the location and route requested
for applicant's proposed communications facilities.
4. The area or areas of the City the applicant desires to serve and a
preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
5. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities
and to offer or provide the communications services proposed.
6. An accurate map showing the location of any existing communications
facilities in the City that applicant intends to use or lease.
B. Any communications provider that occupies public rights of way of the City
without a franchise as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall file an
application pursuant to this Section within 45 days of the effective date of this
Ordinance. Any communications provider that desires to occupy the public
rights of way of the City after the effective date of this Ordinance shall register
prior to installation of any communications facilities in the public rights of way.
[Section 30 amended and renumbered to Section 28 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 28 amended and renumbered to Section 30 by Ord. No.
635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 31. Application and Review Fee:
A. Subject to applicable state law, applicant shall reimburse the City for such
reasonable costs as the City incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.
B. An application and review fee to be determined by resolution of the City
9-5.31 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.35
Page 14
C. Council shall be deposited with the City as part of the application filed
pursuant to Section 30 above. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed
to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the
applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise.
[New Section 31 added by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015
Section 32. Determination by the City. The City shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part. If the
application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
The application shall be evaluated based upon the continuing capacity of the rights
of way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities and the applicant’s legal,
technical and financial ability to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance and
applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and policies. [Section 31 is
repealed and replaced by Section 32 and renumbered to Section 29 by Ord. No.
486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 29 amended and renumbered to Section 32
by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 33. Rights Granted. No franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance
shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights of way, but shall be
deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights of way for the limited purposes
and term, and upon the conditions stated in the franchise agreement. The right
granted by the franchise is limited to the right to use the public rights of way for the
provision of communications services as defined herein. Nothing in the franchise
shall be construed to prevent the City from grading, paving, repairing and/or altering
any public rights of way, constructing, laying down, repairing, relocating or removing
City facilities or establishing any other public work, utility or improvement of any kind,
including repairs, replacement or removal of any City facilities. If any of grantee’s
facilities interfere with the construction, repair, replacement, alteration, or removal of
any public rights of way, public work, City utility, City improvement or City facility,
except those providing communications services in competition with a grantee,
grantee’s facilities shall be removed or relocated as provided in Section 26 and 27 of
this Ordinance; in a manner acceptable to the City and consistent with industry
standard engineering and safety codes. [Section 33 is renumbered to Section 30 by
Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 30 amended and renumbered to
Section 33 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 34. Term of Grant. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement,
a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of
five years. [Section 34 is renumbered to Section 31 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 31 renumbered to Section 34 by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
Section 35. Franchise Territory. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise
agreement, a communications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a
specific geographic area of the City to be served by the franchise grantee, and the
9-5.35 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.37
Page 15
public rights of way necessary to serve such areas, and may include the entire city.
[Section 35 is renumbered to Section 32 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section 32 amended and renumbered to Section 35 by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
Section 36. Franchise Fee.
A. A communications franchise granted hereunder shall require the grantee to
pay the franchise fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City
Council.
B. Every communications provider that uses the public rights of way in the City
to provide communications services without a franchise expressly authorizing
the provision of such communications services, whether or not the provider
owns the communications facilities used to provide its services and whether
or not the provider is required to obtain a franchise pursuant to Section 29 of
this Ordinance, shall pay a right of way use fee in the amount of the franchise
fee determined by resolution of the City Council. The duty to provide
information set forth in Section 48 of this Ordinance shall apply to information
of communications providers subject to the right of way use fee in this
subsection 26.B sufficient to demonstrate compliance with this subsection.
C. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, the fee shall be paid within
30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment shall be
accompanied by an accounting of gross revenues and a calculation of the
amount payable. The communications provider shall pay interest at the rate of
9% per year for any payment made after the due date.
D. The franchise fee required by this Section shall be subject to all applicable
limitations imposed by federal or state law.
[Section 36 is amended and renumbered to Section 33 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 33 amended and renumbered to Section 36 by Ord. No.
635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 37. Amendment of Grant: Conditions for amending a franchise:
A. A new application and grant shall be required of any communications provider
that desires to extend or locate its communications facilities in public rights of
way of the City, which are not included in a franchise previously granted
under this Ordinance.
B. If ordered by the City to locate or relocate its communications facilities in
public rights of way not included in a previously granted franchise, the City
shall grant an amendment without further application.
C. A new application and grant shall be required of any communications provider
that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise
previously granted under this Ordinance.
[Section 37 is renumbered to Section 34 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section 34 amended and renumbered to Section 37 by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
Section 38. Renewal Applications: A grantee that desires to renew its franchise
9-5.38 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.40
Page 16
under this Ordinance shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current
agreement, file an application with the City for renewal of its franchise which shall
include, if requested by the city, new or updated information required pursuant to
Section 30 of this Ordinance; and at the City’s request, the grantee shall provide any
information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the City and the
grantee. The application shall be evaluated based upon the continuing capacity of
the rights of way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities and the
applicant’s legal, technical and financial ability to comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance; applicable federal, state and local laws; and all rules, regulations and
policies pertaining thereto.
[Section 38 is amended and renumbered to Section 35 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 35 amended and renumbered to Section 38 by Ord. No.
635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 39. Obligation to Cure As a Condition of Renewal. No franchise shall
be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of
the agreement, or of the requirements of this Ordinance, have been cured, or a plan
detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the
City. [Section 39 is renumbered to Section 36 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section 36 and 37 amended and new Section 39 add by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
Section 40. Assignments or Transfers of System or Franchise: Unless
otherwise provided in an existing franchise, ownership or control of a majority
interest in a communications system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be
transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other
act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the
City, which consent shall not be unreasonable withheld or delayed, and then only on
such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.
A. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system
shall agree, in writing, to assume and abide by all of the provisions of the
franchise.
B. No transfer shall be approved unless the City determines the assignee or
transferee has the legal, technical and financial ability to comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance and applicable federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations and policies. .
C. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall
reimburse the City for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses
reasonably incurred by the City in considering a request to transfer or assign
a communications franchise.
D. Any transfer or assignment of a communications franchise, system or integral
part of a system without prior approval of the City under this Section or
pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of
the franchise.
[Section 41 is amended and renumbered to section 38 by Ord. No. 486, passed
9-5.41 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.43
Page 17
[February 12, 2001; Section 38 is amended and renumbered to Section 40 by Ord.
No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 41. Revocation or Termination of Franchise: A franchise to use or
occupy public rights of way of the City may be revoked for the following reasons:
A. Construction or operation in the City or in the public rights of way of the City
without a construction permit.
B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
C. Failure to comply with Section 40 herein with respect to sale, transfer or
assignment of a communications system or franchise.
D. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the City.
E. Abandonment of communications facilities in the public rights of way, unless
the City has authorized abandonment in place pursuant to subsection 27.B.
F. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this Ordinance.
G. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the City
under this Ordinance.
H. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee as determined by authority of a court.
I. Violation of material provisions of this Ordinance
J. Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement.
[Section 42 is amended and renumbered to Section 39 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 39 is amended and renumbered to Section 41 by Ord.
No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 42. Notice and Duty to Cure. In the event that the City believes that
grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the City shall give the grantee written
notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise
statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and
providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not exceeding 30 days, to furnish
evidence that:
A. Corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued,
to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
B. Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or
C. It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less
than revocation.
[Section 43 is renumbered to Section 40 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section 40 is renumbered to 42 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 43. Public Hearing. In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence
reasonably satisfactory to the City as provided in Section 42 hereof, the City
Administrator may refer the apparent violation or non-compliance to the City Council.
The City Council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity
to be heard concerning the matter. [Section 44 is renumbered to Section 41, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 41 is amended and renumbered to 43 by Ord. No. 635
passed February 23, 2015]
9-5.44 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.47
Page 18
Section 44. Standards for Revocation or Lesser Sanctions: If persuaded that
the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this
Ordinance, or of a franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to
revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, including but
not limited to assessment of penalties pursuant to Section 58, considering the
nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or
more of the following factors. Whether:
1. The misconduct was egregious.
2. Substantial harm resulted.
3. The violation was intentional.
4. There is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.
5. There is a history of overall compliance.
6. The violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
[Section 45 is amended and renumbered to Section 42 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 42 is amended and renumbered to 44 by Ord. No. 635
passed February 23, 2015]
Section 45. Other City Costs: All grantees shall, within 30 days after written
demand therefore, reimburse the City for all reasonable direct and indirect costs and
expenses incurred by the City in connection with any modification, amendment,
renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement consistent with
applicable state and federal laws. [New Section 45 added by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
GENERAL FRANCHISE TERMS
Section 46. Facilities: Upon request, each grantee shall provide the City with an
accurate map or maps certifying the location of all communications facilities within
the public rights of way. This map or maps shall be in a format acceptable to the
City. [Section 46 is repealed and replaced by Section 47 which is amended and
renumbered to Section 43 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 43 is
amended and renumbered to 46 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 47. Damage to Grantee’s Facilities: Unless directly and proximately
caused by negligent, careless, wrongful, willful, intentional or malicious acts by the
City, and consistent with Oregon law, the City shall not be liable for any damage to
or loss of any communications facility within the public rights of way of the City as a
result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction,
excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights of way by or on
behalf of the City, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly
therefrom. [New Section 47 added by Ord. No. 635 February 23, 2015
9-5.48 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.51
Page 19
Section 48. Duty to Provide Information:
A. Except in emergencies, within 60 days of a written request from the City, each
grantee shall furnish the City with the following:
1. Information sufficient to demonstrate that grantee has complied with all
requirements of this Ordinance, including but not limited to the franchise
fee payments required by Section 36 and any franchise agreement.
2. All books, records, maps, and other documents, maintained by the
grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights of way shall be
made available for inspection by the City at reasonable times and
intervals.
B. Such information, books, records and other documents shall be furnished at a
mutually agreed upon location within the City unless the City agrees in writing
to a location outside the City.
C. If the City’s audit or review of the books, records and other documents or
information of the grantee demonstrate that grantee has underpaid the
franchise fee by 3% or more in any one year, grantee shall reimburse the City
for the cost of the audit or review, in addition to any interest owed pursuant to
Section 36 of this Ordinance or as specified in a franchise. Any
underpayment, including any interest or audit cost reimbursement, shall be
paid within 30 days of the City’s notice to grantee of such underpayment.
[Section 48 is repealed and replaced by Section 49 which is amended and
renumbered to Section 44 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 44 is
amended and renumbered to 48 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 49. Service to the City: If the City contracts for the use of communication
facilities, communication services, installation, or maintenance from the grantee, the
grantee shall offer the City the grantee’s most favorable rate available at the time of
the request charged to similar users within Oregon for a similar volume of service,
subject to any of grantee’s tariffs or price lists on file with the OPUC. With the City’s
permission, the grantee may deduct the applicable charges from fee payments.
Other terms and conditions of such services may be specified in a separate
agreement between the City and grantee. [New Section 49 added by Ord. No. 635
passed February 23, 2015]
Section 50. Compensation for City Property: If any right is granted, by lease,
franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation of
communications facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall
be fixed by the City. For purposes of this Section 50 only, “communications
facilities” shall mean the plant and equipment, other than customer premises
equipment, used by a communications provider.
[Section 50 is repealed and replaced by Section 51 and renumbered to Section 45
by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 45 amended and renumbered
to Section 50 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 51. Multiple Services:
A. A communications provider that provides or transmits or allows the provision
or transmission of communications services and non-communications
9-5.51 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.53
Page 20
B. services over its communications facilities is subject to the requirements of
this Ordinance for the portion of the communications facilities and extent of
communications services delivered over those communications facilities.
C. A communications provider that provides or transmits more than one
communications service to customers in the City shall pay the applicable right
of way use fee pursuant to Section 36.B for each communications service,
provided that a communications provider shall not be required to pay a right
of way use fee for communications services for which it is paying a franchise
fee pursuant to Section 36.A. Unless otherwise required by law, a
communications provider is not required to have a franchise for each
communications service it provides using its communications facilities so long
as it pays the applicable franchise fee and, if applicable, right of way use fee
for each communications service.
D. Communication providers providing cable service shall also be subject to the
cable franchise requirements in City cable franchise ordinances.
[Section 52 is renumbered to Section 46 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section 46 replaced and renumbered to Section 51 by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
Section 52. Leased Capacity: A grantee shall have the right, without prior City
approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers, provided that the
grantee shall notify the City that such lease or agreement has been granted to a
customer or lessee. [Section 53 is amended and renumbered to Section 47 by Ord.
No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 47 is amended and renumbered to
Section 52 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 53. Grantee Insurance: Unless otherwise provided in a franchise
agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring both the Grantee and the City, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional
insured:
A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than
1. $3,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person;
2. $3,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and,
3. $3,000,000 for all other types of liability.
B. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of
$1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.
C. Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's liability
insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.
D. Comprehensive from premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard,
underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less
than $3,000,000.
E. The liability insurance policies required by this Section shall be maintained by
the grantee throughout the term of the communications franchise, and such
9-5.53 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.57
Page 21
other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise
hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its communications facilities.
Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement or other
endorsement agreed to in writing by the City:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the City, by
registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the City Administrator of such
intent to cancel or not to renew."
F. Each grantee shall maintain continuous uninterrupted coverage in the terms
and amounts required by this Section. If the insurance is canceled or
materially altered, the grantee shall obtain a replacement policy that complies
with the terms of this Section and provide the City with a replacement
certificate of insurance.
G. As an alternative to the insurance requirements contained herein, a grantee
may provide evidence of self-insurance subject to review and acceptance by
the City.
[Section 54 is amended and renumbered to Section 48 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 48 amended and renumbered to Section 53 by Ord. No.
635 passed February 23, 2015]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 54. Governing Law. Any franchise granted under this Ordinance is
subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the
State of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the City. [Section 56 is repealed
and replaced with Section 57 and renumbered to Section 50 by Ord. No. 486,
passed February 12, 2001; Section 49 text deleted, Section 50 renumbered to
section 54 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 55. Written Agreement: No franchise shall be granted hereunder except
by a writing duly executed by the franchisee and the City. [Section 58 is
renumbered to Section 51 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 51 is
amended and renumbered to Section 55 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 56. Nonexclusive Grant: No franchise granted under this Ordinance shall
confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public
rights of way of the City for delivery of communications services or any other
purposes. [Section 59 is renumbered to section 52 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 52 is amended and renumbered to Section 56 by Ord.
No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 57. Severability and Preemption. If any article, section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of
competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules,
regulations or decision, the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby
9-5.57 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.61
Page 22
but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each
remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition,
covenant and portion of this Ordinance shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest
extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations
preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this Ordinance, then
the provision shall be read to be preempted only to the extent required by law. In
the event such federal or state law, rule, or regulation is subsequently repealed,
rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had
been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full
force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further
action on the part of the City. [Section 60 is renumbered to Section 53 by Ord. No.
486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 53 is renumbered to Section 57 by Ord. No.
635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 58. Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. A separate
and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs. It is the responsibility of the city attorney to cause a person cited under this
ordinance to appear before the municipal court judge for determination of
appropriate action and/or fine. [Section 61 is renumbered to Section 54 by Ord. No.
486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 54 is renumbered to Section 58 by Ord. No.
635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 59. Other Remedies. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as
limiting any judicial remedies that the City may have, at law or in equity, for
enforcement of this Ordinance. [Section 62 is renumbered to Section 55 by Ord. No.
486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 55 is renumbered to Section 59 by Ord. No.
635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 60. Captions. The captions to sections throughout this Ordinance are
intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions
contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this
Ordinance. [Section 63 is renumbered to Section 56 by Ord. No. 486, passed
February 12, 2001; Section 56 is renumbered to Section 60 by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
Section 61. Compliance with Laws: Any grantee under this Ordinance shall
comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any
administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the
entire term of any franchise granted under this Ordinance, which are relevant and
relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a communications system.
9-5.61 Aumsville Ordinances 9-5.65
Page 23
[Section 64 is renumbered to Section 57 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section 57 is renumbered to Section 61 by Ord. No. 635 passed February 23,
2015]
Section 62. Consent. Wherever the consent of either the City or of the grantee is
specifically required by this Ordinance or in a franchise granted, such consent will
not be unreasonably withheld. [Section 65 is renumbered to Section 58 by Ord. No.
486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 58 is renumbered to 62 by Ord. No. 635
passed February 23, 2015]
Section 63. Application to Existing Ordinance and Agreements: To the extent
that this Ordinance is not in conflict with and can be implemented with existing
ordinance and franchise agreements, this Ordinance shall apply to all existing
ordinance and franchise agreements for use of the public right of way for
communications services. [Section 66 is renumbered to Section 59 by Ord. No.
486, passed February 12, 2001; Section 59 is amended and renumbered to 63 by
Ord. No. 635 passed February 23, 2015]
Section 64. Confidentiality: The City agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the
confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by
the Oregon Public Records Law; provided that documents are clearly marked as
confidential by the grantee at the time of disclosure to the City. The City shall not be
required to incur any costs to protect the confidentiality of such document, other than
the City’s routine internal procedures for complying with the Oregon Public Records
Law. [Section 67 is renumbered to Section 60 by Ord. No. 486, passed February 12,
2001; Section 60 is amended and renumbered to 64 by Ord. No. 635 passed
February 23, 2015]
Section 65. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the thirtieth day
after its enactment. [Section 68 is renumbered to Section 61 by Ord. No. 486,
passed February 12, 2001; Section 61 is renumbered to Section 65 by Ord. No. 635
passed February 23, 2015]
PASSED by the council October 11, 1999 and signed by the mayor October 14,
1999.
4-12 Aumsville Ordinances 4-12.1
1
ORDINANCE NO. 490
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES REGULATING ALARM
SYSTEMS WITHIN THE CITY OF AUMSVILLE; TO BE KNOWN AS THE
"AUMSVILLE ALARM ORDINANCE".
WHEREAS, the occupants of numerous residential, commercial and industrial
establishments within the incorporated areas of the city have found it desirable to
make provision for installation of alarm systems for such emergencies as burglary
and robbery, at their own cost and expense, upon their premises.
WHEREAS, there is a growing number of private enterprises that have embarked
upon the business of selling or leasing such alarm systems, entering into contract
with such occupants for the installation, operation and maintenance of such alarm
systems, and providing, either individually or in concert with other private business
enterprises, similarly engaged, for the connection of the individual alarms so
installed by them to an alarm device or devices.
WHERAS, the proliferation of the number of private enterprises engaged in the
alarm business, each with its own system and equipment, has resulted in conditions,
that, if not remedied, will lead to an unnecessary drain on the manpower, time,
space, facilities and finances of the incorporated area of the city and its public safety
departments and agencies; a deterioration of the quality of service to persons
subscribing to alarm services; and inequities among the various private enterprises
engaged in the alarm business in the incorporated areas of the city.
WHEREAS, the public interest requires the enactment of rules, regulations,
standards, and procedures to regulate and control the private alarm business in the
incorporated area of the city.
WHEREAS, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public,
regulations of alarm systems is necessary for the following purposes:
1. The municipal departments and agencies charged with the protection of
public safety may efficiently and economically coordinate their functions
with the various alarm services to which the public of the incorporated
area of the city may subscribe;
2. The quality of the alarm services rendered to the public may be improved
and maintained at a high level.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, words in the present
tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural
number includes the singular, the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, the
masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter. As used in this ordinance,
4-12.1 Aumsville Ordinances 4-12.1
2
unless the context requires otherwise, the following words and their derivations shall
be utilized:
Alarm Business. The business by any individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity, of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system in or on any building,
structure or facility.
Alarm System. A device, system, assembly or equipment, of interconnected
devices, mechanical or electrical, including hardware and related accessories,
designed to give warning, or signal the occurrence of a fire, burglary, robbery,
medical emergency, other hazardous conditions, or other activity requiring
urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. Residential
smoke detectors, which are not connected to a receiving panel at an alarm
reception point and do not emit sound outside the residence, are not included
within this definition.
Alarm User. The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind, in control of any building, structure, or facility
wherein an alarm system is maintained.
Automatic Dialer. A device programmed to select a telephone number and
deliver a warning message or signal over standard telephone lines.
Digital Communicator. An automatic dialer specially designed and
programmed to deliver an alarm signal to compatible receiving equipment
located at an alarm reception point by telephone line.
Emergency Communication Center. The Santiam Canyon Communications
Center or the Willamette Valley Communications Center, used to receive
transmissions and general information from the public to be dispatched to the
respective entities utilizing the centers.
False Alarm. Any activation of an alarm system, which results in the dispatch
of emergency personnel to the protected premises, where personnel are
unable to discover evidence of an emergency condition. It does not include
an alarm signal caused by violent conditions or nature of other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. An alarm
is not considered false if: there are signs of forced or attempted forced entry;
obvious natural circumstances (heavy wind); notification from the alarm
company that the system is faulty before personnel arrive on scene;
notification from the user that the system or the user erred, before arrival of
personnel on scene; notification from a neighbor to indicate their observance
of suspicious activity, when no apparent entry or attempted entry can be
determined otherwise.
Hard-Wired System. An alarm system that detects and transmits alarms
using direct leased lines to a receiving panel at an alarm reception point.
Local Alarms. Systems or devices that sound audibly on the premises of the
user, but are not connected to a receiving panel at an alarm reception point.
Protected Premises. All of that contiguous area including buildings protected
by a single alarm system and under common ownership and use.
4-12.2 Aumsville Ordinances 4-12.6
3
Persons. Any alarm user, be it a natural person, form partnership,
association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, profit or
nonprofit, public or private, in control of any building, structure, or facility
wherein an alarm system is maintained.
Section 2. General System Requirements. No alarm system shall be installed,
used, or maintained in violation of any of the requirements of adopted provisions of
the Uniform Fire Code or of any applicable statute, law, or administrative regulation
of the state or of the city. Any alarm user required by federal, state, county, or
municipal statute, regulation, rule, or ordinance to install, maintain, and operate an
alarm system shall be subject to this ordinance.
Section 3. Permit Required. Upon the effective date of this ordinance no person
shall install, use, or maintain any alarm system without first obtaining a permit for
such system from the city. Systems approved and installed prior to adoption of this
ordinance shall be governed by such rules and regulations as contained herein.
Each permit shall bear the signature of the chief of police and be for a one-year
period. The permit shall be physically displayed upon the premises using the alarm
system and shall be available for inspection. The permit shall be so displayed as to
be readily observable from the main entrance to the alarmed premises. The
Aumsville Police Department may refuse to respond to an alarm from a system
without a valid permit.
Section 4. Confidentiality. All information submitted as required by this ordinance
will be held in the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt
from disclosure pursuant to state statute; and any violation of confidentiality shall be
deemed a violation of this ordinance.
Section 5. Permit: Application, Issuance. Each application for an alarm system
permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the city. Each permit application shall
be submitted in accordance with this ordinance. Applications for alarm user's permits
shall be filed with the city each year.
Upon receipt of the permit application, the city shall undertake such investigation as
is deemed necessary. If it appears that the proposed system will comply with the
provisions of this ordinance, and any other applicable rules and regulations, the city
shall issue, to the applicant, a permit bearing an identifying number specifying the
type of alarm system for which it is issued and set the expiration date of the permit.
Section 6. Term of Permit and Renewal. An alarm system permit shall be in
effect for one year and will automatically terminate upon any change of principal,
class of system or protected premises. No permit may be transferred to another
principal or protected premises. Renewal permits must be obtained prior to the
expiration of the existing permit. Renewal applications shall contain the principal's
signed statement indicating that there has been no changes in principal, protected
premises or type of alarm system.
4-12.7 Aumsville Ordinances 4-12.10
4
Section 7. Exempt Systems. An alarm user which is a governmental political unit
shall be subject to this ordinance; but shall not be subject to payment of additional
fees, except the imposition of penalties as provided herein.
Section 8. Maintenance and Repair Responsibility. The holder of an alarm
system permit shall, at all times, be responsible for the proper maintenance and
repair of the system and for the repair or replacement of any component, method of
installation, design feature, or like condition which may give rise to a false alarm.
Section 9. Late Fee.
1. A $25.00 fee shall be assessed if a user fails to obtain a permit prior to
activation of an alarm, or within 45 days of the date of the notice of alarm
permit requirement.
2. A late charge of $10 per month will be assessed on all permit holders who
do not submit the renewal application prior to expiration of the permit.
Section 10. False Alarms. A new alarm system user shall be exempt from this fee
for the first 60 days from the initial application date, not to exceed 3 false alarms.
The user will be notified by mail of a false alarm occurrence and payment of said fee
shall be made to the city within 30 days of receipt of the notice. At the discretion of
the chief of police, the city shall notify the alarm user of excessive false alarms and
direct that the user submit a report to the chief of police within 10 days of receipt of
the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the
cause of the false alarms. An alarm user incurring a false alarm shall be subject to
the following fees.
1. First 4 false alarms during the permit year, no charge;
2. For the 5th through 10th false alarms, $25.00 per alarm;
3. For each false alarm call after the 10th, $50.00 per alarm.
As a condition of any alarm system permit issued under the provisions of this
ordinance and for maintenance of any similar system installed prior to adoption of
this ordinance, the permittee shall pay the city fees for false alarms generated by the
alarm system according to this schedule.
Any person who has been assessed a false alarm fee may appeal such charge to
the chief of police, by giving written notice to the chief of police within 30 days of the
invoice assessing such charges. Upon receipt of the appeal notice, the chief of
police shall appoint one or more of his staff to investigate the circumstances of the
alarms upon which the appeal is based. The investigator shall notify the appellant of
a time, not less than two weeks nor more than four weeks following the date upon
which the appeal was filed, at or before such time the appellant shall file in writing
with the investigator whatever factual information he deems relevant in support of his
appeal.
4-12.11 Aumsville Ordinances 4-12.13
5
Section 11. Permit: Ground for Revocation. The following shall be grounds for
revoking any permit issued pursuant to this ordinance:
1. Any false or incomplete statement made on the permit application;
2. Substantial alteration of alarm transmitting devices other than those
approved a the time of the permit application;
3. Testing or deliberate activation of the alarm system without following the
provisions set forth in Section 13 of this ordinance;
4. Failure to properly maintain the system;
5. Failure to pay a false alarm fee as prescribed in Section 6 of this
ordinance within 30 days of demand. Noncompliance shall subject the
protected property to a lien on the property, as well as to the penalties
prescribed in Section 7 and 8 of this ordinance.
6. Any permit for an alarm system that has 10 or more false alarms within a
permit year may be revoked and the system shall be disconnected.
An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm system upon being
notified, by certified mail, of the revocation of the permit. Any party whose alarm
system permit has been revoked under this section may appeal that action to the city
council by giving written notice to the city administrator within 30 days after receipt of
the notice of revocation. The filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the action
appealed until disposition of the appeal by the council.
Section 12. Training Requirements. The holder of an alarm system permit shall
be responsible for training and retraining of employees, family members, and other
persons who make regular use of the protected premises and who may, in the
normal course of their activities, be in a position to accidentally trigger an alarm
device. Such training shall include procedures to avoid accidental alarms and steps
to follow in the event the system is accidentally triggered.
Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing, to any user, an alarm system
which is installed on premises located in the area subject to this ordinance shall
furnish the user with instructions that provide information to enable the user to
operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the alarm system at any
time. The alarm company shall also stress the effect false alarms have on the
criminal justice system and the risks to police of responding to alarms. Written
material, pre-recorded video information, or
other means that have been approved by the chief of police can accomplish this
training.
Section 13. Testing of Systems. All alarm system testing shall be conducted in
accordance with the following: All service and tests of any alarm system that may
result in an officer being dispatched shall be conducted only after notification to the
emergency communication center of the intention to conduct such service or tests.
Failure to so notify will result in a false alarm assessment. This will include the
testing of fire alarm systems.
4-12.14 Aumsville Ordinances 4-12.18
6
Section 14. Responsibility for Alarm Deactivation. All permit holders shall
furnish and update names and phone numbers of at least two responsible persons
having access to the premises who may be notified to assist personnel in the event
the alarm is activated.
Section 15. Sound Limitations. Local alarms, other than fire alarms, shall not
make a sound similar to that of sirens on emergency vehicles or of civil defense
warning systems. Owners of local alarms shall be responsible to maintain and turn
the alarm system off in case of malfunction, and are subject to Section 7 of this
ordinance. No local alarm-sounding device shall sound for more than five minutes
and shall incorporate an automatic cutoff.
Section 16. Enforcement; Authority. The chief of police, under supervision of the
city administrator, shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
ordinance.
Section 17. Violation; Penalty. A violation of a provision of this ordinance is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. In addition to other remedies and fees
provided for in this ordinance, any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance may issue an enforcement complaint to any person found in violation of
the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 18. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the 30th day after
its enactment.
PASSED by the council March 12, 2001 and signed by the mayor March 14, 2001.
4-13 Aumsville Ordinances 4-13.1
1
ORDINANCE NO. 498
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING AN EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.
WHEREAS, the purpose of this Emergency Operations Plan is to protect, through
planning, training, and organization, and by authorizing the exercise of emergency
powers as prescribed by this title, the lives and property of the citizens of the City of
Aumsville in the event of disaster, now therefore,
The City of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Definitions.
Emergency. Any manmade or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening
loss of life, injury to person or property, human suffering or financial loss. An
emergency includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather,
drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material,
as defined in ORS 466.605, contamination, utility or transportation emergencies,
disease, chemical, biological or other agent blight, infestation, crisis influx of
migrants unmanageable by the county, civil disturbance, riot, sabotage and war.
Emergency Management. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions and prevention, minimization, and repair of damage resulting from an
emergency; provided, however, that this term does not refer to the functions for
which military forces are primarily responsible.
Emergency Management Agency. An organization created and authorized under
ORS 401.015 to 401.105, 401.260 to 401.325, and 401.355 to 401.580 by the state,
county, or city to provide for and assure the conduct and coordination of functions
for comprehensive emergency program management.
Emergency Management Director Appointed by the city administrator, the
Emergency Management Director is responsible for preparing a plan for the
provision of emergency services in the event of a disaster or emergency, for
conducting necessary training sessions and practice drills, and for coordinating such
emergency services during an actual emergency.
Emergency Management Plan. An emergency response plan prepared for the City
of Aumsville.
Emergency Operations Center. The City of Aumsville Emergency Operations Center
is in the Aumsville Rural Fire Department facility, located at 490 Church Street,
Aumsville, Oregon.
4-13.1 Aumsville Ordinances 4-13.4
2
Emergency Services. Those activities provided by state and local government
agencies with emergency operational responsibilities to prepare for and carry out
any activity to prevent, minimize, respond to, or recover from an emergency. These
activities include, without limitation, coordination; preplanning; training; interagency
liaison; fire fighting; oil or hazardous material spill or release clean up as defined in
ORS 466.605; law enforcement; medical health and sanitation services; engineering
and public works; search and rescue activities; warning and public information;
damage assessment; administration and fiscal management; and those measures
defined as "civil defense" in section 3 of the Act of January 12, 1951, PL 81-920 (50
U.S.C. 2252).
Section 2. Emergency Management Director Appointment. The city
administrator shall appoint an Emergency Management Director.
Section 3. Powers and Duties of the Emergency Management Director in
Preparation for an Emergency. Subject to the direction and control of the city
administrator, the Emergency Management Director shall be empowered as follows:
1. Oversee and provide direction to the Emergency Management Plan.
2. Review the Emergency Management Plan and recommend revision as
necessary.
3. Activate the emergency operations center when needed.
4. Coordinate city emergency management activities.
5. Conduct exercises to test the plan and the capabilities of the city.
6. Attend timely update briefings with other policy group members when an
EOC has been activated.
7. Facilitate training for emergency management personnel.
8. Represent the city in all emergency management activities.
9. Provide liaison with other emergency management offices and with
volunteer organizations tasked with emergency responsibilities.
10. Carry out other specific responsibilities listed in Emergency Management
Plan.
Section 4. Authority of the Emergency Management Director in the Event of
an Emergency. Subject to the supervision and control of the city administrator, the
Emergency Management Director shall be empowered during an emergency as
follows:
1. To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other requirements as may
be necessary for the protection of life and property and to bind the City of
Aumsville for the fair value thereof and, if necessary, to immediately
commandeer the same for public use. These powers may be exercised in
light of the circumstance of extreme emergency situations without regard
to time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law
(excepting mandatory constitutional requirements) including, but not
limited to, budget law limitations, the requirements of competitive bidding,
the publication of notices, entering into public works contracts, the
4-13.4 Aumsville Ordinances 4-13.7
3
incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of
equipment, the purchase of supplies and materials, and the expenditure
of public funds.
2. To requisition necessary personnel and/or material of any of the city's
departments or agencies.
3. To require the emergency services of any city officer or employee, and,
after the declaration of an emergency pursuant to ORS 401.015 to ORS
401.580 to command the aid of as many citizens as are necessary;
provided, however, that such persons shall be entitled to all privileges,
benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered
emergency service volunteers as provided in ORS 401.355 to ORS
401.465.
Section 5. Emergency Management Plan. The Aumsville City Council shall
adopt an Emergency Management Plan.
Section 6. Declaration of Emergency.
1. The Aumsville City Council may declare a state of emergency and request
emergency services and assistance from local, state, and federal
agencies. A declaration of emergency shall be communicated to Marion
County pursuant to ORS 401.055.
2. In the event a quorum of the Aumsville City Council cannot be assembled
within a reasonable time, the authority to declare an emergency is hereby
delegated first to the mayor, then to the council president, and then to the
city administrator. If the city administrator is unable to act due to absence
or incapacity, then the acting city administrator or the emergency
management director is hereby granted the authority to declare an
emergency.
3. If the declaration of emergency is made by anyone other than the city
council, then the council shall convene as soon as practicable to ratify the
state of emergency.
4. The declaration of a state of emergency must include:
a. A description of the situation and the existing conditions; and
b. Delineation of the geographic boundaries of the emergency; and
c. Declaration that all appropriate resources have been expended by the
city; and
d. A request for assistance.
Section 7. Violations. The following offenses shall be punishable as
misdemeanors by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or by imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days.
1. No person shall willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay the enforcement of any
lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this ordinance, nor in the
performance of any duty required by this ordinance.
4-13.7 Aumsville Ordinances 4-13.10
4
2. No person shall wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of
identification as specified by the State Department of Emergency Services
and/or which would be likely to mislead a member of the public into
believing that such person is a member of any Emergency Management
Agency.
Section 8. Immunity from Private Liability. There shall be no liability on the
part of any person, partnership, corporation, the State of Oregon, or any political
subdivision thereof who owns or maintains any buildings or premises that have been
designated by the Emergency Management Director as a disaster shelter for any
injuries sustained by any person while in or upon said building or premises as a
result of the condition of said building or premises or as a result of any act or
omission, or in any way arising from the designation of such premises as a shelter
provided such person has entered, gone upon, or into said building or premises for
the purpose of seeking refuge therein during an emergency; provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to the willful act of such owner or occupant or his
servants, agents, or employees. This section shall also apply to any practice drill
authorized pursuant to this section.
Section 9. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed separate, distinct, and
independent provision and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the section.
Section 10. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the thirtieth
day after its enactment.
PASSED by the council October 25, 2001 and signed by the mayor November 1,
2001.
4-14 Aumsville Ordinances 4-14.2
1
ORDINANCE NO. 505
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE USE OF PARKS, PARKWAYS, PUBLIC
SQUARES, PUBLIC GROUNDS, STREETS, BOULEVARDS, PATHS,
SIDEWALKS, GREENWAYS, REST AREAS, PLAYGROUNDS AND OTHER
AREAS.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Purpose, Policy and Scope.
(A) The city council, except as otherwise expressly provided, declares its intention
to exercise general supervision, management and control of all public parks,
public parkways, public squares, public ground, including but not restricted to
streets, boulevards, paths, sidewalks, greenways, rest areas, playgrounds and
other areas, hereinafter collectively referred to as "public areas" whether publicly
owned, dedicated, leased or otherwise set aside for public use and not under
the supervision or control of any other public agency.
(B) All public areas as herein designated for general public use shall be kept and
maintained for the use and benefit of the public, subject to such reasonable and
necessary rules and regulations as herein prescribed or as may be from time to
time adopted to protect and preserve the enjoyment, convenience and safety of
the general public in the use thereof.
(C) In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, the
Aumsville City Council declares its intention to prescribe rules and regulations
as set forth or from time to time as necessary with respect to such public areas.
(D) Parks are defined as those parks that are designated as parks by the city
council. It is the express intent of the city council, in some circumstances, to
regulate activity only in the city parks set forth herein. In those instances, the
ordinance section shall designate that the conduct or activity is prohibited in the
park.
(E) In the event that someone or some organization want to use the parks and/or
public areas for an event such as a demonstration/contest, a festival, a carnival,
or the like the city council authorizes the city administrator to modify, change or
delete the rules and regulations that are contained in this ordinance as the
circumstances may dictate; taking into account what is in the best interest of the
city and its citizens. However, the city administrator shall not allow the use of
alcoholic beverages on public property.
[Section 1, amended by Ord. No. 532, passed May 24, 2004]
Section 2. Delegation of Authority. The city administrator is authorized to make
such reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this and other city
ordinances and the policies of the council as herein enunciated, as may be
necessary for the control and management of the public areas hereinabove
designated.
4-14.2 Aumsville Ordinances 4-14.7
2
All such rules and regulations shall be set forth in writing and, to the extent deemed
necessary by the city administrator, shall be posted in conspicuous places in the
areas affected thereby, for the guidance of the general public and individual users.
If any person feels aggrieved by any such rule or regulation, he may appeal to the
council by filing with the city administrator an opposition against such rule or
regulation, which shall be placed on the agenda of the council at its next regular
meeting, and until amended or repealed by council such rule or regulation shall
remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. Regulations Prescribed by Council. The council finds that it is in the
public interest and necessary for the peace, health and safety of the general public
that the rules and regulations set forth in this ordinance be enforced, and for the
purposes herein set forth are adopted.
Section 4. City Employees Not Affected. Nothing contained herein shall prevent
the performance of any act or duty by city employees that has been duly authorized
by the city administrator or public works or police department.
Section 5. Closures. No person shall ride, drive or walk on such parts or portions
of the public areas or pavements as may be closed to public travel, or interfere with
barriers erected against the public.
Section 6. Conduct. No person shall sleep on the seats or benches, or use or play
loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or behave in a
disorderly manner, or do any act tending to a breach of the public peace.
Section 7. Damage - Payment for Restoration.
(1) Owners or persons in control of, or persons who permit the entry of any
dog, horse or other animal into any pubic area under the control of the
city, in addition to any penalties imposed by this ordinance for violation
thereof, shall be held liable for, and shall pay to the city, the full value of
repair or restoration of any public property damaged or destroyed, and if
not paid upon demand by the city, recovery of same may be sought by
action brought in the name of the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) Any person who shall utilize the public areas herein described and who
shall damage or destroy any public property under the control of the city,
in addition to any penalties imposed by this ordinance for violation hereof,
shall be held liable for, and shall pay to the city, the full value of repair or
restoration of any public property damaged or destroyed, and if not paid
upon demand by the city, recovery of same may be sought by action
brought in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.
4-14.8 Aumsville Ordinances 4-14.15
3
Section 8. Sales and Services For Hire Restricted. It is unlawful for any person
to sell or offer for sale any article or perform or offer to perform any service for hire in
any of the public areas without a written permit for such concession granted by the
city administrator or designee.
Section 9. Advertising and Decorative Devices Forbidden. It is unlawful for any
person to place or carry any structure, sign, bulletin board or advertising device of
any kind whatever, or erect any post or pole or the attachment of any notice, bill,
poster, sign wire, rod or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, fountain, wall post or
structure, or place any advertising, decorative or other device of any kind whatever,
on any of the vases, statues, bridges or monuments in any public areas; provided
that the city administrator may by a written permit allow said devices temporarily.
Section 10. Parks - Intoxicating Liquor Prohibited. Unless authorized by a
vote of the common council of the City of Aumsville for a community wide
event, it is unlawful for any person to:
(A) take into or upon any park any alcoholic beverage; or
(B) sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage in any park.
[Section 10 Amended by Ord. 668, sec 2, passed July 8, 2019]
Section 11. Rubbish Accumulation Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
obstruct the free use and enjoyment of any public areas by misuse of refuse
containers or by placing any straw, dirt, chips, paper, shavings, shells, ashes, swill
or garbage, or other rubbish, or refuse or debris, in or upon any public areas, except
in designated trash receptacle.
Section 12. Vandalism Prohibited.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, break, injure, mutilate,
deface or damage in any way, any structure, monument, statue, case,
fountain, wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, tree, shrub, fern, plant, flower
or other property in any public areas unless otherwise licensed or
privileged to do so.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to injure, deface, damage or destroy any
notice of the rules and regulations for the government of the public areas,
which shall have been posted or permanently fixed by order or
permission of the city administrator.
Section 13. Gambling Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to play any game
of chance or to carry on betting of any kind within public areas.
Section 14. Firearms or Fireworks Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
use, carry or display firearms, firecrackers, fireworks, or explosives of any kind in
any park.
Section 15. Parks - Molesting Animals, Birds and Fish Prohibited. It is unlawful
for any person to use any weapon, stick, stone or missile of any kind for the purpose
4-14.8 Aumsville Ordinances 4-14.15
3
of destruction, injury, disturbance or molestation of any wild or domestic animal, fowl
or fish within the park limits.
4-14.15 Aumsville Ordinances 4-14.19
4
It is unlawful for any person to give, or offer, or attempt to give to any animal with the
parks, any noxious articles, or anything prohibited by notices conspicuously posted
therein.
Section 16. Animals.
(A) It is unlawful for the owner, possessor or keeper of any animal to permit
such animal to roam at large in any public areas, and, if such animal is
found in any public areas, it may be impounded.
(B) No one shall ride any horse, or other animal, in any part of a park.
(C) No one shall hitch horses or other animals to any tree, shrub, fence,
railing or other structure within any part of a park.
Section 17. Parks - Use of Established Entrance. No one shall enter or leave the
parks in a motor vehicle, except at an established entrance; and no one shall enter
or remain in the parks after the hours fixed by regulation.
Section 18. No Admittance Areas. No person shall enter any building, enclosure,
or place with any of the public areas upon which the words "no admittance" are
displayed or posted by sign, placard or otherwise.
Section 19. Parks - Public Restroom Facility.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to blow, spread or place any nasal or other
bodily discharge, or spit, urinate or defecate on the floors, walls,
partitions, furniture, fittings, or on any portion of any public restroom
facility, or in any place in such a facility, excepting directly into the
particular fixture provided for that purpose. Nor shall any person place
any bottle, can, cloth, rag, or metal, wood or stone substance in any of
the plumbing fixtures in any such station.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to stand or climb on a water closet, closet
seat, basin, partition or other furniture or fitting; or to loiter about or push,
crowd or otherwise act in a disorderly manner; or to interfere with any
attendant in the discharge of his or her duties; or skate, swear, or use
obscene, loud or boisterous language within any public restroom facility,
or at or near the entrance thereof.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to cut, deface, mar, destroy, break, remove
or write on or scratch any wall, floor, ceiling, partition, fixture or furniture,
or use towels in any improper manner, or waste soap, toilet paper, or any
of the facilities provided in any public restroom facility.
4-14.20 Aumsville Ordinances 4-14.24
5
Section 20. Parks - Traffic Regulations.
(A) No one shall ride, drive or operate any bicycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle,
truck, wagon, or any other vehicle, in any part of a park, except on the
regular drives designated therefor.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any park or
playground area in the city, except in designated parking areas. The
police department shall have and exercise authority to tow any vehicle
found parked in a park or playground area not designated for parking
purposes, and to impound such vehicles and to impose and collect
associated administrative fees.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to store, park, or leave standing unattended
for a continuous period of more than twenty-four hours, any motor
vehicle, boat, trailer, conveyance or other personal property within any
public area under the city's control.
(D) No person shall ride or stand upon any device or conveyance other than
roller skates, in-line roller skates, scooters or a skateboard within the
boundaries of the skatepark.
Section 21. Parks - Public Drinking Fountain. It is unlawful for any person to
willfully mark, scratch, disfigure, remove or in any manner damage any public
drinking fountain, or throw, place or deposit in any cup or basin of same any matter
or refuse whatever, or obstruct the regular flow of water in any manner whatever.
Section 22. Signs, Lights, Call Boxes, Hydrants. It is unlawful for any person to
willfully cut, remove, deface or in any manner damage any street sign, any street,
bridge, light or light fixture, or any hydrant, fence, gate or enclosure, or any part
thereof, placed in any public areas.
Section 23. Parks - Ejectment Period. Any city employee or city councilor may
request any person acting in violation of Aumsville ordinance or state law to leave
any city park. The city police shall have the authority to eject from any park any
person acting in violation of Aumsville ordinance or state law, for a period of time up
to six months. Any person entering upon or remaining in the park in violation of such
a directive, shall be guilty of criminal trespass and subject to prosecution therefore.
Section 24. Parks - Penalty for Violation. Any person violating any provision of
this ordinance shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00
as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. If the person violating any
provision of this ordinance is under the age of 18 years of age then the person's
parent or legal guardian may be cited into the Aumsville Municipal Court pursuant to
Aumsville Ordinance Number 434, known as the parental responsibility ordinance.
Additionally, nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the offender, if they are under the
age of 18, from being cited directly into the Aumsville Municipal Court if the city of
Aumsville obtains a blanket remand from the Marion County Juvenile Court
remanding a violation of this ordinance to the Aumsville Municipal Court.
4-14.25 Aumsville Ordinances 4-14.25
6
Section 25. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the thirtieth day
after its enactment.
PASSED by the council July 8, 2002 and signed by the mayor July 11, 2002.
4-15 Aumsville Ordinances 4-15.3
1
ORDINANCE NO. 554
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
REGULATIONS WITHIN THE CITY OF AUMSVILLE.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Title of Provisions. This ordinance shall be known as the “Chronic
Nuisance Property Ordinance” for the city of Aumsville.
Section 2. Incorporation of State Statute and Aumsville Ordinances. Any
reference to state law or statute (Oregon Revised Statutes – ORS) or provisions of
the Aumsville City Ordinances incorporated into this ordinance refers to the state
statute or ordinance provisions in effect on the effective date of this ordinance.
Section 3. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following definitions apply:
1. Chief of Police means the chief of the Aumsville Police Department or designee.
2. City Administrator means the city administrator of the city of Aumsville or
designee.
3. Chronic Nuisance Property means real property premises (including industrial,
commercial or residential buildings), herein also referred to as the “property,”
“premises” or “subject property,” upon, near (as hereinafter described in this
section) or in which three or more distinct occurrences of any of the below listed
prohibited acts or behaviors (as defined in Oregon law) occur, or the patrons,
employees, residents, owners or occupants thereof engage in three or more of
said prohibited acts or behaviors on the property, or, in relation to the property
within 400 feet of the property, during any 180 consecutive day period:
A. Manufacture, distribution or possession of a controlled substance;
B. Rape in the First Degree;
C. Menacing;
D. Intimidation;
E. Harassment;
F. Disorderly conduct;
G. Discharge of weapons;
H. Unnecessary noise (Ordinance No. 369, Sections 3A and 14);
I. Drinking in public (Ordinance No. 405);
J. Minor in possession of alcohol (Ordinance No. 369, Section 14);
K. Assault;
L. Sexual abuse;
M. Public indecency;
N. Public urination or defecation (Ordinance No. 369, Section 14);
O. Criminal mischief;
P. Criminal mistreatment;
Q. Criminal trespass;
R. Unlawful use of a weapon; or
S. Criminal homicide or any type of attempted criminal homicide.
4-15.3 Aumsville Ordinances 4-15.6
2
4. Owner means the person(s), including individual(s), corporation, partnership or
other entity, having legal or equitable title to the property. Property means any
real property and any improvement thereon incidental or appurtenant, including
but not limited to any room, apartment, house, building, structure or any separate
part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not.
5. Responsible Party includes:
A. The owner of the property, or the owner’s manager or agent or other person or
entity in control of the property on behalf of the owner; and/or,
B. The person or entity occupying the property, including a bailee, lessee, tenant
or other having possession.
C. Responsible party for a specific property shall be presumed from the following:
1. The owner and the owner’s agent, as shown on the assessor’s tax rolls of
Marion County.
2. The resident or occupant of the property, as shown on the records
(including utilities records) of the city of Aumsville.
6. Court means a court of competent jurisdiction, which may address the respective
issue.
Section 4. Chronic Nuisance Property.
1. The behavior, acts or omissions described in this ordinance are hereby declared
to be nuisances and if they commonly reoccur in relation to a specific property,
such property may be declared “chronic nuisance property,” thereby requiring the
application of remedies set out in this ordinance.
2. Any property within the city of Aumsville, which is found to be a chronic nuisance
property, shall be in violation of this ordinance and subject to its remedies.
3. Any person who is a responsible party for property, which is deemed a chronic
nuisance property, shall be in violation of this ordinance and subject to its
remedies.
Section 5. Pre-Filing Notification Procedure. After two occurrences on or near
the property (as defined in this ordinance), of any of the prohibited acts or behaviors
listed in this ordinance, within a consecutive 180-day period, the chief of police or
designee shall provide notification, via certified mail, return receipt requested, to all
known responsible parties for the property, stating the times and places of the
alleged occurrences and the potential liability for violation of this ordinance. The city
administrator and city attorney shall be provided copies of the notice.
Section 6. Compliance Agreement With Responsible Party(ies).
1. After providing notification to all known responsible parties, the chief of police or
designee has the authority to solicit and obtain, on behalf of the city, a voluntary
agreement with the party(ies) to comply with the provisions of this ordinance
(“compliance agreement”). The compliance agreement shall be in writing and
signed by all known responsible parties and the chief of police or designee on
behalf of the city; a copy thereof shall be provided to the city administrator.
2. In proposing the compliance agreement, the chief of police or designee shall
consider the factors outlined in Section 9, subsection 2 below.
4-15.6 Aumsville Ordinances 4-15.8
3
3. The compliance agreement is strictly optional and remedial in nature, and shall
not be interpreted to limit in any manner the authority of the city to commence an
action against any responsible party or another for a violation of any provision of
the Aumsville ordinances or Oregon law.
4. If the compliance agreement is not followed as agreed, the city may proceed with
civil action as provided in this ordinance or the provisions of the ORS or the
Aumsville ordinances.
Section 7. Commencement of Actions; Summons and Complaint. In the event
there occurs on or near (as defined in this ordinance), the property three or more
continued prohibited acts or behavior as listed in Section 3 of this ordinance, contrary
to the terms of the compliance agreement and/or in violation of this ordinance, the
Aumsville City Council shall be advised and, upon deliberation, may direct that the
city proceed to initiate court action pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance or take
such other action as the council deems appropriate.
Section 8. Remedies; Fines; Civil Penalty; Enforcement Order.
1. In the event the respondent(s) is found by a preponderance of the evidence to
have violated this ordinance, the court may, by judgment and order:
A. Require that the chronic nuisance property be closed against all use and
occupancy for a period of not less than 30 days, but not more than 180 days;
and/or
B. Assess a fine of not more than $250.00 for each offense.
C. Subsequent acts and behavior in violation of the provisions of this ordinance,
which occur within two years following the entry of any earlier judgment and
order, may be actionable, at the direction of the city council, and, if violation(s)
of this ordinance is established, the chronic nuisance property may be closed
in accordance with this section, and the court may impose a civil penalty of a
fine of not more than $1,000.
D. In addition to the above, the court may employ any other remedy provided by
law, deemed by the court to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.
E. In addition to the above, the court may assess costs and charges as described
in Section 11.
2. In lieu of closure of the property, at the court’s discretion, the respondent may be
permitted to file a bond with the city that is acceptable to the court and subject to
the court’s satisfaction of the respondent’s good faith commitment to abatement of
the nuisance. Such bond shall be in the amount of at least $500 and shall be
conditioned upon the non-recurrence, for a period of one year after entry of the
judgment, of any of the acts or behaviors listed in Section 3 of this ordinance.
Forfeiture of the bond is subject to court review and order.
3. The court may authorize the city to physically secure the subject property against
use or occupancy, in compliance with the judgment or order, in the event the
owner(s) or the responsible party(ies) fail to do so within the time specified by the
court.
4-15.9 Aumsville Ordinances 4-15.11
4
Section 9. Defenses; Mitigation.
1. It is a defense to an action brought pursuant to this ordinance, that the
responsible party, the respondent, at the time the alleged action or behavior
occurred, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine
that the property had become chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of
the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the
determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The assertion that
the party, the respondent, was not present at the property at the time the alleged
acts or behavior occurred upon which the property was deemed chronic nuisance
property, shall not, alone, be a defense to the action.
2. The court may consider any of the following factors, as appropriate, in its decision,
and shall cite those found applicable:
A. The effort taken by the responsible party to mitigate or correct the alleged
action or behavior which occurred at or near (as defined in this ordinance) and
in relation to the property;
B. Whether the alleged action or behavior was repeated or continuous;
C. The magnitude or gravity of the alleged action or behavior;
D. The cooperativeness of the responsible party with the city in causing the
abatement of the alleged action or behavior;
E. The cost to the city of investigating and abating action or behavior or
attempting to correct the condition; or
F. Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant.
Section 10. Emergency Remedy. In addition to any remedy available to the city
under this ordinance or otherwise, in the event the city administrator finds that a
property or its use constitutes an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare,
upon review and approval by the city council, the city may apply to the court for such
relief as is deemed appropriate.
Section 11. Costs; Lien.
1. The court may assess the property owner(s) and the responsible party(ies) the
following costs incurred by the city in the proceeding:
A. Cost incurred in the actual physical securing of the subject property against
use or occupancy, including, but not limited to, the cost of personnel,
materials, medical costs, consulting fees, notices and equipment charges;
B. The city’s investigative costs; and
C. Administrative costs and attorney fees and costs (collectively referred to as
cost) incurred in pre-filing implementation of the abatement process, together
wit the cost of the initiation and conducting of the court action.
2. The city administrator may, within 14 days of the court’s entry of judgment and
order against the respondent(s), submit a signed detailed statement of costs,
including attorneys’ fees, to the court for its review. If no objection to the
statement is made within the period prescribed by Oregon Rules of Civil
Procedure, Rule 67, the amount submitted shall become a part of the judgment
and a lien against the subject premises. A copy of the judgment and the
statement of costs, together with a verified designation of the address and legal
4-15.11 Aumsville Ordinances 4-15.15
5
description of the property, shall be forwarded to the Marion County Clerk for
filing.
3. Persons assessed the costs and/or civil penalty pursuant to this ordinance shall
be jointly and severally liable for the payment thereof to the city.
Section 12. Attorney Fees. In any action brought pursuant to this ordinance, the
court may, in its discretion, award reasonable attorneys fees to the prevailing party.
Section 13. Severability. If any provision of this ordinance, or its application to any
person or circumstance, is held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of the
ordinance, or the application of its provisions to other persons or circumstances, shall
not in any way be affected.
Section 14. Non-Exclusive Remedy. The remedies described in this ordinance
shall not be the exclusive remedies of the city in enforcement of the prohibition of the
acts and behaviors described in Section 3.
Section 15. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the thirtieth day
after its enactment.
PASSED by the council September 26, 2005 and signed by the mayor September
27, 2005.
4-16 Aumsville Ordinances 4-16.3
1
ORDINANCE NO. 555
AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING THE GIVING OF FALSE INFORMATION TO
POLICE OFFICERS.
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Giving False Information to Police Officers. It shall be unlawful for
any person to knowingly and willfully give any false, untrue or misleading
information, with intent to obstruct justice, to a police officer while he is acting in his
official capacity.
Section 2. Penalty. The offense described in this ordinance of giving false
information to police officers is a violation punishable by a maximum fine of
$1,000.00.
Section 3. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the thirtieth day after
its enactment.
PASSED by the council September 26, 2005 and signed by the mayor September
27, 2005.
4-18 Aumsville Ordinances 4-18.2
1
ORDINANCE NO. 564
AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING RESIDENTS OF THE CITY OF AUMSVILLE TO
REGISTER WITH THE CHIEF OF THE AUMSVILLE POLICE DEPARTMENT IF
THEY HAVE BEEN CONVICTED OF A SEX CRIME AS DEFINED BY STATE
LAW; DEFINING CERTAIN ASPECTS OF THE ORDINANCE AND PRESCRIBING
PENALTIES FOR THE FAILURE TO REGISTER.
RECITALS
Whereas, It is an important function of the City to provide for the well being of its
citizens; and
Whereas, It is determined that keeping a data base or registration of all Sex
Offenders who reside within the corporate limits in the City of Aumsville will help
law enforcement in its protection of the City’s residents and help law enforcement
prevent future sex crimes from occurring; and
Whereas, it is the intent of the City that this Ordinance only supplements current
State law regarding Sex Offender registration as it relates directly to the
registration of convicted Sex Offenders that reside within the corporate limits of
the City of Aumsville; now therefore,
The city of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Recitals.
1.1 The recitals set forth above are incorporated into the body of this
Ordinance as if fully set forth herein.
Section 2. Definitions.
2.1 City. City of Aumsville, including all residences and the like within
the corporate limits of the City as defined by current City Ordinances and
State Law.
2.2 Resident or Resides. A person over the age of 18 who lives or
resides within the corporate limits of the City of Aumsville. A person
staying with a friend, relative, or the like within the corporate limits of the
City of Aumsville for a period of less than 30 days is not considered a
resident of the City of Aumsville.
4-18.2 Aumsville Ordinances 4-18.2
2
2.2.1 Public Indecency. A person commits the crime of Public Indecency if
while in, or in view of, a public place the person performs:
(a) An act of sexual intercourse;
(b) An act of deviate sexual intercourse;
(c) An act of exposing the genitals of the person with the intent of
arousing a sexual desire of the person or another person.
2.2.2 Private Indecency. A person commits a crime of Private Indecency if the
person exposes the genitals of the person with the intent of arousing the
sexual desire of the person or another person, and:
(a) The person is in a place where another person has a reasonable
expectation of privacy;
(b) The person is in view of the other person;
(c) The exposure reasonably would be expected to alarm or annoy the
other person;
(d) The person knows that the other person did not consent to the
exposure.
This section does not apply to a person who commits the act described
herein, if the person co-habitates as, and is involved in a sexually intimate
relationship with the other person.
A place where another person has a reasonable expectation of privacy
includes, but is not limited to residence, yards of residents, working areas,
and offices.
2.3 Sex Crime. Sex Crime means rape in any degree; Sodomy in any
degree; Unlawful sexual penetration in any degree; Sexual abuse in any
degree; Incest with a child victim; Using a child in a display of sexually
explicit conduct; Encouraging child sexual abuse in any degree;
Transporting child pornography into the State; Paying for viewing a child’s
sexually explicit conduct; Compelling prostitution; Promoting prostitution;
Kidnapping in the first degree if the victim was under 18 years of age;
Contributing to the sexual delinquency of a minor; Sexual misconduct if
the offender is at least 18 years of age; Possession of materials depicting
sexually explicit conduct of a child in the first degree; Kidnapping in the
second degree if the victim is under 18 years of age, except by a parent or
by a person found to be within the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court; Any
attempt to commit any of the crimes set forth above; Burglary, when
committed with the intent to commit any of the crimes set forth above;
Public indecency or private indecency, if the person has a prior conviction
for a crime listed above.
4-18.2 Aumsville Ordinances 4-18.5
3
2.4 Sex Offender. Sex Offender means a person who has been convicted of
a sex crime or has been found guilty, except for insanity of a sex crime.
For the purposes of this ordinance, a sex offender must be at least 18
years of age or older at the time the person was convicted of the sex
crime, or at the time he was found guilty except for insanity of a sex crime.
2.5 Registration. Registration means to actually register with the
Aumsville Chief of Police, by filling out a form as set forth in this Ordinance
below. Setting forth the person’s name, date of birth, and residence,
along with the name of any probation officer if applicable; The name of the
Court of Conviction of the sex crime, and any other information deemed
appropriate by the Chief of Police to help and able them to monitor and
protect the citizens of Aumsville.
Section 3. Registration. All sexual offenders as defined above who reside
within the City of Aumsville must, within 30 days of taking up residency within the
corporate limits of the City of Aumsville, register with the Aumsville Chief of
Police, by doing the following:
3.1 Filling out a form to be determined by the Chief of Police, which sets forth
the following information:
(a) The name of the sex offender
(b) The address of the sex offender
(c) The telephone number of the sex offender
(d) The crime for which the sex offender was convicted of, including
the date of conviction and the Court that the sex offender was
convicted in.
(e) A designation that the person is either on or off supervised parole
or probation, and if applicable, the name of the sex offender’s
parole or probation officer.
Section 4. Release of Information. The Chief of Police of the City of Aumsville
shall not release any information to the public in regards to the Sexual Offender’s
registration, except for the name and address of the Sexual Offender. All other
information shall be deemed confidential and shall not be released.
Section 5. Ordinance Inapplicable to Person who has Obtained Relief From
State Sexual Offender Reporting. This Ordinance is not applicable to any
person who has obtained relief from the Sexual Offender Reporting
Requirements as set forth by the State of Oregon, pursuant to ORS 181.600.
4-18.6 Aumsville Ordinances 4-18.7
4
Section 6. Penalties. Any person violating this order by failing to register as a
Sex Offender with the City of Aumsville upon being found guilty shall be fined an
amount not to exceed $250.00 for the first offense. Any person who is found
guilty of failure to register as a Sex Offender pursuant to this Ordinance a
second time within a five year period shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and be sentenced to a fine not to exceed $6,250.00 and one year in the County
Jail.
Section 7. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect on the thirtieth day
after its enactment.
PASSED by the council April 24, 2006 and signed by the mayor April 27, 2006.
4-19 Aumsville Ordinance 4-19.2
ORDINANCE NO. 597
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING DRIVING AND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD
CHECK POLICIES CONCERNING PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICE
PROVIDERS AND VOLUNTEERS.
Whereas, the City of Aumsville finds it in the city’s best interest, both financially and
efficiency of time, to have the city police department complete criminal and driving
history record checks for employees, finalists for positions of employment, contracted
service providers, or voluntary public service that require certain services; and
Whereas, ORS 181.555(1) AND OAR 257-010-0025(1)(b) establish procedures for
access to criminal conviction record information possessed by the Oregon State Police
(OSP) through The Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS), and
Whereas, OAR 257-015-0060(2)(a) allows agencies authorized by OSP to access
Computerized Criminal History records via LEDS after implementation of a local
ordinance; now therefore,
The City of Aumsville ordains as follows:
Section 1. Purpose.
1.1 The purpose of this Ordinance is to authorize the City of Aumsville Police
Department to access OSP criminal offender information through LEDS, for
employees, finalists for positions of employment, contracted service providers,
and public service volunteers with the City of Aumsville; to ensure selected
individuals have the highest degree of citizen trust and confidence.
Section 2. Procedure.
2.1 All proceedings pursuant to this Ordinance shall be conducted in accordance with
ORS 181.555 and OAR 257-010-0025, which establishes procedures for access to
criminal record information possessed by the OSP through LEDS, and proper
driving history check protocol; as supplemented below.
(a) Authorization Forms - Finalists for employment, employees, and public service
volunteers with the City of Aumsville will be required to authorize the City of
Aumsville to conduct a driving and criminal conviction check through the LEDS
system if their job duties require the following activities.
? Delivering services to minors.
? Handling/processing cash and/or checks.
? Law enforcement related duties.
? Building services/Maintenance.
? Maintaining confidential medical and/or criminal records
? Any other classification of job duties authorized by the City of Aumsville
The city administrator will maintain the driving and criminal history
4-19.2 Aumsville Ordinances 4-19.2
authorization forms for those doing work on behalf of the city, and will request
that a driving and/or criminal history check be made if it is determined that this
will be in the best interest of the city in filling the position or assigning the job
duty.
(b) Process - A member of the Aumsville Police Department trained and authorized
to perform criminal history checks through the CJIS system will conduct the
driving and criminal conviction check on the employee, prospective employee,
contract service provider, or volunteer and orally report to the department head
or city administrator the driving history and if the persons record indicates "no
criminal record" or "criminal record". If the person's record is reported as
"criminal record", the police department will, under OAR 257-010-0025(l)(c),
request a written criminal history report from the OSP Identification Services
Section and pay the applicable fee for this service. The police department will
make the written criminal history record available to the city administrator and
department head for their consideration in making the selection.
(c) Driving and Criminal History Records Retention - The written driving and
criminal history records on persons that are not selected will be retained in
accordance with the requirements Oregon Administrative Rule record retention
requirements, and thereafter will be destroyed by shredding. The driving and
any criminal history record of persons with a criminal conviction that are hired
or appointed, will become part of the confidential personnel files of that person.
Access to confidential personnel files is limited to only authorized persons who
have an official need to access such files that is sanctioned by law or
regulation.
(d) Selection Consideration - A persons driving history and felony criminal history,
or a history of conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or theft,
will be closely examined by the department head and city administrator; to
determine if the applicant possesses the required degree of citizen and public
trust and confidence. Each public service selection will, however, be made on
an individual, case-by-case basis, taking into account the person's
qualifications, the requirements of the particular job or volunteer post, and the
results of the criminal history check. Factors such as the age of an offender at
the time of the offense, the type of offense and subsequent rehabilitation, and
the public sensitivity of the position under consideration, must be taken into
account in evaluating a criminal history report. Selecting a person with a
criminal history record will require a positive recommendation by the
department head and the approval of the city administrator, after full disclosure
and consideration of the criminal history and the person.
PASSED by the council February 8th, 2010 and signed by the mayor February 11th,
2010.
Ordinance No. 659 Page 1
ORDINANCE NO. 659
AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING ALL BUSINESSES AND PEDDLERS IN THE CITY OF
AUMSVILLE TO MAKE APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE, FIXING FEES, PROVIDING FOR
THE MANNER FOR ENFORCING THIS ORDINANCE, AND REPEALING ORDINANCES
NO. 269 AND 567.
The city of Aumsville does ordain:
Section 1. Definitions.
(1) Business. For the purpose of this ordinance, a business is defined as any person, firm,
company or corporation establishing itself in a set location or address for the purpose of
carrying on a profession, vocation or trade, and offering its services to the community.
(2) Home Occupation. For the purpose of this ordinance a home occupation is defined as an
occupation, profession, craft or hobby, which is customarily incidental to, or carried on in,
a dwelling place or premises. The occupation must be carried on by a member of the
family residing within the dwelling place. There shall be no structural alterations or
changes in the dwelling or on the premises unless a permit has been issued for the
same. Home occupation activities are to be such that they can be conveniently,
unobtrusively, and inoffensively pursued in a family dwelling. No outside storage of
vehicles, goods or debris is permitted. Home occupation business activities cannot use
more then 20% of the available space in residence.
(3) Peddler. For purpose of this ordinance a peddler is defined as any person or persons
going in and upon private property, or calling at residences; not having been requested
or invited to do so by the owner or owners, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale
of, or disposing of, goods, wares, merchandise or services and/or for the purpose of
peddling. It does not include those seeking donations without a product (charitable),
political candidates, or religious organizations.
(4) Transient Business. For the purpose of this ordinance a transient business is defined as
a business that operates from various properties and has no fixed permanent location
from which business is conducted .The business must be removed each day.
Section 2. Purpose. This ordinance is enacted to regulate businesses to ensure that
businesses are complying with applicable city ordinances, state and federal laws; and to
provide revenue to pay for the expenses required to issue licenses, to provide revenue to pay
for municipal services to business.
Section 3. Peddling Restricted. The practice of persons going in and upon private property
or calling at residences without having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or
owners, for the purpose of soliciting orders or offering goods, merchandise and/or services for
sale is hereby prohibited and declared to be a violation of city ordinance and punishable as a
violation unless the appropriate business license is obtained. The peddler must have his current
city license displayed on his/her person at all times when operating in the city. Failure to
display license during the solicitation shall constitute a violation and the peddler will be subject
to a fine and/or suspension of license.
Section 4. License Required. Any person, firm, company or corporation establishing a new
business within the city limits of Aumsville shall be required to make application for a license at
city hall. Further, no person may engage in the business of a peddler as defined in Section 1
without first obtaining a license and paying the license or investigation fees required.
Ordinance No. 659 Page 2
Section 5. Applications and Fees.
(1) Application for a business license shall be made to the office of the city administrator
upon forms furnished by the city. Each application shall state the following information:
(A) Name, address (legal and local), and identification verification of the applicant;
(B) The name of the proposed business;
(C) The address at which the business will be conducted (if applicable);
(D) A description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(E) For peddlers and transient businesses, If not self-employed:
a. the name and address of the employer;
b. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
c. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license
number or other means of identification; as well as proof of general liability
insurance coverage in an amount to be determined by the chief of police;
(F) The amount of the license fee tendered with the application;
(G) The signature of the applicant or agent making application;
(H) The date of application;
(I) Evidence of satisfaction of state registration, bonding, or insurance if required,
including registration number and expiration date.
(2) Prior to approving or denying an application, the city may require the applicant to supply
any additional information necessary to determine the applicant’s qualifications for the
license. Review of an application shall not begin until all requested information has
been provided.
(3) At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall pay a fee, (as set out in the City of
Aumsville fee schedule) to the city to cover the cost of investigation.
Section 6. Investigation and Issuance.
(1) Upon receipt of a peddler’s license application, the city may refer the original
application to the police chief who shall cause an investigation of the applicant’s
business and moral character to be made as may be necessary for the protection of the
public.
(2) If, as a result of the investigation, the character or business responsibility of the
applicant is found to be satisfactory, the police chief shall endorse on the application
his approval.
(3) If, as a result of the investigation, the character or business responsibility of the
applicant is found to be unsatisfactory, the police chief shall endorse on the application
his disapproval and his reasons for the same.
(4) The police chief, or his agent, shall investigate and approve or disapprove of the
application within 10 days from the receipt of the application. If the application is not
approved or disapproved within the time allowed, the police chief is considered to have
given his consent and approval of the application.
(5) Approval of Application.
(A) The city administrator shall issue a decision on an application within 30 days of the
submission of a complete application form, all requested additional information,
and fee.
(B) The city administrator may issue a license upon finding that the applicant has met
all requirements of federal, state, and county laws, and applicable city ordinances.
(C) If the application is approved, the city administrator shall notify the applicant. The
notice shall state any conditions or limitations placed on the license as a condition
of maintaining the license, which the city administrator deems necessary to protect
the public health, safety or welfare, or which are required by federal, state, or
county law, and applicable city ordinances.
Ordinance No. 659 Page 3
Section 7. License Fees.
(1) All business license fees shall be determined by resolution of the city council.
(2) All revenues from license fees shall be deposited in the general fund. Any costs
involved in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance shall be expended from
the general fund.
Section 8. Registration.
(1) Charitable, religious, or political organizations, or persons, and those organizations or
persons conducting lawful surveys or canvassing the city of Aumsville are required to
contact the city administrator or the chief of police and furnish information as to dates
and times they will be conducting operations in the city.
(2) The term of a business license or home occupation license, is for a period of one year
beginning July 1 through June 30. If a license is issued during the year, it will need to
be renewed by June 30.
(3) The term of a peddler’s or transient license is determined at the time of application for a
period no longer than 30 days.
Section 9. Transfers and Relocations.
(1) No peddler's license issued under this ordinance may be used by a person other than
the one to whom the license is issued.
(2) Peddlers are required to have license with them at all times and display license so it is
visible to homeowner.
(3) In the event of the transfer of ownership of any business, the applicable business
license may be transferred only by application of the new owner to the city
administrator. The transfer may be approved upon finding that the new applicant
meets the requirements of all applicable city ordinances.
(4) In the event a business relocates, the licensee shall reapply to the city administrator to
transfer business license. The new license may be issued upon finding that the new
location meets the requirements of all applicable city ordinances.
Section 10. Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of License.
(1) A license issued under this ordinance may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the
city administrator after notice for any of the following causes:
(A) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a
license;
(B) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the
license activity;
(C) A violation of this ordinance;
(D) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or;
(E) Conducting the licensed activity in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.
(2) The license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name and
address of the licensee, the type of business, the date of issuance, and the length of time
the license is in effect. The city shall keep a record of all licenses issued
(3) Notice. The city administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of a
denial, suspension, or revocation. The notice shall state the reason for the action taken and
shall inform the applicant of the right to appeal under Section 11 of this ordinance.
Reapplication. A person whose application for a business license has been denied, or
whose license has been revoked may, after 90 days from the date of denial or revocation,
Ordinance No. 659 Page 4
apply for a new license upon payment of the application fee and submission of an
application form and related documents.
Section 11. Appeal.
(1) In the event an application for a license under this ordinance is denied, or in the event a
license is suspended or revoked, the applicant or license holder shall have the right to
appeal. The written notice of appeal to the council shall be filed with the city
administrator within 15 days after the denial of license or suspension or revocation.
(2) The council shall hear and make a determination in regard to the appeal at its next
regular meeting held not less than 20 days after the filing of the notice of appeal.
(3) The decision of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
Section 12. Disclaimers, Exceptions, General Requirements, Exemptions.
(1) Disclaimers and Exceptions. The levy or collection of a license fee upon any business
shall not be construed to be a license or permit by the city to the person engaged
therein in the event such business shall be unlawful, illegal or prohibited by the laws of
the state of Oregon or the United States, or ordinances of the city.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be taken or construed as vesting any right in any
license as a contract obligation on the part of the city. Business license fees, as set by
council resolution, may be increased or decreased, and other or additional taxes or
fees may be levied, increased or decreased, at any time by the city council. No person
having paid the fee required, and having made application for a business license, shall
be entitled to a refund.
(3) General License Requirements. In addition to any other requirement of this ordinance,
each licensee shall:
(A) Conform to all federal, state and local laws and regulations, the provisions of this
ordinance, and any rules adopted hereunder.
(B) Notify the city within 10 days of any change in material information contained in
the application, related materials, or license.
(C) Displaying of License.
1. Businesses with established place of business shall display business license in
a conspicuous place at all times.
2. Individual without an established place of business shall be required to
continually carry the license with them when conducting business in the city
limits of Aumsville.
Section 13. Specific Requirements.
(1) Businesses dealing in the purchase or trade of secondhand goods, such as jewelry,
guns or electronic equipment, shall keep a record of the sales for inspection by the
chief of police. Such a record shall include the name of the seller, the name of the
buyer, the date of sale, a description of the merchandise sold, any serial numbers or
distinguishing marks on the goods being traded, as well as other information that would
enable return of stolen goods.
(2) Merchant Police, Security Services and Similar Businesses.
(A) Each individual shall agree to a complete background check by the chief of police
to determine the qualifications and reliability of the individual for the proposed
business. The city may require a bond and such insurance as may be deemed
proper. The license shall be issued only upon the police chief's approval of each
person involved, such approval to be based on the complete background check.
Ordinance No. 659 Page 5
Section 14. Exemptions.
(1) The license requirement does not apply to temporary businesses established for the
purpose of supporting a festival or outdoor market.. Business or vendors are limited to
events that last no longer then 72 hours.
Section 15. Violations and Penalties.
(1) Any person or business convicted of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for any one offense, each day
constituting a separate offense.
(2) Inspection and Right of Entry. Whenever they shall have cause to suspect a violation
of any provisions of this ordinance, or when necessary to investigate an application for,
or revocation of a license under any of the procedures prescribed in this ordinance,
officials responsible for enforcement or administration; of this ordinance, or their duly
authorized representatives, may enter on any site, or into any structure, for the purpose
of investigation, provided they do so in a reasonable manner. No secured building shall
be entered without the consent of the owner or occupant unless under authority of a
lawful warrant.
(3) Abatement. Any business which is established, operated, moved, altered, enlarged or
maintained contrary to the licensing requirements shall be, and is hereby declared to be,
unlawful and a public nuisance, and may be abated as such.
(4) Legal Proceedings by City Attorney. In addition to the enforcement provisions of this
ordinance, upon request by the city administrator, the city attorney may institute any
additional proceedings, including, but not limited to, seeking injunction relief to enforce
the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 16. Repeal. Ordinance No. 269, enacted October 13, 1981, and Ordinance 567
enacted October 10, 2006 is hereby repealed.
Section 17. Severability. The council declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence,
or word of this ordinance be declared for any reason invalid, said declaration shall not affect the
validity or applicability of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so
held to be invalid.
PASSED by Council on the 13th day of November 2017and SIGNED by the mayor the 13th day
of November, 2017.
ORDINANCE NO. 662
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
POLICE SERVICES SURCHARGE; DETERMINING USE OF FUNDS;
SETTING UP BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES; CREATING
AN APPEALS PROCESS; ESTABLISHING ENFORCEMENT
WHEREAS, the Aumsville City Council is responsible for maintaining a sound
financial basis for ongoing City operations and,
WHEREAS, after extensive review the City Council has determined that reductions in
the police department revenue, as well as continual increases in the police departments
cost, has created a significant budget deficit, and,
WHEREAS, after survey and meetings requesting public input on this problem, the
Council has determined that the majority of the citizens of Aumsville do not want to
see service or staff cuts in the Police Department to alleviate this deficit and,
WHEREAS, The City Council has determined it is in the best interests of the citizens of
Aumsville to retain the Police Department and to establish a Police Services Surcharge
to achieve that end;
NOW, THEREFORE, THE COMMON COUNCIL FOR THE CITY OF
AUMSVILLE ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. TITLE.
Sections 1 to 8 shall be known as the Police Services Act.
Section 2. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(A) The principal purpose of this Police Services Act is to safeguard, facilitate and
encourage the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and businesses of the city.
The Council also finds that a continuous and consistent Police Services program
provides a multitude of economic and social benefits to the public, including, but not
limited to:
1. Police protection;
2. Prevention of crime;
3. Protection of property;
4. Promotion of business and industry;
5. Promotion of community spirit and growth.
(B) It is the intent of this act to provide a funding mechanism to help pay for the benefits
conferred on city residents and businesses by the provision of an adequate program of
Police Services; and further to help maintain the Police Department at acceptable
service levels.
(C) The structure of this Police Services Act is intended to be a surcharge for service
within the city limits. However, it is not intended to provide full funding for the Police
Department.
Section 3. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(1) Developed Property. A parcel or portion of real property on which an improvement
exists. Improvement on developed property includes, but is not limited to,
buildings.
(2) Nonresidential unit. A nonresidential unit is a developed property which is
primarily not for personal domestic accommodation, including but not limited to
business or commercial enterprise. A nonresidential structure which provides
facilities for one or more businesses or tenants, including, but not limited to,
permanent provisions for access to the public, shall have each distinct unit or
tenancy considered as a separate nonresidential unit. A business that leases
storage space does not create separate units for each storage space so long as the
lease does not provide for general public access to the storage space from which
the lessee runs a business.
(3) Person. Person means a natural person, unincorporated association, tenancy in
common, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, cooperative, trust,
governmental agency or other entity in law or in fact.
(4) Person Responsible. The Person Responsible is the person owing the public safety
fee. Unless another responsible party has agreed in writing to pay the public safety
fee, and a copy of that writing is filed with the city, the person(s) responsible for
paying the city’s utility charges is the Person Responsible.
(5) Residential unit. A residential unit is a developed property primarily used for
personal domestic accommodation which provides complete individual living
facilities for one or more persons including but not limited to permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, and sanitation. A home business within a residential unit is not
a separate nonresidential unit. An accessory dwelling unit on a parcel is a separate
residential unit. Each individual dwelling unit within a multifamily residential
property, condominium, or mobile home park is a separate residential unit. A
business that provides long-term assisted living care, including but not limited to a
long-term care facility, but that does not provide full individualized living facilities
for each dwelling unit is a single nonresidential unit, not separate residential units.
Section 4. IMPOSITION OF POLICE SERVICES SURCHARGE.
(A) There is hereby created a Police Services surcharge to accomplish the above stated
purposes. The Police Services surcharge is imposed by the city monthly on all utility
accounts connected to city utilities.
(B) The Police Services surcharge amount will be set by a resolution of the Council. The
city council may, in its surcharge resolution, provide for penalties for delinquency of
payments to ensure prompt payment of Police Services surcharge billings Billing shall
be as a line item on the City's utility bill unless otherwise specified below.
(C) Except as the fees may be reduced or eliminated under Section 7, the obligation to
pay a Police Services surcharge arises when a Person Responsible uses or otherwise
benefits from Police Services. It is presumed that Police Services are used, and that a
benefit arises, whenever the subject real property is a developed property within the
City limits.
(D) All developed properties within the city limits shall be charged the Police Services
surcharge.
(E) Undeveloped properties shall not be charged a Police Services surcharge.
(F) It is the Council's intention to review the Police Services surcharge annually, as part of
the budget review process.
Section 5. DEDICATION OF FUNDS.
All Police Services surcharge revenues derived shall be distinctly and clearly noted as
revenue in the City budget and shall be expended on the improvement, maintenance,
administration and operation of the Police Department and for no other purpose in order
to help provide for a safe, well-functioning Police Services program.
Section 6. COLLECTION.
(A) Police Services surcharges shall be collected monthly. Statements for the surcharge
shall be included as an item on the city monthly utility billing.
(B) The Person Responsible shall pay the Police Services surcharge at the same time and
in the same manner as payment is made for city utility services. The Police Services
surcharge shall be prorated based on utility billing cycles and, for utility accounts that
are opened or closed during the period the Police Service surcharge is in effect, the
date the utility account is opened or closed.
(C) Charges for water, sewer and the Police Services surcharge may be billed on the
same utility bill. In the event funds received for payments on a monthly utility bill are
inadequate to satisfy in full all of the water, sewer, and Police Services charges; credit
shall be given first to the sewer service charges, second to charges for water service
and third to police service fee. Any future payment will be applied first to any
previous unpaid balances before this priority payment schedule will apply in any given
month.
(D) There shall be no charge for an undeveloped property until such time as a certificate
of occupancy permit has been issued for the property by Marion County.
(E) The imposition of surcharges shall be calculated on the basis of one surcharge per
utility account with the exception of developed properties that have more than one
residential or nonresidential unit, which are billed as one utility account or combined
utility accounts. In this circumstance the charges are based on individual residential or
nonresidential units as the case may be.
(F) Creation of a city utility account is the basis for imposing the Police Services
surcharge. The Police Services surcharge does not in any way create an obligation of
the real property. Rather, the obligation to pay the Police Services surcharge is a
personal obligation of the customer responsible for payment of the city utility account.
No lien will attach to the real property at which the account is located because of the
nonpayment of the general service fee.
Section 7. APPEAL PROCESS.
(A) A Police Services surcharge may be appealed for change or relief in accordance with
the following criteria:
(1) Any utility customer who disputes any interpretation given by the city as to property
classification may appeal such interpretation. If the appeal is successful, relief will be
granted by reassignment to a more appropriate billing category. In such instances,
reimbursement will be given for any overpayment, retroactive to the filing date of the
appeal. Factors to be taken into consideration include, but are not limited to:
availability of more accurate information; equity relative to billing classifications
assigned to other developments of a similar nature; changed circumstances; and
situations uniquely affecting the party filing the appeal.
(B) Application for appeal shall state the reason for appeal, with supporting
documentation to justify the requested change or relief.
(C) The customer will first file the appeal with the City Administrator. The CA will
investigate and determine if an error has been made, if an error exists the CA will
authorize the appropriate correction to the customer’s account. If the customer is not
satisfied with the CA decision he/she may appeal to the city council.
(D) The City Council shall hear all appeals at a scheduled public meeting. Such appeal
shall occur at the first regular meeting held subsequent to the appeal filing including
the standard notification period. The matter shall be heard solely upon the record. In
no event shall a final decision be made later than 90 days after the matter was
formally appealed to the City Council.
Section 8. ENFORCEMENT.
(A) In addition to other lawful enforcement procedures, the city may enforce the
collection of charges required by this chapter by withholding delivery of water or
sewer services to any premises where Police Services surcharges are delinquent or
unpaid.
(B) Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the city may institute any
necessary legal proceedings, other than foreclosure proceedings, to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to collection of charges owing.
The city's enforcement rights shall be cumulative.
PASSED by the council December 11, 2017 and signed by the mayor December 17,
2017. (Amended by Ord. No. 667 adopted January 14, 2019)